QUARTZSITE, ARIZONA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-2 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 24-02, passed 6-25-2024
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
(800) 445-5588
www.amlegal.com
TOWN OFFICIALS
Council
Mayor               Norm Simpson
Vice Mayor          Karey Amon
Council member      Starr BearCat
Council member      Lynda Goldberg
Council member      Loretta Warner
Council member      Nancy Nichols
Council member      Gary Ensunsa
Town Manager        Jim Ferguson
Deputy Town Manager Kiki Tunnell
Town Clerk          Flora Romero
Finance Manager     Kiki Tunnell
Town Attorney       Joseph Estes of
                    Pierce Coleman P.L.L.C.
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCES
ORDINANCE NO. 21-09
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE TOWN OF QUARTZSITE, ARIZONA,
REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN EXISTING GENERAL
ORDINANCES OF THE TOWN DEALING WITH SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN SUCH CODE OF
ORDINANCES; DECLARING THE DOCUMENT ENTITLED "CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE TOWN OF
QUARTZSITE, ARIZONA" AS A PUBLIC RECORD; PROVIDING FOR REPEAL OF CONFLICTING
ORDINANCES; PROVIDING FOR SEVERABILITY; PROVIDING FOR PENALTIES. AND DECLARING
AN EMERGENCY.
WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of the Town of Quartzsite
("Town") are inadequately arranged and classified and are insufficient in form
and substance for the complete preservation of the public peace, health, safety
and general welfare of the municipality and for the proper conduct of its
affairs; and
WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the State of Arizona empower and
authorize the Town to revise, amend, restate, codify and compile any existing
ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted or published and to
incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in book form; and
WHEREAS, the Common Council of the Town of Quartzsite has authorized a general
compilation, revision and codification of the ordinances of the Town of a
general and permanent nature and publication of such ordinance in book form;
and
WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that an emergency be declared
and this ordinance take effect at an early date.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Common Council of the Town of Quartzsite,
Arizona:
Section 1.   That certain document entitled the "Code of Ordinances of the Town
of Quartzsite, Arizona," three copies of which are to remain on file in the
office of the Town Clerk, is hereby declared to be a public record and said
copies are to remain on file with the Town Clerk.
Section 2.   The general ordinances of the Town as revised, amended, restated,
codified, and compiled in book form are hereby adopted as and shall constitute
the "Code of Ordinances of the Town of Quartzsite, Arizona."
Section 3.   Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 2 shall consist of
the following Titles:
   QUARTZSITE, ARIZONA CODE OF ORDINANCES
   TABLE OF CONTENTS
      Chapter
   TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
      10.   Rules of Construction; General Penalty
   TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
      30.   Mayor and Council
      31.   Officers, Employees and Organizations
      32.   Legislation
      33.   Municipal Court
      34.   Emergencies and Disasters
      35.   Procurement Code
      36.   Tax Code
   TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
      50.   Water
      51.   Sewers
      52.   Wastewater Treatment, Discharge and Requirements
      53.   Backflow Control Program
   TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
      70.   Administration and Enforcement
      71.   Traffic Regulations
      72.   Parking Rules
      73.   Trucks
      74.   Traffic and Parking Schedules
   TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
      90.   Animal Control
      91.   Health and Sanitation
      92.   Public Nuisance Abatement
      93.   Fire Prevention and Protection
      94.   Abandoned Vehicles
      95.   Abandoned, Lost or Stolen Personal Property
      96.   Parks and Recreation; Cemeteries
   TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
      110.   Business License Code
      111.   Vendors
      112.   Automated Kiosks
      113.   Sexually-Oriented Business
      114.   Short-Term Rentals
      115.   Cable Communications
      116.   Telecommunications Services
      117.   Video Services
   TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
      130.   General Offenses
   TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
      150.   Building Regulations; Construction
      151.   Street Numbering
      152.   Rights-of-Way
      153.   Floodplain Management
      154.   Subdivisions
      155.   Zoning
   PARALLEL REFERENCES
   References to Arizona Revised Statutes
   References to Prior Code
   References to Resolutions
   References to Ordinances
   INDEX
Section 4.   Providing For Repeal of Conflicting Ordinances.
      All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in such Code of
Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this
ordinance except as they are included and reordained in whole or in part in
such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense committed or
penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of this
ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of ordinances levying
taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory, establishing
franchises, or granting special rights to certain persons, authorizing public
improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing of money,
authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property, granting or
accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public use, vacating or
setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor shall such repeal
affect any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature or pertaining to
subjects not contained in or covered by the Code.
Section 5.   Such Code shall be deemed published as of the day of its adoption
and approval by the Town Council and the Town Clerk is hereby authorized and
ordered to file a copy of such Code of Ordinances in the Office of the Clerk.
Section 6.   Such Code shall be in full force and effect as provided in Section
9, and such Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and places of the
ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties and regulations therein
contained and of the date of passage, and that the same is properly signed,
attested, recorded, and approved and that any public hearings and notices
thereof as required by law have been given.
Section 7.   Providing For Severability
      If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
Ordinance, or any part of the Code adopted herein by reference, is for any
reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of
competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions thereof.
Section 8.   Providing for Penalties.
   Chapter 10.99 - PENALTY
      (A)   (1)   Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this
chapter shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,500 or by imprisonment for a
period not to exceed six months, or both such fine and imprisonment.
         (2)   Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate offense
punishable as herein described.
      (B)   Any violation of or failure or refusal to do or perform any act
required by Title VII or Chapter 94 of this code of ordinances constitutes a
civil traffic violation. Civil traffic violations are subject to the provisions
of A.R.S. Title 28, Ch. 6 Art. 20 and 21, and amendments thereto.
   Chapter 35.99 PENALTY - Any person found guilty of violating any provision
of this    chapter shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,500 or by
imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both such fine and
imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate offense
punishable as herein described.
   Chapter 92.99 PENALTY - Unless a penalty, remedy or sanction is otherwise
specified    in this chapter, the penalty for a violation of this chapter shall
be as follows:
      1.   The remedies herein are cumulative, and the town may proceed under
one (1) or more such remedies.
      2.   Any owner or responsible party who commits, causes, permits,
facilitates, or aids or abets any violation of any provision of this chapter or
who fails to perform any act or duty required by this chapter is responsible
for a civil infraction and is subject to a civil sanction of not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00).
      3.   Any owner or responsible party who commits, causes, permits,
facilitates, or aids or abets any violation of any provision of this chapter or
who fails to perform any act or duty required by this chapter is guilty of a
class one (1) misdemeanor.
      4.   Each day any violation of any provision of this chapter or the
failure to perform any act or duty required by this chapter exists shall
constitute a separate violation or offense.
   Chapter 94.99 PENALTY - It is unlawful for any owner, tenant, lessee,
occupant or other    person to fail, neglect or refuse to abate the nuisance as
provided in this chapter. The imposition of any sentence shall not exempt the
offender from compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
   Chapter 96.99 PENALTY
      (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code of
ordinances.
      (B)   Upon conviction for violation of § 96.22 of this chapter, the
sentence to be imposed shall be a fine of not more than $500 or imprisonment
for not more than 30 days, or both.
   Chapter 111.99 PENALTY
      (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code of
ordinances.
      (B)   (1)   Any person or organization vending in the Town without
possessing a valid vendor sales permit shall immediately cease and desist and
be subject to:
         (a)   First Offense: immediate purchase as possible of a vendor sales
permit at the current fee of $50, plus a penalty of $50, for a total amount of
$100; purchase of an extension vendor sales permit at the current fee of $15,
plus a penalty of $15, for a total amount of $30; purchase of a special event
permit at the current fee of $ 15, plus a penalty of $ 15, for a total amount
of $30;
         (b)   Second offense: immediate purchase as applicable of a vendor
sales permit at the escalated permit and penalty fee of $200; purchase of an
extension vendor sales;
         (c)   Escalated: permit at the escalated permit and penalty fee of
$60; purchase of a special event vendor sales permit at the escalated permit
and penalty fee of $60; and
         (d)   Further offenses: each additional violation thereafter shall
result in a doubling escalation of the permit and penalty.
         (2)   At the discretion of the town's Code Enforcement Official, a
vendor who fails to immediately purchase a vendor sales permit and pay the
applicable permit fee and penalty as set for in division (B)(1) above:
            (a)   The vendor shall immediately cease and desist all vending and
business transactions; and
            (b)   A criminal citation shall be issued. Such violation shall be
a Class 2 misdemeanor punishable by a fine not exceeding $750 or by
imprisonment not to exceed five days, or by both such fine and imprisonment in
the decision of the court.
         (3)   If a vendor is found to be doing business without a valid town
vendor sales permit or a special event vendor sales permit, the park and swap
lot owner or park and swap lot operator is subject to the following:
            (a)   First offense: notice of violation;
            (b)   Second offense: immediate penalty of $50; and
            (c)   Third and further offenses: immediate penalty of $100
   Chapter 112.99 PENALTY
      Each day any violation of any provision of this article continues shall
constitute a separate offense, except when the violation is from a bona fide
error that occurred, provided that the licensee maintains procedures reasonable
adopted to avoid the occurrence of bona fide errors. A violation of this
article that is not a bona fide error, whether or not specifically designated
as being unlawful, shall be a class 1 misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be
punished as provided in §10.99 of the Quartzsite Town Code. For the purposes of
this section, "bona fide error" includes clerical, calculation, computer
malfunction, programming, and printing errors and other similar errors.
   Chapter 151.99 PENALTY
      Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $25 per day. Each
day a violation continues shall be a separate offense punishable as hereinabove
described, but not to exceed four days.
Section 9.   Declaration of Emergency – Effective Date.
      This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary for the
immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and general welfare of the
people of this municipality and shall take effect at the earliest date provided
by law.
PASSED AND ADOPTED by the Common Council of the Town of Quartzsite this 28th
day of September 2021 by the following vote:
AYES: MAYOR SIMPSON, VICE MAYOR WARNER, CM BEARCAT, CM GOLDBERG, CM AMON
NAYES: 0  ABSENT: CM SCHUE, CM CUNNINGHAM
EXCUSED: 0  ABSTAINED: 0
 
   APPROVED this 28th day of September 2021.
                     Norman Simpson /s/
                     Norman Simpson, Mayor
ATTEST:
Tina Abriani /s/
Tina Abriani, Town Clerk
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   How code designated and cited
   
10.02   Construction of ordinances
   
10.03   Interpretation and definitions
   
10.04   Additional rules of construction
   
10.05   References to this code
   
10.06   Conflicting provisions
   
10.07   Section headings
   
10.08   Effect of repeal
   
10.09   Severability of parts of code
   
10.10   Repeal of existing ordinances; effective date of repeal
   
10.11   Ordinances exempt from repeal
   
10.12   Effective date of code
 
   
10.99   Penalty
§ 10.01 HOW CODE DESIGNATED AND CITED.
   The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall
constitute and be designated as the “Code of the Town of Quartzsite, Arizona”,
and may be so cited. Such code may also be cited as the “Quartzsite Town Code”.
§ 10.02 CONSTRUCTION OF ORDINANCES.
   The rules and the definitions set forth in this chapter shall be observed in
the construction of this code and the ordinances of the town unless such
construction would be inconsistent with either the manifest intent of the
Council or the context of this code or the ordinances of the town.
§ 10.03 INTERPRETATION AND DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Interpretation.
      (1)   The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the
future includes the present.
      (2)   OR may be read AND, AND may be read OR, if the sense requires it.
      (3)   Whenever the words HE or SHE is used, it shall be construed to
include both sexes.
      (4)   Whenever any “department, board commission, office, officer or
employee” is referred to, it shall mean a department, board, commission,
office, officer or employee of the town, unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise.
   (B)   Definitions. All words and phrases shall be constructed and understood
according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words
and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar
and appropriate meaning.
      ACTS BY AGENTS. When an ordinance requires an act to be done which may by
law as well be done by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be
construed to include all such acts when done by an authorized agent.
      CODE, THE CODE or THIS CODE. The Code of the Town of Quartzsite, Arizona,
unless the text indicates otherwise.
      COUNCIL. The Common Council of the Town of Quartzsite, Arizona.
      COUNTY. The County of La Paz, Arizona.
      DAY. The period of time between any midnight and the midnight following.
(Prior Code, § 1-3-5)
      DAYTIME, NIGHTTIME. DAYTIME is the period of time between sunrise and
sunset. NIGHTTIME is the period of time between sunset and sunrise.
(Prior Code, § 1-3-6)
      DEPARTMENT, BOARD, COMMISSION, OFFICE, OFFICER or EMPLOYEE. Whenever any
department, board, commission, office, officer or employee is referred to, it
shall mean a department, board, commission, office, officer or employee of the
town unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
(Prior Code, § 1-3-7)
      IN THE TOWN or WITHIN THE TOWN. All territory over which the town now
has, or shall hereafter acquire, jurisdiction for the exercise of its police
powers or other regulatory powers.
(Prior Code, § 1-3-9)
      JOINT AUTHORITY. All words purporting to give a JOINT AUTHORITY to three
or more town officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such
authority to a majority of such officers or other persons unless it shall be
otherwise expressly declared in the law giving the authority.
(Prior Code, § 1-3-10)
      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
(Prior Code, § 1-3-19)
      MONTH. A calendar month.
(Prior Code, § 1-3-11)
      OATH. Includes affirmation or declaration.
      PERSON. Extend to and shall be applied to firm, corporations, or
voluntary associations, as well as to individuals, unless plainly inapplicable.
      PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes every species of property, except real
property as defined herein.
(Prior Code, § 1-3-15)
      PRECEDING, FOLLOWING. Next before and next after, respectively.
      PROPERTY. Real and personal property.
(Prior Code, § 1-3-17)
      REAL PROPERTY. Lands, tenements and hereditaments.
(Prior Code, § 1-3-18)
      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
(Prior Code, § 1-3-19)
      SHALL HAVE BEEN. Past and future cases.
(Prior Code, § 1-3-20)
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION BY MARK. Includes a mark when the signer cannot
write, such signer’s or subscriber’s name being written near the mark by a
witness who writes his or her own name near the signer’s or subscriber’s name;
but a SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION BY MARK can be acknowledged or can serve as a
signature or subscription to a sworn statement only when two witnesses so sign
their names thereto.
      STATE. The State of Arizona.
      TENANT or OCCUPANT. As applied to a building or land, shall include any
person holding a written or an oral lease or who occupies the whole or part of
such building or land, either alone or with others.
      TIME (COMPUTATION). The time within which an act is to be done as
provided in this code or in any order issued pursuant to any ordinance, when
expressed in days, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including
the last; except that, if the last day is Sunday or a holiday, it shall be
excluded; and, when such time is expressed in hours, the whole of Sunday or a
holiday, from 12:00 midnight to 12:00 midnight, shall be excluded.
      TIME (REASONABLE). In all cases where any section of this code shall
require any act to be done in a reasonable time or reasonable notice to be
given, such REASONABLE TIME OR NOTICE shall be deemed to mean such time only as
may be necessary for the prompt performance of such duty, or compliance with
such notice.
      TOWN. The Town of Quartzsite, Arizona.
      WEEK. A week consists of seven consecutive days.
      WRITING. Includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension
by ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement or record is
required or authorized by this code, it shall be made IN WRITING in the English
language unless it is expressly provided otherwise.
(Prior Code, § 1-3-29)
      YEAR. A calendar year, except where otherwise provided.
(Ord. 90-9, passed - -1990; Res. 90-24, passed - -1990)
Statutory reference:
   Definitions and construction of statutes generally, see A.R.S. §§ 1-211 to
1-215
§ 10.04 ADDITIONAL RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   In addition to the rules of construction specified in §
10.03 of this chapter, the rules set fourth in §§
10.05 and
10.06 of this chapter shall be observed in the construction of this code.
§ 10.05 REFERENCES TO THIS CODE.
   All references to chapters, subchapters or sections are to the chapters,
subchapters and sections of this code unless otherwise specified.
§ 10.06 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Conflicting provisions; different chapters. If the provisions of
different chapters of this code conflict with or contravene each other, the
provisions of each chapter shall prevail as to all matters and questions
growing out of the subject matter of such chapter.
   (B)   Conflicting provisions; same chapter. If conflicting provisions are
found in different sections of the same chapters, the provisions of the section
which is the last in numerical order shall prevail unless such construction is
inconsistent with the meaning of such chapter.
§ 10.07 SECTION HEADINGS.
   Headings of the several sections of this code are intended as a convenience
to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be
titles of such section, nor as any part of the section, nor unless expressly so
provided shall they be so deemed when any of such section, including the
headings, is amended or reenacted.
§ 10.08 EFFECT OF REPEAL.
   (A)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision
shall be itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive such
former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it shall be expressly so
provided.
   (B)   The repeal of any ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty
incurred before the repeal took effect nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding
pending at the time of the repeal, for any offense committed under the
ordinance repealed.
§ 10.09 SEVERABILITY OF PARTS OF CODE.
   It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Council that the sections,
divisions, sentences, clauses and phrases of this code shall be severable and,
if any provisions of this code is held unconstitutional for or any reason by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any
of the remaining provisions of the code.
§ 10.10 REPEAL OF EXISTING ORDINANCES; EFFECTIVE DATE OF REPEAL.
   All ordinances of the town, except those specifically exempted in this
chapter, now in force and effect are hereby repealed immediately upon adoption,
but all rights, duties and obligations created by said ordinances shall
continue and exist in all respects as if this code had not been adopted and
enacted.
§ 10.11 ORDINANCES EXEMPT FROM REPEAL.
   The adoption and enactment of this code shall not be construed to repeal or
in any way to affect or modify:
   (A)   Any special ordinance or ordinances regarding franchises, annexations,
dedications or zoning;
   (B)   Any ordinances making an appropriation;
   (C)   Any ordinances affecting any bond issue or by which any bond issue may
have been authorized;
   (D)   The running of the statutes of limitations in force at the time this
code becomes effective;
   (E)   The continued existence and operation of any department, agency,
commission or office heretofore legally established or held;
   (F)   Any bond of any public officer;
   (G)   Any taxes, fees, assessments or other charges incurred or imposed; or
   (H)   Any ordinances authorizing, ratifying, confirming, approving or
accepting any compact or contract with any other municipality, the state or any
county or subdivision thereof or with the United States or any agency or
instrumentality thereof.
§ 10.12 EFFECTIVE DATE OF CODE.
   Each and every section of this code, as herein contained and hereby enacted,
shall take effect and be in force immediately upon adoption; except that, where
a later effective date is provided, it shall prevail.
§ 10.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Any person found guilty of violating any provisions of this
code, except as otherwise provided in this code, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not to
exceed $2,500 or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or by
both such fine and imprisonment.
      (2)   Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate offense
punishable as hereinabove described.
   (B)   Any violation of or failure or refusal to do or perform any act
required by Title VII or Ch. 94 of this code of ordinances constitutes a civil
traffic violation. Civil traffic violations are subject to the provisions of
A.R.S. Title 28, Ch. 5, and amendments thereto.
(Prior Code, § 1-8) (Ord. 90-9, passed - -1990; Res. 90-24, passed - -1990)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   MAYOR AND COUNCIL
      
31.   OFFICERS, EMPLOYEES AND ORGANIZATIONS
      
32.   LEGISLATION
      
33.   MUNICIPAL COURT
      
34.   EMERGENCIES AND DISASTERS
      
35.   PROCUREMENT CODE
      
36.   TAX CODE
CHAPTER 30: MAYOR AND COUNCIL
Section
Council
   
30.01   Elected officers
   
30.02   Corporate powers
   
30.03   Duties of office
   
30.04   Vacancies on Council
   
30.05   Compensation
   
30.06   Oath of office; bond
   
30.07   Financial disclosure statement
   
30.08   Absence of Council members
   
30.09   Qualification of Council candidates
Council Elections
   
30.20   Primary elections
   
30.21   Non-political ballot
   
30.22   General election nomination
   
30.23   Election to office
   
30.24   Candidate financial disclosure
   
30.25   Election dates
Council Procedures
   
30.40   Regular meetings
   
30.41   Special meetings
   
30.42   Meetings to be public
   
30.43   Quorum
   
30.44   Agenda
   
30.45   Boards, committees and commissions
   
30.46   Voting
   
30.47   Suspension of rules
Mayor
   
30.60   Direct election of Mayor
   
30.61   Vice Mayor; Acting Mayor
   
30.62   Powers and duties
   
30.63   Absence
   
30.64   Failure to sign documents
   
30.65   Local emergencies
COUNCIL
§ 30.01 ELECTED OFFICERS.
   The elected officers of the town shall be seven Council members, one of whom
shall be designated as Mayor in accordance with §
30.60 of this chapter. The Mayor and Council members shall constitute the
Council and shall continue in office until assumption of duties of office by
their duly elected or appointed successors. Council members shall serve four
years overlapping terms in the manner provided by state statute.
(Prior Code, § 2-1-1)
§ 30.02 CORPORATE POWERS.
   The corporate powers of the town shall be vested in the Council and shall be
exercised only as directed or authorized by law. All powers of the Council
shall be exercised by ordinance, resolution, order or motion.
(Prior Code, § 2-1-2)
§ 30.03 DUTIES OF OFFICE.
   Council members shall assume the duties of office at the regularly scheduled
Council meeting next following the date of the general election at which, or
effective as of the date of which, the Council members were elected. Mayor and
Council members will abide by the Town Council’s Procedure and Legal and
Ethical Standards (Quartzsite Town Council Procedure Policy) of the Conduct
Manual.
(Prior Code, § 2-1-3) (Ord. 09-29, passed - -2009)
§ 30.04 VACANCIES ON COUNCIL.
   (A)   The Council shall fill a vacancy that may occur by either of the
following:
      (1)   Appointment for the unexpired term; and
      (2)   Appointment until the next regularly scheduled Council election if
the vacancy occurs more than 30 days before the nomination petition deadline.
   (B)   The member appointed shall meet the qualifications established in
A.R.S. § 9-232.
(Prior Code, § 2-1-4) (Ord. 08-19, passed - -2008)
§ 30.05 COMPENSATION.
   (A)   Compensation of the town code sets forth that the compensation of
elected officers may be fixed from time to time by resolution of Council. It is
expressly understood that said increases shall be effected at the earliest
possible date. That monthly compensation stipend for the Mayor is hereby set at
$500 and the monthly compensation stipend for each Council member is hereby set
at $400.
   (B)   (1)   Council’s monthly stipend be pro-rated on a daily basis for the
month their seat is in question by election, to be paid one-half after each
regularly scheduled Council meeting for that month.
      (2)   If the Mayor or a Council member leaves office prior to the last
day of a month or takes office after the first day of the month, their
compensation shall be prorated on a daily basis and they should be paid for
only those days of the month which he or she serves.
   (C)   (1)   Each Council member’s monthly stipend payment shall be paid in
installments of one-half after each regularly scheduled Council meeting.
      (2)   Each payment shall be dependent and conditioned upon the Council
member’s attendance either in person or telephonically at each regularly
scheduled Council meeting, unless such absence is excused by the Common Council
(Prior Code, § 2-1-5) (Ord. 89-08, passed - -1989; Res. 96-04, passed - -1996;
Ord. 99-09, passed - -1999; Ord. 09-14, passed - -2009; Ord. 11-10, passed - -
2011; Ord. 13-06, passed - -2013)
§ 30.06 OATH OF OFFICE; BOND.
   (A)   Immediately prior to assumption of the duties of office, each Council
member shall, in public, take and subscribe to the oath of office.
(Prior Code, § 2-1-6)
   (B)   (1)   Prior to taking office, every Council member shall execute and
file an official bond, enforceable against the principal and his or her
sureties, conditioned on the due and faithful performance of his or her
official duties, payable to the state and to and for the use and benefit of the
town or any person who may be injured or aggrieved by the wrongful act or
default of such officer in his or her official capacity.
      (2)   A person so injured or aggrieved may bring suit on such bond under
provisions identical to those contained in A.R.S. § 38-260. Bonds shall be in
such sum as shall be provided by resolution, and the premium for such bonds
shall be paid by the town.
(Prior Code, § 2-1-7)
§ 30.07 FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE STATEMENT.
   The Mayor and each Council member shall file by January 31 of each year a
financial disclosure statement in a form and with such information as provided
by resolution of the Council.
(Prior Code, § 2-1-8) (Res. 89-06, passed - -1989)
§ 30.08 ABSENCE OF COUNCIL MEMBERS.
   A Council member shall not absent himself or herself from the town for a
greater period than 30 days without the consent of the Council.
(Prior Code, § 2-1-9) (Ord. 08-17, passed - -2008)
§ 30.09 QUALIFICATION OF COUNCIL CANDIDATES.
   (A)   The Town Council shall judge the elections, qualifications and returns
of its members pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-234. Such qualifications shall not only
include those contained within A.R.S. Title 16, but also any contained within
this town code.
   (B)   The qualifications for eligibility of Mayor or Council candidates for
election or appointment to these positions includes the requirement that no
delinquent or fixed fines and penalties, user fees, permit fees and sales tax
be owed to the town at the time of declaration of candidacy.
   (C)   Council members, candidates and appointees for town elected and
appointed office shall be held to certain standards of conduct, which include
compliance with all federal, state and local laws, rules and regulations (i.e.,
to include, but not exclusive of, state standards of conduct for public
officials, conflict of interest, open meetings laws and the like).
   (D)   Failure to comply with this section shall result in ineligibility of
the candidate or elected official seeking re-election to be qualified to run or
be appointed to town office.
   (E)   Appointed official to town offices of Manager, Attorney, Town Clerk
and Magistrate shall be held to the same standards and shall not be qualified
to hold appointed positions.
(Prior Code, § 2-1-10) (Ord. 09-15, passed - -2009; Ord. 23-01, passed 1-24-
2023)
COUNCIL ELECTIONS
§ 30.20 PRIMARY ELECTIONS.
   Any candidate who receives at the primary election a majority of all the
votes cast at that election for that office shall be declared elected to the
office for which that person is a candidate effective as of the date of the
general election, and no further election shall be held as to said candidate;
provided that, if more candidates receive a majority of the votes cast than
there are seats to be filled for that office then those candidates who receive
the highest number of votes equal to the number of seats to be filled for the
office shall be declared elected to that office. The majority of votes cast
shall be determined pursuant to state law.
(Prior Code, § 2-3-1) (Ord. 16-04, passed 4-12-2016)
§ 30.21 NON-POLITICAL BALLOT.
   Nothing on the ballot in any election shall be indicative of the support of
the candidate.
(Prior Code, § 2-3-2)
§ 30.22 GENERAL ELECTION NOMINATION.
   If, at any primary election held as above provided, there be any office for
which no candidate is elected, then as to such office, said election shall be
considered to be a primary election for nomination of candidates for such
office, and the second or general municipal election shall be held to vote for
candidates to fill such office. Candidates to be placed on the ballot at the
general municipal election shall be those not elected at the primary election
and shall be equal in number to twice the number to be elected to any given
office or less than that number if there be less than that number named on the
primary election ballot. Persons who receive the highest number of votes for
the respective offices at such first election shall be the only candidates at
such second election; provided that, if there be any person who, under the
provisions of this subchapter, would have been entitled to become a candidate
for any office, except for the fact that some other candidate received an equal
number of votes therefor, then all such persons receiving an equal number of
votes shall likewise become candidates for such office.
(Prior Code, § 2-3-3)
§ 30.23 ELECTION TO OFFICE.
   The candidates equal in number to the persons to be elected who receive the
highest number of votes shall be declared elected.
(Prior Code, § 2-3-4)
§ 30.24 CANDIDATE FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE.
   Each candidate for the office of Council member shall file a financial
disclosure statement when such candidate files a nomination paper. The
statement shall contain such information as required by resolution of the
Council.
(Prior Code, § 2-3-5) (Res. 09-06, passed - -2009)
§ 30.25 ELECTION DATES.
   The primary election shall be held on the date of the primary election of
the state. The general election shall be held on the date of the general
election of the state.
(Prior Code, § 2-3-6) (Ord. 93-10, passed - -1993; Ord. 13-06, passed - -2013)
COUNCIL PROCEDURES
§ 30.40 REGULAR MEETINGS.
   The Council shall establish, by resolution, the date, time and place for all
regular meetings of the Council and an order of business for the agenda. All
regular meetings of the Council shall be held at the location specified in the
notice of meeting.
(Prior Code, § 2-4-1) (Ord. 89-05, passed - -1989; Ord. 92-07, passed - -1992;
Ord. 02-05, passed - -2002; Ord. 11-11, passed - -2011; Ord. 14-02, passed - -
2014; Ord. 17-02, passed 2-14-2017)
§ 30.41 SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   (A)   The Mayor may convene the Common Council at any time after giving 24
hours’ notice of such meeting to members of the Common Council and the general
public. The agenda of any such meeting shall be subject to the approval of a
majority of the members of the Common Council and any special meeting called by
the Mayor shall not proceed in the absence of a quorum and approval of one or
more agenda items by a majority of the Common Council.
   (B)   The Common Council may, upon written request of three of its number,
convene a meeting thereof at any time after giving 24 hours’ notice of such
meeting to the Mayor and other Members of the Common Council and the general
public. The agenda of any such meeting shall be subject to the approval of a
majority of the members of the Common Council and any special meeting called
upon the written request of three Common Council members shall not proceed in
the absence of a quorum and approval of one or more agenda items by a majority
of the Common Council.
(Prior Code, § 2-4-2) (Ord. 89-05, passed - -1989; Ord. 11-11, passed - -2011)
§ 30.42 MEETINGS TO BE PUBLIC.
   All proceedings of the Council shall be open to the public; except that,
upon approval by a majority vote of the Council, the Council may meet in a
closed executive session pursuant to the provisions of state law. Notice of
meetings shall be given in a manner consistent with state statutes.
(Prior Code, § 2-4-3)
§ 30.43 QUORUM.
   A majority of the Council shall constitute a quorum for transacting
business, but a lesser number may adjourn from time to time and compel the
attendance of absent members.
(Prior Code, § 2-4-4)
§ 30.44 AGENDA.
   Prior to each Council meeting, or on or before a time fixed by the Council
for preparation and distribution of an agenda, whichever is earlier, the Town
Clerk shall collect all written reports, communications, ordinances,
resolutions, contracts and other documents to be submitted to the Council,
prepare an agenda according to the order of business and furnish each Council
member, the Mayor and the Town Attorney with a copy of the agenda and any
material pertinent thereto. Any member of the Town Council may request that
items be placed on the Town Council’s agenda for consideration, discussion and
legal action. Such request may be made by submitting a written request signed
by two members to the Town Clerk’s office prior to the deadline for the
specified agenda or by a member of the Council requesting the item be placed on
the Town Council’s agenda as a future agenda item with the concurrence of a
second member. All communication should be addressed to Council as a whole and
not to any individual member thereof.
(Prior Code, § 2-4-5) (Ord. 10-06, passed - -2010; Ord. 18-05, passed 5-8-2018)
§ 30.45 BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS.
   The Mayor shall create such boards, committees and commissions, standing or
special as deemed necessary. The Mayor and Council, by a simple majority at a
properly noticed public meeting, have the right to appoint members thereto.
Boards, committees and commissions shall perform such duties as the Mayor and
Council prescribe.
(Prior Code, § 2-4-7) (Ord. 96-06, passed - -1996)
§ 30.46 VOTING.
   (A)   The Mayor shall vote as a member of the Council.
   (B)   Upon the request of any member, the ayes and nays upon any question
shall be taken and entered in the minutes.
(Prior Code, § 2-4-8)
§ 30.47 SUSPENSION OF RULES.
   Any provisions of this subchapter may be temporarily suspended in connection
with any matter under consideration by a recorded vote of three-fourths of the
members present; except that, this section shall not be construed to permit any
action that is contrary to state statutes.
(Prior Code, § 2-4-9)
MAYOR
§ 30.60 DIRECT ELECTION OF MAYOR.
   (A)   Commencing with the primary and the general election of the town in
1992, the Mayor shall be directly elected by the people by a majority vote of
the qualified electors.
   (B)   The term of the Mayor shall be for four years.
   (C)   Any candidate who shall receive at the primary election, held by the
town, a majority of all votes cast for Mayor at such primary election, shall be
declared to be elected to the office of Mayor effective as of the date of the
general election for the town and said candidate shall not be required to run
for Mayor at the general election.
   (D)   A candidate cannot run for both Mayor and Council member at the same
election.
   (E)   Council members who desire to run for Mayor must resign their
positions on the Council as of the day they submit their nomination papers,
unless they are in the last year of their term.
   (F)   All other provisions of this code or state statutes dealing with
municipal elections are hereby declared to be applicable to the direct election
of the Mayor for the town.
(Prior Code, § 2-2-1) (Ord. 91-05, passed - -1991)
§ 30.61 VICE MAYOR; ACTING MAYOR.
   (A)   (1)   The Council shall designate one of its members as Vice Mayor,
who shall serve at the pleasure of the Council.
      (2)   The Vice Mayor shall perform the duties of the Mayor during his or
her absence or disability.
(Prior Code, § 2-2-2)
   (B)   In the absence or disability of both the Mayor and Vice Mayor, the
Council may designate another of its members to serve as acting Mayor who shall
have all the powers, duties and responsibilities of the Mayor during such
absence or disability.
(Prior Code, § 2-2-3)
§ 30.62 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The powers and duties of the Mayor shall include the following.
   (A)   He or she shall be the Chairperson of the Council and preside over its
meetings. He or she may make and second motions and shall have a voice and a
vote in all its proceedings.
   (B)   He or she shall be recognized as head of the town government for all
official and ceremonial purposes.
   (C)   He or she shall, on behalf of the Council, confer with and advise the
Town Manager to ensure that Council programs and policies are being fully
implemented.
   (D)   He or she shall execute and authenticate by his or her signature such
instruments as the Council shall approve or that statutes, ordinances or this
code shall require.
   (E)   He or she shall make such recommendations and suggestions to the
Council as he or she may consider proper.
   (F)   He or she shall perform such other duties required by state statute
and this code as well as those duties required as chief executive officer of
the town.
(Prior Code, § 2-2-4) (Ord. 10-06, passed - -2010; Ord. 11-10, passed - -2011;
Ord. 15-01, passed 2-24-2015)
§ 30.63 ABSENCE.
   The Mayor shall not absent himself or herself from the town for a greater
period than 30 days without the consent of the Council.
(Prior Code, § 2-2-5) (Ord. 07-19, passed - -2007)
§ 30.64 FAILURE TO SIGN DOCUMENTS.
   The Mayor shall sign any ordinance, resolution, contract, warrant, demand or
other document or instrument requiring the Mayor’s signature within five
calendar days from the date the Common Council took action requiring the
Mayor’s signature or from notification by the Town Manager or the Town
Manager’s designee that such document requires the Mayor’s signature. If any
ordinance, resolution, contract, warrant, demand or other document or
instrument requiring the Mayor’s signature remains unsigned after five calendar
days from the date the Common Council took action requiring the Mayor’s
signature or from notification by the Town Manager or the Town Manager’s
designee that such document requires the Mayor’s signature, the Vice Mayor or
if the Vice Mayor is unavailable, any Council member may sign such ordinance,
resolution, contract warrant, demand or other document which when so signed
shall have the same force and effect as if signed by the Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 2-2-6) (Ord. 15-01, passed 2-24-2015)
§ 30.65 LOCAL EMERGENCIES.
   (A)   The Mayor or any five members of the Common Council may by
proclamation declare an emergency or a local emergency to exist due to fire,
conflagration, flood, earthquake, explosion, war, bombing, acts of the enemy or
any other natural or human-made calamity or disaster or by reason of threats or
occurrences of riots, routs, affrays or other acts of civil disobedience which
endanger life or property within the town.
   (B)   After an emergency is declared pursuant to division (A) above, the
Mayor shall, during such emergency, govern by proclamation and shall have the
authority to impose all necessary regulations to preserve, the peace and order
of the town, including, but not limited to:
      (1)   Imposition of curfews in all or portions of the town;
      (2)   Ordering the closing of any business;
      (3)   Closing to public access any public building, street or other
public place;
      (4)   Calling upon regular or auxiliary law enforcement agencies and
organizations within or without the town for assistance; and
      (5)   Requiring that town offices remain open or remain closed.
(Prior Code, § 2-2-7) (Ord. 11-10, passed - -2011; Ord. 15-01, passed 2-24-
2015)
CHAPTER 31: OFFICERS, EMPLOYEES AND ORGANIZATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
31.01   Officers generally
   
31.02   Bond
   
31.03   Additional powers and duties
   
31.04   Criminal records checks
Specific Officers and Organizations
   
31.15   Town Manager
   
31.16   Town Clerk
   
31.17   Police Chief
   
31.18   Town Engineer
   
31.19   Town Attorney; Town Prosecutor
   
31.20   Town Magistrate
   
31.21   Zoning Administrator
   
31.22   Police Department
Indemnification and Defense of Officers and Employees
   
31.35   Definitions
   
31.36   Persons to be indemnified or defended
   
31.37   Prerequisite; notification of Town Manager
   
31.38   Proceeding not initiated by the town
   
31.39   Criminal proceedings
   
31.40   No presumption created
   
31.41   Proceeding initiated by town
   
31.42   Success on the merits
   
31.43   Determination by legal counsel
   
31.44   Indemnification not deemed exclusive remedy
Personnel System
   
31.55   Creation and scope
   
31.56   Conditions of employment
   
31.57   Rules and regulations
   
31.58   Political contributions
   
31.59   Criminal record checks
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.01 OFFICERS GENERALLY.
   (A)   There are hereby created the offices of Town Manager, Town Clerk,
Police Chief, Town Engineer, Town Attorney and Town Magistrate, who shall
serve, with the exception of the Magistrate, at the pleasure of the Council.
(Prior Code, § 3-1-1)
   (B)   The Council may appoint and remove from time to time such other
officers as it may deem necessary and that are not provided for in this code or
state statute.
(Prior Code, § 3-1-2)
§ 31.02 BOND.
   The Council shall require each officer of the town to give bond for the due
discharge of his or her duties in such sums and with such security as it may
direct and approve as determined by resolution. The town shall pay the costs of
such bond.
(Prior Code, § 3-1-3)
§ 31.03 ADDITIONAL POWERS AND DUTIES.
   In addition to any powers and duties prescribed in this code, each officer
shall have such further powers, perform such further duties and hold such other
office as may be provided by the Council through ordinance, resolution or
order.
(Prior Code, § 3-1-4)
§ 31.04 CRIMINAL RECORDS CHECKS.
   There is hereby created a policy for conducting criminal records checks for
prospective town employees and volunteers.
(Ord. 09-11, passed - -2009)
SPECIFIC OFFICERS AND ORGANIZATIONS
§ 31.15 TOWN MANAGER.
   (A)   Office created. The office of the Town Manager is hereby created and
established. The Town Manager shall be appointed by the Council wholly on the
basis of his administrative and executive ability and qualifications and shall
hold office for and at the pleasure of the Council.
   (B)   Bond. The Town Manager shall furnish a corporate surety bond to be
approved by the Council in such sum as may be determined by the Council. The
bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties imposed
upon the Manager as prescribed in this subchapter. Any premium for such bond
shall be a proper charge against the town.
   (C)   Compensation. The Town Manager shall receive such compensation as the
Council shall fix from time to time.
   (D)   Removal procedure. The Town Manager may be removed by a majority vote
of the members of the Council. Severance pay, if any, shall be as provided in a
contract.
   (E)   Powers and duties. The Town Manager shall be the administrative head
of the government of the town under the direction and control of the Council,
except as otherwise provided by the Council. He or she shall be responsible to
the Council for the proper administration of all affairs of the town, in
addition to his or her general powers as administrative head and not as a
limitation thereon, it shall be his or her duty and he or she shall have the
powers set forth in the following divisions:
      (1)   Appoint and, when necessary for the good of the service, suspend or
remove all officers and employees of the town not appointed by the Council, if
an officer or employee’s appointment required the concurrence of the Council,
removal shall require concurrence of the Council. He or she may authorize the
head of a department or office to appoint, suspend or remove subordinates in
such department or office. All appointments and removals shall be based on
merit and upon the qualifications and disqualifications of such officer or
employee without regard to any political belief or affiliation;
      (2)   Prepare the budget annually and submit it to the Council together
with a message describing the important features and be responsible for its
administration after adoption;
      (3)   Prepare and submit to the Council at the end of the fiscal year a
complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the town the
preceding year;
      (4)   Keep the Council advised of the financial condition and future
needs of the town and make such recommendations as he or she may deem
desirable;
      (5)   Serve as personnel officer with such duties as directed by the
Council, prescribed by this code and as set forth in the personnel rules and
regulations. He or she shall recommend to the governing body a standard
schedule of pay for each appointive office and position in the town service,
including minimum, intermediate and maximum rates. He or she shall authorize
the payment of overtime pay for such employees as may work in excess of a
normal work period. Such rates of pay and periods of work shall be in
conformity with wages and salaries enacted by the Council;
      (6)   Recommend to the Council from time to time adoption of such
measures as he or she may deem necessary or expedient for the health, safety or
welfare of the community or for the improvement of administrative services;
      (7)   Consolidate or combine offices, positions, departments or units
under his or her jurisdiction, with the approval of the Council. The Manager
may be the head of one or more departments;
      (8)   Attend all meetings of the Council, unless excused therefrom, and
take part in the discussion of all matters coming before the Council. He or she
shall be entitled to notice of all regular and special meetings of the Council;
      (9)   In case of accident, disaster or other circumstances creating a
public emergency, the Manager may award contracts and make purchases for the
purpose of meeting said emergency; but he or she shall file promptly with the
Council a certificate showing such emergency and the necessity for such action,
together with an itemized account of all expenditures;
      (10)   See that all laws and ordinances are duly enforced;
      (11)   Investigate the affairs of the town or any department or division
thereof. Investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the
administration of the government of the town and in regard to service
maintained by the public utilities in the town, and see that all franchises,
permits and privileges granted by the town are faithfully observed;
      (12)   Oversee the work of the Police Chief and provide for a written
evaluation on an annual basis to be provided to the Council for consideration;
and
      (13)   Perform such other duties as may be required by the Council, not
inconsistent with state law or town ordinances.
   (F)   Council not to interfere with appointments or removals. With regard to
officers and employees appointed by the Manager, neither the Council, nor any
of its members, shall direct or request the appointment of any person to, or
his or her removal or suspension from, such office by the Manager or any of his
or her subordinates, or in any manner take part in the appointment or removal
of such officers and employees in the administrative services of the town.
Except for the purpose of inquiry, the Council and its members shall deal with
the administrative service solely through the Manager.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-1)
§ 31.16 TOWN CLERK.
   (A)   Appointment. The Clerk shall be appointed by the Town Manager with the
concurrence of the Council. The position shall be classified and subject to the
personnel policy.
   (B)   Records. The Clerk shall keep a true and correct record of all
business transacted by the Council and any other records that either pertain to
the business of the town or that the Council directs. The Clerk shall number,
plainly label and file separately in a suitable cabinet all ordinances,
resolution, notices, deeds, surveys, leases, paid and unpaid vouchers,
inventories, letters, orders and other documents of whatever nature.
   (C)   Public inspection of records. The Clerk shall keep convenient for
public inspection all public records and public documents under his or her
control, as provided by state statute, being Title 39, Chapter 1, Public
Records, A.R.S. §§ 39-101 to 39-161.
   (D)   Monthly reports. The Clerk shall prepare and collect from town
officers and employees such monthly reports prepared in such manner and to
include such information as may be directed by the Council.
   (E)   Minutes. The Clerk shall prepare or cause to be prepared all minutes
of Council proceedings and ensure their correctness and accuracy.
   (F)   Ordinances, resolution, budgets and notices. The Clerk shall process,
record, file, publish and, if required by state statute, post all ordinances,
resolutions, budgets and notices that may be passed by the Council.
   (G)   Duties as Treasurer. The Clerk or the Town Manager’s designee shall
hold the office of Town Treasurer and receive and safely keep all moneys that
shall come to the town and pay out the same when authorized by the Council. He
or she shall keep a separate record and account of each different fund provided
by the Council, apportion the moneys received among the different funds as
prescribed by the Council, and keep a complete set of books showing: every
money transaction of the town, the state of each fund, from what source the
money in each fund was derived and for what purpose expended, and he or she
shall make monthly reports to the Council of all receipts and disbursements and
the balance in each fund. At the end of the fiscal year, he or she shall make a
full and detailed statement of the receipts and expenditures of the town during
the year, specifying the different sources of revenue and the amount received
from each, all appropriations made by the Mayor and Council, and the object for
which they were made, and the amount of money expended under each, the
evidences of indebtedness issued, and what portion remains thereof outstanding,
with the rate and amount of interest due thereon, and the amount of cash on
hand.
   (H)   Election official. The Clerk shall be the town election official and
perform those duties required by state statute.
   (I)   Licenses. The Clerk shall issue or cause to be issued all licenses
that may be prescribed by state statute or this code.
   (J)   Administrative duties. The Clerk shall perform those administrative
responsibilities and duties that are conferred upon him or her by the Town
Manager in addition to those specified in this code.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-2) (Ord. 06-05, passed - -2006; Ord. 06-12, passed - -2006;
Ord. 08-13, passed - -2008; Ord. 10-07, passed - -2010; Ord. 14-04, passed - -
2014)
§ 31.17 POLICE CHIEF.
   The Police Chief shall be the Chief of Police and he or she shall perform
such duties as may be required of him or her by law and as the Council may deem
necessary.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-3)
§ 31.18 TOWN ENGINEER.
   The Town Engineer shall be appointed by the Town Manager with the
concurrence of the Council. The Engineer shall have charge of the town streets,
sewers and waterworks and shall perform such duties as may be required of him
or her by law and such other duties as the Council may deem necessary.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-4)
§ 31.19 TOWN ATTORNEY; TOWN PROSECUTOR.
   (A)   Town Attorney. The Town Attorney shall be appointed by the Council.
The Town Attorney shall act as the legal counselor and advisor of the Council
and other town officials and, as such, shall give his or her opinion in writing
when requested by the Town Manager. The Town Attorney shall review and assist
in the drafting of all deeds, contracts, conveyances, ordinances, resolutions
and other legal instruments when required by the Town Manager. The Town
Attorney shall approve or disapprove as to form, in writing, all drafts of
contracts and all official or other bonds before final approval or acceptance
thereof by the Council. The Town Attorney shall return within the time allotted
by the Town Manager all ordinances and resolutions submitted for consideration
by the Town Manager, with approval or disapproval as to form noted thereon,
together with the reasons therefore. Except for matters handled by counsel
appointed by the town’s insurance carrier, the Town Attorney shall prosecute
and defend ail civil suits, actions or causes where the town is a party to the
extent of the Town Attorney’s ability and in accordance with the Town
Attorney’s independent professional legal judgment and in compliance with the
Arizona Supreme Court’s Rule of Professional Responsibility shall report to the
Council, when required, the condition of any suit or action to which the town
is a party. The Town Attorney shall attend all Council meetings to advise the
Council on legal issues and serve as Town Parliamentarian. Upon approval of the
Town Manager, the Town Attorney’s attendance at a Council meeting may be by
telephone.
   (B)   Town Prosecutor. The Town Prosecutor shall be appointed by the
Council. The Town Prosecutor shall prosecute all criminal charges in the town’s
Magistrate Court which are supported by probable cause within the parameters of
the Arizona Supreme Court’s Rules of Professional Responsibility and prevailing
standards of prosecution. The Town Prosecutor shall prosecute all civil, petty
and civil traffic offenses in the town’s Magistrate Court which are supported
by probable cause within the parameters of Professional responsibility and
prevailing standards of prosecution if the defendant in such matters is
represented by counsel.
   (C)   Validity. If any division, sentence, clause or phase of this section
is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional; such decision shall not affect
the validity of the remaining portions of this section. The Town of Quartzsite
Common Council hereby declares that it would have passed this section, and each
division, clause or phase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or
more divisions, sentences, clauses and phases be declared unconstitutional.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-5) (Ord. 11-08, passed - -2011; Ord. 14-04, passed - -2014;
Ord. 17-01, passed 1-10-2017)
§ 31.20 TOWN MAGISTRATE.
   The Town Magistrate shall be appointed by the Council and shall be the
presiding officer of the Magistrate’s Court. He or she shall perform those
functions necessary to the maintenance of the Magistrate’s Court as provided by
state statute.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-6)
§ 31.21 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   Established. The office of Zoning Administrator of the town is hereby
established.
(Prior Code, § 3-5-1)
   (B)   Appointment of Zoning Administrator.
      (1)   The Zoning Administrator shall be appointed by the Town Manager
with the concurrence of the Council.
      (2)   The Zoning Administrator may be the Town Manager, Town Clerk or any
other individual appointed by the Council, which the Council finds to be
qualified to hold said position.
(Prior Code, § 3-5-2)
   (C)   Duties of Zoning Administrator. It shall also be the duty of the
Zoning Administrator to make recommendations to the Planning and Zoning
Commission as to zoning changes that are necessary in the town and, upon the
filing of an application with the Zoning Commission for a change of zoning, the
Zoning Administrator shall make his or her recommendations, in writing,
regarding the application, citing the facts upon which he relies in making his
or her decisions. The Zoning Administrator shall submit his or her
recommendations to the Planning and Zoning Commission prior to the Planning and
Zoning Commission hearings which deal with the rezoning of any parcel of
property within the town.
(Prior Code, § 3-5-3)
   (D)   Fees. The Council shall be authorized to establish a uniform schedule
of fees to be charged by the Zoning Administrator for any duties performed by
the Administrator, and such fee schedule shall become effective upon approval
of the Council.
(Prior Code, § 3-5-4)
   (E)   Appeals. Any decision or recommendation of the Zoning Administrator
shall be appealable to the Board of Adjustment as established in the zoning
ordinance of the town.
(Prior Code, § 3-5-5)
(Ord. 14-04, passed - -2014)
§ 31.22 POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   Created; composition. There is hereby created a Police Department for
the town which shall consist of a Police Chief and as many police officers as
may from time to time be deemed necessary by the Council for the safety and
good order of the town.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-1)
   (B)   Appointment of officers. The Police Chief shall be appointed by the
Town Manager with the concurrence of Council. The Council shall provide for the
appointment of as many police officers as may from time to time be deemed
necessary for the safety and good order of the town.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-2)
   (C)   Compensation of officers. The Police Chief and the police officers of
the town shall be compensated as determined by the Council. The Police Chief
shall not receive any perquisites, commissions or compensation for his or her
services as Police Chief, except as the Council may prescribe.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-3)
   (D)   Departmental rules and regulations. The Police Department shall be
operated and managed in accordance with such departmental rules and regulations
as may from time to time be adopted by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-4)
   (E)   Duties of the Police Department. It is the duty of the Police
Department, under the direction of the Police Chief, to:
      (1)   Enforce this code and the statutes of the state within
jurisdictional limits as conferred by law and to arrest and charge the
violators thereof;
      (2)   Take charge of the town jail and all prisoners confined therein,
and all those who are sentenced to labor on the streets or public works of the
town and to see that orders and sentences with reference to such are fully
executed and complied with;
      (3)   Deliver any persons who may be confined in the jail upon conviction
of a crime committed under the jurisdiction of the Magistrate’s Court to any
authorized officer of the town who shall at any time demand such prisoners. Any
such authorized person so demanding and receiving such prisoners shall work
such prisoners on the streets or alleys of the town or on any and all
authorized work as may be determined by the Council;
      (4)   Render such account of the Police Department, its duties and
receipts as may be required by the Council and keep non-confidential records of
the office open to inspection by the Council at any time;
      (5)   Direct traffic and ensure the orderly flow thereof and investigate
and make reports of traffic accidents;
      (6)   Inspect and ascertain the condition of traffic-control devices of
every description which have been erected within the town on the authority of
the Council and notify the Council of any defects found therein; and
      (7)   Perform such additional duties as may be required by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-5)
   (F)   Answering calls outside the town. The members of the Police Department
are duly authorized to answer calls for aid and assistance beyond the corporate
limits of the town pursuant to mutual aid agreements and state statutes.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-6)
(Ord. 90-14, passed - -1990; Res. 90-27, passed - -1990)
INDEMNIFICATION AND DEFENSE OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
§ 31.35 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DEFEND. To provide legal counsel to represent the person in a proceeding.
   INDEMNIFY. To reimburse an officer or employee for expenses incurred related
to a proceeding.
   PERSON.
      (1)   Current and former officers, employees, Town Council members and
members of committees, commissions and boards of the town; and
      (2)   The spouse of a current or former officer, employee, Town Council
member or member of a committee, commission or board of the town to the extent
such spouse in named in a proceeding solely because of the spouse’s marital
relationship to such officer, employee, Town Council member or member of a
committee, commission or board of the town who is named in a proceeding.
   PROCEEDING. Any threatened, pending or completed action or suit, whether
civil, criminal or administrative.
(Prior Code, § 3-7-1) (Ord. 13-05, passed - -2013)
§ 31.36 PERSONS TO BE INDEMNIFIED OR DEFENDED.
   (A)   Any person made a party or threatened to be made a party to any
proceeding because such person is an officer, employee, Council member or
member of a committee, commission or board of the town shall be indemnified and
defended in accordance with this subchapter.
   (B)   The indemnification and defense obligations set forth in this
subchapter do not apply to acts of an officer, employee, Council member or
member of a committee, commission or board for any conduct that exceeds the
authority granted to the person by virtue of his or her position.
   (C)   The indemnification and defense obligations set forth in this
subchapter do not apply to acts of an officer, employee, Council member or
member of a committee, commission or board of the town being civilly or
criminally prosecuted for acts constituting a violation of the town code.
   (D)   The town reserves the right not to indemnify any person with respect
to an award of damages where such person is adjudged by a court as negligent or
committing misconduct in the performance of his or her duty to the town.
(Prior Code, § 3-7-2) (Ord. 13-05, passed - -2013)
§ 31.37 PREREQUISITE; NOTIFICATION OF TOWN MANAGER.
   (A)   As a prerequisite to indemnification of defense under this subchapter,
a person shall notify the Town Manager as soon as he or she has knowledge that
he or she is made a party or threatened to be made a party to any proceeding.
   (B)   If there is no Town Manager, the interim Town Manager or Town Clerk
shall be notified.
(Prior Code, § 3-7-3) (Ord. 13-05, passed - -2013)
§ 31.38 PROCEEDING NOT INITIATED BY THE TOWN.
   Except as provided in §
31.36 of this chapter, if the proceeding is one not initiated by the town:
   (A)   The person shall be indemnified against his or her expenses, including
attorney’s fees, costs, judgments, fines and amounts paid in settlement
actually and reasonably incurred by him or her in connection with the
proceeding; and
   (B)   The town, either directly or through its insurance carrier, shall
defend the person in connection with the proceeding.
(Prior Code, § 3-7-4) (Ord. 13-05, passed - -2013)
§ 31.39 CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS.
   Except as provided in §
31.36 of this chapter, if the proceeding is a criminal proceeding, the person
shall be indemnified and defended if he or she had no reasonable cause to
believe his or her conduct was unlawful.
(Prior Code, § 3-7-5) (Ord. 13-05, passed - -2013)
§ 31.40 NO PRESUMPTION CREATED.
   With respect to the indemnification and defense obligations under §§
31.38 or
31.39 of this chapter, a termination of the proceeding by judgment, order,
settlement, conviction or upon a plea of nolo contendere or its equivalent,
shall not by itself create a presumption that the person acted, or failed to
act, other that in good faith and in a manner which he or she reasonably
believed to be in or not opposed to the best interest of the town, and with
respect to any criminal proceeding, shall not by itself create a presumption
that the person had reasonable cause to believe that his or her conduct was
unlawful.
(Prior Code, § 3-7-6) (Ord. 13-05, passed - -2013)
§ 31.41 PROCEEDING INITIATED BY TOWN.
   The indemnification and defense obligations set forth in this subchapter
shall not apply to proceedings initiated by the town to procure a judgment
against any person in the town’s favor unless a determination is made pursuant
to §
31.43 of this chapter that the requirements of this subchapter have been met.
Notwithstanding anything else set forth in this section, if a court enters a
judgment that the person’s actions exceeded his or her authority, such person
shall reimburse the town for all costs incurred by it in providing the
indemnification and/or defense of the proceeding.
(Prior Code, § 3-7-7) (Ord. 13-05, passed - -2013)
§ 31.42 SUCCESS ON THE MERITS.
   To the extent that a person covered by this subchapter has been successful
on the merits or otherwise in defense of any proceeding covered by this
subchapter or in the defense of any claim, issue or matter therein, he or she
shall be indemnified against expenses, including attorney’s fees and costs,
actually and reasonably incurred by him or her in connection therewith.
(Prior Code, § 3-7-8) (Ord. 13-05, passed - -2013)
§ 31.43 DETERMINATION BY LEGAL COUNSEL.
   Any indemnification made pursuant to this subchapter and any defense
authorized by this subchapter shall be provided by the town only as authorized
in the specific case upon a determination that indemnification or defense of
the person is proper in the circumstances because he or she has met the
requirements set forth in this subchapter. Indemnification and defense shall be
made unless the Town Attorney or independent legal counsel engaged by the town
determines that the requirements of this subchapter have not been met.
(Prior Code, § 3-7-9) (Ord. 13-05, passed - -2013)
§ 31.44 INDEMNIFICATION NOT DEEMED EXCLUSIVE REMEDY.
   (A)   The indemnification provided by this subchapter shall not be deemed
exclusive of any other rights to which those indemnified may be entitled.
   (B)   The indemnification provided by this subchapter shall be supplemental
to and excess to any valid and collectible insurance coverage.
(Prior Code, § 3-7-10) (Ord. 13-05, passed - -2013)
PERSONNEL SYSTEM
§ 31.55 CREATION AND SCOPE.
   There is hereby adopted a merit system for the employees of the town, the
provisions of which shall apply to all employees of the town, except elected
officials, officers of the town appointed by the Council, persons engaged under
contract to supply expert, professional or technical services, temporary
employees and volunteer personnel who receive no regular compensation from the
town.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-1)
§ 31.56 CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT.
   (A)   The appointment, promotion and tenure of every employee shall be
conditioned solely on merit, qualifications and satisfactory performance of the
duties and responsibilities assigned.
   (B)   No employee or applicant for employment shall be discriminated against
on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, age or political affiliation.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-2) (Ord. 14-04, passed - -2014)
§ 31.57 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Council may adopt, by resolution, rules and regulation to give effect to
this subchapter, which may be modified or changed from time to time, but such
rules and regulations shall follow the generally accepted principles of good
personnel administration.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-3)
§ 31.58 POLITICAL CONTRIBUTIONS.
   No officer, official or employee of the town shall use any influence or
pressure upon any employee to obtain any assessment or contribution of money or
time, either direct or indirect, for any political campaign or personal gain.
   (A)   Terms. There is hereby created a personnel board, which shall consist
of three regular members and two alternate members from the citizens of the
town. Regular members and alternates shall be appointed by the Mayor and
Council. The terms of regular members shall be three years, so staggered that
only two Board member terms expire in the same year. The terms of the alternate
members shall be one year. Alternate members shall be called by the Chairperson
as needed to assure a quorum is present. This Board shall be required to meet a
minimum of once each year at a date and time to be determined by the members of
the Board. Special meetings may be called as needed by the Chairperson. The
regular members of the Board shall elect a Chairperson from their membership to
conduct the meetings. The members of the Personnel Board shall serve at the
pleasure of the Mayor and Council.
   (B)   Duties.
      (1)   The Board shall meet as needed to conduct hearings on qualified
employee grievances and make recommendations to the Town Manager or his or her
designee as the Personnel Officer. The Board may meet in executive session in
accordance with the state’s Open Meeting Law, being A.R.S. §§ 38-431.01 et seq.
      (2)   The Board shall review changes to the town’s personnel policy and
make recommendations to the Mayor and Council as needed.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-4)
§ 31.59 CRIMINAL RECORD CHECKS.
   (A)   Fingerprinting of applicants. All applicants for either employment
with the town and all applicants for volunteer positions for the town or a
contractor with a contract with the town who provide services to minors shall
submit a full set of fingerprints to the town, for the purpose of obtaining a
state and federal criminal records check. These checks shall be done pursuant
to the provisions found in A.R.S. § 41-1750 and Pub. Law No. 92-544. The
state’s Department of Public Safety is authorized to exchange these fingerprint
data with the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
   (B)   Use of Department of Public Safety. The state’s Department of Public
Safety is hereby authorized to exchange the fingerprint data with the Federal
Bureau of Investigation pursuant to A.R.S. § 41-1750 and Pub. Law No. 92-544.
   (C)   Conditional acceptance of employment. Applicants may submit their
employment application forms and fingerprint cards for processing up ten days
prior to selection by the town of a candidate. Any employment by the town or
contractor is subject to results of the criminal records check, and, if an
applicant has been notified of his or her selection and has temporarily assumed
a position with the town or contractor, such position may be vacated at the
option of the town depending on the criminal history results.
(Ord. 18-12, passed 10-23-2018)
CHAPTER 32: LEGISLATION
Section
Ordinances, Resolutions and Contracts
   
32.01   Prior approval
   
32.02   Introduction
   
32.03   Reading of proposed ordinance
   
32.04   Requirements for ordinance
   
32.05   Effective date of ordinance
   
32.06   Signatures required
   
32.07   Publishing required
   
32.08   Posting required
Initiatives and Referendums
   
32.20   Power reserved; time of election
   
32.21   Number of signatures
   
32.22   Time of filing
   
32.23   Sample ballots and publicity pamphlets
ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS AND CONTRACTS
§ 32.01 PRIOR APPROVAL.
   All ordinances, resolutions and contracts documents shall, before
presentation to the Council, have been reviewed as to form by the Attorney and
shall, when there are substantive matters of administration involved, be
referred to the person who is charged with the administration of the matters.
Such person shall have an opportunity to present his or her comments,
suggestions and objections, if any, prior to the passage of the ordinance,
resolution or acceptance of the contract.
(Prior Code, § 2-5-1)
§ 32.02 INTRODUCTION.
   Ordinances, resolutions and other matters or subjects requiring action by
the Council shall be introduced and sponsored by a member of the Council;
except that, the Attorney, the Manager or the Clerk may present ordinances,
resolutions and other matters or subjects to the Council, and any member of the
Council may assume sponsorship thereof by moving that such ordinance,
resolution, matter or subject be adopted; otherwise, they shall not be
considered.
(Prior Code, § 2-5-2)
§ 32.03 READING OF PROPOSED ORDINANCE.
   All ordinances shall have at least one reading. This reading may be by title
only, if the Council is in possession of printed copies of said ordinance. Upon
the request of any member of the Council, the ordinance shall be read in full.
(Prior Code, § 2-5-3) (Ord. 93-10, passed - -1993)
§ 32.04 REQUIREMENTS FOR ORDINANCE.
   Each ordinance should have but one subject, the nature of which is clearly
expressed in the title. Whenever possible, each ordinance shall be introduced
as an amendment to this code or to an existing ordinance and, in such case, the
title of the sections to be amended shall be included in the ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 2-5-4)
§ 32.05 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCE.
   No ordinance, resolution or franchise shall become operative until 30 days
after its passage by the Council and approval by the Mayor, except measures
necessary for the immediate preservation of the peace, health or safety of the
town, but such an emergency measure shall not become immediately operative
unless it states in a separate section the reason why it is necessary that it
should become immediately operative, and unless it is approved by the
affirmative vote of three-fourths of all the members elected to the Council,
taken by ayes and nays and approved by the Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 2-5-5)
§ 32.06 SIGNATURES REQUIRED.
   Every ordinance passed by the Council shall, before it becomes effective, be
signed by the Mayor and attested by the Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 2-5-6)
§ 32.07 PUBLISHING REQUIRED.
   Only such orders, resolutions, motions, regulations or proceedings of the
Council shall be published as may be required by state statutes or expressly
ordered by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 2-5-7)
§ 32.08 POSTING REQUIRED.
   Every ordinance imposing any penalty, fine, forfeiture or other punishment
shall, after passage, be posted by the Clerk in three or more public places
within the town and an affidavit of the person who posted the ordinance shall
be filed in the office of the Clerk as proof of posting.
(Prior Code, § 2-5-8) (Res. 90-18, passed - -1990; Res. 94-19, passed - -1994;
Res. 99-15, passed - -1999)
INITIATIVES AND REFERENDUMS
§ 32.20 POWER RESERVED; TIME OF ELECTION.
   (A)   There is reserved to the qualified electors of the town the power of
the initiative and the referendum as prescribed by the state constitution. When
a referendum or initiative election is required to be placed on the ballot, the
Council shall do so at the next regularly scheduled state primary or general
election.
   (B)   Alternatively, the Council may, at its discretion, call a special
election to be held on any date authorized by A.R.S. § 16-204 to place a
referendum or initiative election on the ballot.
(Prior Code, § 2-6-1) (Ord. 13-06, passed - -2013)
§ 32.21 NUMBER OF SIGNATURES.
   (A)   The total number of registered voters qualified to vote at the last
municipal election, whether regular or special, immediately preceding the date
upon which any initiative petition is filed shall be the basis upon which the
number of qualified electors of the town required to file an initiative
petition shall be computed.
   (B)   The basis upon which the number of qualified electors of the town
required to file a referendum petition shall be as determined by state law.
(Prior Code, § 2-6-2)
§ 32.22 TIME OF FILING.
   (A)   Initiative petitions shall be filed at least 120 days prior to the
election at which they are to be voted upon.
   (B)   Referendum petitions shall be filed within 30 days of the adoption of
the ordinance or resolution. If the Town Clerk is unable to provide petitioners
with a copy of the ordinance of resolution at the time of application for an
official number or on the same business day of the application, the 30- day
period shall be calculated from the date such ordinance or resolution is
available.
(Prior Code, § 2-6-3)
§ 32.23 SAMPLE BALLOTS AND PUBLICITY PAMPHLETS.
   (A)   The following procedures relating to sample ballots and publicity
pamphlets are hereby adopted for conducting elections at which an initiative or
referendum is to be voted upon: a publicity pamphlet, containing the entire
text of the official ballots, shall be mailed by the Town Clerk to each
household within the town in which a registered voter resides, not less than
ten days prior to the election to which the sample ballot pertains.
   (B)   The pamphlet shall contain the proposition as it will appear on the
ballot together with a summary of each proposition. Each summary shall be
followed by any arguments supporting the proposition followed by any arguments
opposing the proposition.
   (C)   Arguments supporting and opposing the proposition appearing on the
ballot shall be filed with the office of the Town Clerk by 5:00 p.m. not less
than 60 days prior to the election at which the propositions are to be voted
upon. Arguments supporting or opposing propositions appearing on the ballot
shall meet the following requirements.
      (1)   Arguments must relate to the proposition proposed by initiative or
referred by referendum which will appear on the ballot.
      (2)   Arguments must identify the proposition to which they refer and
indicate whether the argument is in support of or in opposition to the
proposition.
      (3)   Arguments may not exceed 300 words in length.
      (4)   Arguments must be signed by the person or persons who submit them.
Arguments submitted by organizations shall be signed on behalf of the
organization by an officer of the organization authorized to take such action.
All persons signing documents shall indicate their residence or post office
address.
         (a)   No person or organization shall submit more than one argument
for each proposition to be voted upon.
         (b)   Each argument shall be accompanied by a deposit in the amount of
$100 to offset proportional costs of printing. This requirement shall not be
waived on any account.
(Prior Code, § 2-6-4)
CHAPTER 33: MUNICIPAL COURT
Section
General Provisions
   
33.01   Court establishment and jurisdiction
   
33.02   Town Magistrate; powers and duties
   
33.03   Proceedings of Court
Fees and Court Enhancement Fund
   
33.15   Collection agency fees
   
33.16   Attorney collection fees
   
33.17   Warrant fees
   
33.18   Suspension fees
   
33.19   Credit/check/debit card service fee
   
33.20   Public safety recovery fees
   
33.21   Court enhancement fees
   
33.22   Late fees
   
33.23   Time payment fees
   
33.24   Fund established
   
33.25   Diversion fee
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 33.01 COURT ESTABLISHMENT AND JURISDICTION.
   There is hereby established in the town a Municipal Court, which shall have
jurisdiction of all violations of this code, and jurisdiction concurrently with
the county’s Justice of the Peace Precinct in which the town is located and the
Superior Court of the state over violations of civil, civil traffic, petty and
misdemeanor offenses as defined by state statutes of which any element thereof
is alleged to have been committed within the limits of the town.
(Prior Code, § 5-1-1) (Ord. 11-14, passed - -2011; Ord. 13-03, passed - -2013)
§ 33.02 TOWN MAGISTRATE; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   Town Magistrate.
      (1)   The presiding officer of the Municipal Court shall be the Town
Magistrate.
      (2)   The Town Magistrate shall be appointed by the Common Council.
      (3)   The Town Magistrate shall serve a term of two years, with the
beginning and end of the term to be specified at the time of appointment.
      (4)   The term shall automatically terminate upon expiration of said two-
year period, unless prior thereto the Common Council shall by a majority vote
otherwise.
      (5)   Nothing in this chapter shall change the town’s right, after a due
process hearing, to remove the Magistrate for cause.
(Prior Code, § 5-2-1)
   (B)   Qualification.
      (1)   Every Magistrate, Pro Tern Magistrate, Justice of the Peace, Pro
Tem Justice of the Peace, Judge of the Superior Court, Pro Tem Judge of the
Superior Court and Superior Court Commissioner so employed by any county, city
or town of the state or by the state, is qualified to serve as a Pro Tem Town
Magistrate and, if assigned to serve in such capacity by the Town Magistrate,
shall be permitted to serve as a Pro Tem Town Magistrate without the formality
of the ratification of such appointment by the Common Council.
      (2)   The Town Magistrate may, but is not required to, appoint one or
more Pro Tem Magistrates not otherwise qualified to serve as a Pro Tem Town
Magistrate pursuant to division (B)(1) above with the advice and consent of the
Common Council.
      (3)   A Pro Tem Magistrate shall, while so serving, have all the duties,
responsibilities and authority of the Town Magistrate.
      (4)   Any Pro Tem Magistrate may serve as Town Magistrate in the absence
of the Town Magistrate.
      (5)   A Pro Tem Magistrate shall, regardless of the presence or absence
of the Town Magistrate, preside over such matters as are assigned by the Town
Magistrate.
      (6)   The term for a Pro Tem Magistrate appointed pursuant to division
(B)(2) above is two years, with the beginning and end of the term to be
specified at the time of appointment.
      (7)   The term for a Pro Tem Magistrate appointed pursuant to division
(B)(2) above shall automatically terminate upon expiration of said two-year
period, unless prior thereto the Council shall by a majority vote otherwise
direct.
      (8)   Nothing in this chapter shall change the town’s right, after a due
process hearing, to remove a Pro Tem Town Magistrate appointed pursuant to
division (B)(2) above for cause.
(Prior Code, § 5-2-2)
   (C)   Powers and duties of Town Magistrate. The powers and duties set forth
and conferred upon him or her under the provisions of the state constitution
and statutes, this code and the ordinances and resolution of the town:
      (1)   The keeping of a docket in which shall be entered each action and
the proceedings of the court therein;
      (2)   The responsibility for fixing and receiving all bonds and bails and
receiving all fines, penalties, fees and other moneys as provided by law;
      (3)   Payment of all fees, fines, penalties and other moneys collected by
the Court to the Treasurer;
      (4)   Submitting a monthly report to the Council summarizing court
activities for that month; and
      (5)   Preparation of a schedule of traffic violations not involving the
death of a person, listing specific bail for each violation.
(Prior Code, § 5-2-3)
   (D)   Eligibility.
      (1)   Eligibility requirements.
         (a)   Unless otherwise required by state statutes, any person eligible
to be elected as a Justice of the Peace in the state is eligible to be Town
Magistrate.
         (b)   Although residency may be considered as a factor by the Common
Council in selecting a Town Magistrate, residency within the town limits of the
town is not a prerequisite to employment as Town Magistrate.
(Prior Code, § 5-5-1)
      (2)   Persons ineligible to serve as Town Magistrate.
         (a)   No person whose duties as an employee of the town have a direct
relationship with the administration of the town, including, but not limited
to, the Town Manager, Assistant Town Manager, Town Clerk, Police Chief, Town
Engineer or Town Attorney shall hold the office of Town Magistrate or Assistant
Town Magistrate.
         (b)   No person who has been convicted of a felony offense, whether or
not the record of such conviction has been expunged, is eligible to be Town
Magistrate unless expungement of the record of such conviction was the result
of a determination of actual innocence.
         (c)   No person who has been convicted of a misdemeanor offense
involving dishonesty or of theft, including shoplifting, is eligible to be Town
Magistrate.
(Prior Code, § 5-5-2)
   (E)   Duties.
      (1)   The Magistrate shall serve as an independent arbiter of justice.
      (2)   The Magistrate shall abide by the Judicial Canons established by
the state’s Supreme Court.
      (3)   The Magistrate shall administer the Court and be responsible for
the management of its personnel and budget.
(Prior Code, § 5-6-1)
(Ord. 11-14, passed - -2011; Ord. 13-03, passed - -2013)
§ 33.03 PROCEEDINGS OF COURT.
   Municipal Court proceedings shall be governed by the applicable provisions
of the Arizona Constitution, state statutes and State Supreme Court rules
pertaining to the type and nature of cause being heard by the Court.
(Prior Code, § 5-3-1) (Ord. 11-14, passed - -2011; Ord. 13-03, passed - -2013)
FEES AND COURT ENHANCEMENT FUND
§ 33.15 COLLECTION AGENCY FEES.
   A defendant who defaults in his or her obligation for the payment of moneys
owed or due to the Magistrate Court, including, but not limited to,
restitution, fines, sanctions, surcharges, assessments, penalties, bonds, costs
and/or fees, is liable for any and all fees and charges assessed by a
collection agency that is licensed pursuant to A.R.S. Title 32, Ch. 9, Art. 2,
and that is engaged by the Magistrate Court to collect and enforce such
payment. The collection fees and charges assessed by the collection agency
shall be added to the sum or sums due from and chargeable against the
defendant.
(Prior Code, § 5-4-1) (Ord. 11-14, passed - -2011; Ord. 13-03, passed - -2013)
§ 33.16 ATTORNEY COLLECTION FEES.
   (A)   A defendant who defaults in his or her obligation for the payment of
moneys owed or due to the Magistrate Court, including, but not limited to,
restitution, fines, sanctions, surcharges, assessments, penalties, bonds, costs
and/or fees, is liable for any and all fees and charges assessed by a duly
licensed attorney, and who is engaged by the Magistrate Court to collect and
enforce such payment.
   (B)   The collection fees and charges assessed by the attorney shall be
added to the sum or sums due from and chargeable against the defendant.
(Prior Code, § 5-4-2) (Ord. 11-14, passed - -2011; Ord. 13-03, passed - -2013)
§ 33.17 WARRANT FEES.
   (A)    The Municipal Court shall assess a warrant fee for each warrant the
court is required to issue as the result of the defendant’s violation of a
promise to appear, failure to appear, failure to comply with a court order to
maintain contact with his or her attorney, as a result of the return by the
United States Postal Service of a summons mailed by certified mail, as the
result of an order to show cause, as the result of a charge or finding of
contempt of court, as the result of a violation of a court order, as a result
of an alleged failure to comply with a term or condition of a sentence imposed,
as a result of an alleged failure to comply with a term or condition of
probation, as a result of an alleged failure to comply with a term or condition
of deferred prosecution or as a result of an alleged failure to comply with a
term or condition of pre or post-plea prosecution diversion.
   (B)   The warrant fee shall be set in a schedule by the Town Magistrate
subject to approval by the Common Council.
   (C)   The warrant fee is independent of, and in addition to, the bond and
surcharge which must also be posted to secure the defendant’s release.
   (D)   The warrant fee shall remain owing notwithstanding the quashing or
vacating of the warrant requiring its assessment or the dismissal, with or
without prejudice, of the case in which the fee was assessed.
   (E)   (1)   Notwithstanding division (C) above, the Court may waive the
warrant fee if the Court determines that the ends of justice would otherwise be
thwarted by the collection of the fee.
      (2)   The Court shall waive the warrant fee if the Court determines clear
and convincing evidence exists that, through no fault of the defendant’s, the
summons returned by the United States Postal Service was mailed to an address
at which the defendant could not have received the summons.
(Prior Code, § 5-4-3) (Ord. 11-14, passed - -2011; Ord. 13-03, passed - -2013;
Ord. 24-01, passed 1-9-2024)
§ 33.18 SUSPENSION FEES.
   (A)   The Municipal Court shall assess a suspension fee for each suspension
of any driver’s license which a court is required to issue as a result of a
failure to appear to answer a charge or to pay a civil sanction or criminal
fine.
   (B)   The suspension fee shall be set in a schedule by the Town Magistrate
subject to approval by the Common Council.
   (C)   The suspension fee shall remain owing notwithstanding the quashing or
vacating of the warrant requiring its assessment or the dismissal, with or
without prejudice, of the case in which the fee was assessed.
   (D)   Notwithstanding division (C) above, the Court may waive the suspension
fee if the Court determines that the ends of justice would otherwise be
thwarted by the collection of the fee.
(Prior Code, § 5-4-4) (Ord. 11-14, passed - -2011; Ord. 13-03, passed - -2013)
§ 33.19 CREDIT/CHECK/DEBIT CARD SERVICE FEE.
   (A)   The Municipal Court shall assess a service fee to cover the costs
associated with the processing of payments to the court, by credit, check or
debit card.
   (B)   Such fee shall be reflected in those costs and charges assessed by the
credit card processing center, as well as the costs of maintenance and
operation by the town’s Finance Department.
(Prior Code, § 5-4-5) (Ord. 11-14, passed - -2011; Ord. 13-03, passed - -2013)
§ 33.20 PUBLIC SAFETY RECOVERY FEE.
   (A)   A public safety recovery fee shall be collected from a defendant found
guilty or responsible of any criminal or civil violation, other than a parking
violation, on a per charge basis.
   (B)   (1)   The Finance Director shall establish a Public Safety Recovery
Fee Account for the purpose of enhancing public safety.
      (2)   These funds shall not supplant budgeted expenditures and may only
be used in a manner that enhances public safety.
   (C)   The Court may waive the public safety recovery fee if the Court
determines that the ends of justice would otherwise be thwarted by the
collection of the fee.
(Prior Code, § 5-4-6) (Ord. 11-14, passed - -2011; Ord. 13-03, passed - -2013)
§ 33.21 COURT ENHANCEMENT FEES.
   (A)   The Municipal Court shall assess a court enhancement fee in addition
to any fine, sanction or penalty imposed by the court in every case wherein the
defendant is found guilty or responsible for one or more charges or where the
charges against a defendant are deferred or diverted pursuant to a formal
agreement presented to the Court. Court Enhancement Fees shall be collected per
charge for which the defendant is found guilty or responsible. Court
enhancement fees are secondary in order of collection only to restitution and
time payment fees, if applicable.
   (B)   The court enhancement fee shall be received by the Court in a manner
consistent with the state’s Supreme Court Accounting Standards and deposited
with the Finance Department on a monthly basis for deposit into the Court
Enhancement Fund. The Magistrate may use Court Enhancement Funds in conjunction
with common project, programs or uses which may benefit the Court’s operations,
but enhancement funds may not be used to supplant budgeted expenses.
   (C)   The Court may waive the court enhancement fee only if the Court
determines that the ends of justice would otherwise be thwarted by the
collection of the fee.
(Prior Code, § 5-4-7) (Ord. 11-14, passed - -2011; Ord. 13-03, passed - -2013)
§ 33.22 LATE FEES.
   (A)   A late fee shall be paid to the Municipal Court for every payment
against any fine, sanction, fee, assessment, restitution or court cost
(including sanctions paid through community work service) paid after the date
required by a time-payment agreement between the Court and the defendant.
   (B)   This fee is a recurring fee and shall be assessed for every late
payment.
   (C)   This fee is in addition to the fee required under A.R.S. § 12-116(A).
   (D)   Exceptions may be made for bond forfeitures to fines when the bond has
not been received by the Court or when a defendant is in custody and receives a
sentence of time-served.
(Prior Code, § 5-4-8) (Ord. 11-14, passed - -2011; Ord. 13-03, passed - -2013)
§ 33.23 TIME PAYMENT FEES.
   (A)   A time-payment fee shall be assessed in every case in which the
defendant enters an agreement to pay a fine, fee, assessment, court cost,
restitution or to perform community work service over time.
   (B)   The Court may waive the time payment fee if the Court determines that
the ends of justice would otherwise be thwarted by the collection of the fee.
(Prior Code, § 5-4-9) (Ord. 11-14, passed - -2011; Ord. 13-03, passed - -2013)
§ 33.24 FUND ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   The Finance Director shall ensure that a fund is established for a
Court Enhancement Fund.
   (B)   Fees collected in accordance with this chapter not required by law to
be deposited elsewhere shall be placed in the Court Enhancement Fund.
   (C)   The Municipal Court shall administer, through the annual budget
process of the town, and may make expenditures from the fund for the purposes
of enhancing the Municipal Court. Moneys from this fund shall supplement moneys
already provided for the operation of the Municipal Court.
(Prior Code, § 5-4-10) (Ord. 11-14, passed - -2011; Ord. 13-03, passed - -2013)
§ 33.25 DIVERSION FEE.
   (A)   The Municipal Court shall assess a diversion fee for each case
referred to a diversion program established by the Town Prosecutor pursuant to
A.R.S. § 9-500.22.
   (B)   Diversion program, as used in this section, means a program in which
an individual charged with any civil, criminal, or petty offense is not
prosecuted for the offense on successful completion of an authorized diversion
program.
   (C)   The diversion fee shall be set in a schedule by the Town Magistrate
subject to approval by the Common Council.
   (D)   Notwithstanding division (A) of this section, the court may waive all
or part of the diversion fee if the payment of the diversion fee would cause
hardship to the defendant or otherwise be in the best interests of justice.
(Ord. 24-01, passed 1-9-2024)
CHAPTER 34: EMERGENCIES AND DISASTERS
Section
   
34.01   Purposes
   
34.02   Definitions
   
34.03   Civil Preparedness Organization; powers and duties
   
34.04   Mutual aid
   
34.05   Immunity of town and representatives thereof
   
34.06   Violations
§ 34.01 PURPOSES.
   The purposes of this chapter are to:
   (A)   Reduce vulnerability of people and the community to damage, injury and
loss of life and property resulting from natural or human-made catastrophes,
riots or hostile military or paramilitary action;
   (B)   Prepare for prompt and efficient rescue, care and treatment of persons
victimized or threatened by disaster;
   (C)   Provide a setting conducive to the rapid and orderly start of
restoration and rehabilitation of persons and property affected by disasters;
   (D)   Clarify and strengthen the roles of the Mayor, Council, Manager and
town agencies in prevention of, preparation for and response to and recovery
from disasters;
   (E)   Authorize and provide for cooperation in disaster prevention,
preparedness, response and recovery;
   (F)   Authorize and provide for coordination of activities relating to
disaster prevention, preparedness, response and recovery by agencies and
officers of the town, agencies of the private sector and similar activities in
which the federal government, the state and its political subdivisions may
participate; and
   (G)   Provide a disaster management system embodying all aspects of pre-
disaster preparedness and post-disaster response.
(Prior Code, § 3-6-1)
§ 34.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CIVIL PREPAREDNESS. The organization, administration, trained manpower,
facilities, equipment, material, supplies, programs, emergency plans, ability
to execute emergency plans and all other measures necessary and incidental
thereto relating to disaster prevention preparedness response and recovery by
all governmental and private sector agencies to protect or save health, life or
property.
   DIRECTOR. The Town Manager or his or her designee.
   DISASTER. The occurrence or imminent threat of widespread or severe damage,
injury or loss of life or property or extreme peril to the safety of persons or
property, resulting from any natural or human-made causes, including, but not
limited to, fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, blight, drought, famine,
infestation, air contamination, epidemic, explosion, riot or other act of civil
disobedience which endanger life or property or hostile military or
paramilitary action.
   EMERGENCY. The existence of a disaster within the town limits requiring
immediate action by the emergency forces of the town.
   EMERGENCY FORCES. All town governmental and private sector agencies,
volunteers, facilities, equipment, trained manpower and other resources
required to perform civil preparedness functions.
   REGULATIONS. The orders, rules and emergency procedures deemed essential for
civil preparedness.
   STATE OF EMERGENCY. The duly proclaimed existence of a disaster within the
state, except a disaster resulting in a state of war emergency which is or is
likely to be beyond the capabilities and resources of any single county, city
or town and requires the combined efforts of the state and the political
subdivision.
   STATE OF WAR EMERGENCY. The situation which exists immediately whenever this
nation is attacked or upon receipt by the state of a warning from the federal
government indicating that such an attack is imminent.
(Prior Code, § 3-6-2)
§ 34.03 CIVIL PREPAREDNESS ORGANIZATION; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Town Manager is hereby authorized and directed to create a civil
preparedness organization. The Town Manager or his or her designee shall be the
Director of Civil Preparedness.
(Prior Code, § 3-6-3)
   (B)   (1)   The Council:
         (a)   Shall have the power to make, amend and rescind regulations, not
inconsistent with regulations promulgated by the governor, necessary for civil
preparedness, which regulations shall have the full effect of this chapter when
a copy is filed in the office of the Town Clerk. Existing ordinances and
regulations, or ordinances and regulations issued under authority of A.R.S.
Title 26, Chapter 2, in conflict therewith, are suspended during the time and
to the extent that they are in conflict;
         (b)   May appropriate and expend funds, make contracts, obtain and
distribute equipment, materials and supplies for civil preparedness purposes;
         (c)   In the absence of specific authority in state emergency plans
and procedures, the Council shall take emergency measures as deemed necessary
to carry out the provisions of A.R.S. Title 26, Chapter 2;
         (d)   In a state of war emergency the Council may waive procedures and
formalities required by law pertaining to the performance of public work,
entering into contracts, incurring obligations, employing permanent and
temporary workers, utilizing volunteer workers, renting equipment, purchasing
and distributing supplies, materials and facilities and appropriating and
expending public funds when the Council determines and declares that strict
compliance with such procedures and formalities may prevent, hinder or delay
mitigation of the effects of the state of war emergency. The Town shall be
exempt during such emergency from budget limitations prescribed by Art. IX, §
20, of the State Constitution;
         (e)   In addition to the powers granted by other provisions of the law
or Town ordinance, the Council may, by proclamation, declare an emergency or a
local emergency to exist. The proclamation may be rescinded by a majority of
the Council after 24 hours; and
         (f)   During an emergency or local emergency, the Mayor shall govern
by proclamation and shall have the authority to impose all necessary
regulations to preserve the peace and order of the town, including, but not
limited to:
            1.   Imposition of curfews in all or in a portion of the town;
            2.   Ordering the closing of any business;
            3.   Denying public access to any public building, street or other
public place; and
            4.   Calling upon regular or auxiliary law enforcement agencies and
organizations within or without the town for assistance.
      (2)   (a)   The Town Manager is responsible in non-emergency periods to
act on behalf of the Council to develop a readiness plan for the town’s civil
preparedness and for coordinated operations in disaster situations.
         (b)   During emergencies, the Town Manager shall act as the principal
advisor or aid to the Council on emergency operations. His or her major
responsibility is to assure coordination among emergency forces and with higher
and adjacent governments, by assuring that the emergency operation center
functions effectively. He or she shall assist the Council in the execution of
operations, plans and procedures required by the emergency.
         (c)   The Town Manager shall prepare a comprehensive disaster basic
plan which shall be adopted and maintained by resolution of the Council upon
the recommendations of the Town Manager. In the preparation of this plan as it
pertains to town organization, it is the intent that the services, equipment,
facilities and personnel of all existing departments and agencies be used to
the fullest extent.
         (d)   The disaster plan shall be considered supplementary to this
chapter and have the effect of law whenever emergencies, as defined in this
chapter, have been proclaimed.
(Prior Code, § 3-6-4)
(Ord. 10-06, passed - -2010)
§ 34.04 MUTUAL AID.
   In periods of local emergency as declared pursuant to this chapter, the town
is hereby granted full power to provide mutual aid to any affected area in
accordance with local ordinances, resolution, emergency plans or agreements
therefore. The town may request from state agencies mutual aid including
personnel, equipment and other available resources to assist the town during
the local emergency in accordance with emergency plans or at the direction of
the governor.
(Prior Code, § 3-6-5)
§ 34.05 IMMUNITY OF TOWN AND REPRESENTATIVES THEREOF.
   (A)   The town shall not be liable for any claim based upon the exercise or
performance, or the failure to exercise or perform a discretionary function or
duty on the part of the town or any employee of the town, except willful
misconduct, gross negligence or bad faith of any such employee, in carrying out
the provisions of A.R.S. Title 26, Ch. 2.
   (B)   The immunities from liability, exemptions from laws, ordinances and
rules, all pensions, relief, disability worker’s compensation and other
benefits which apply to the activity of officers, agents or employees of the
town when performing their respective functions within the limits of the town
shall apply to them to the same degree and extent while engaged in the
performance of any of their functions and duties extraterritorial under the
provisions of this chapter, excepting willful misconduct, gross negligence or
bad faith.
   (C)   Volunteers duly enrolled or registered for services in a local
emergency, a state of emergency or a state of war emergency in carrying out,
complying with or attempting to comply with, any regulations issued pursuant to
A.R.S. title 26, Ch. 2, or any local ordinance, or performing any of their
authorized functions or duties, or training for the performance of their
authorized functions or duties, shall have the same degree of responsibility
for their actions and enjoy immunities as officers and employees of the state
and its political subdivisions performing similar work.
(Prior Code, § 3-6-6)
§ 34.06 VIOLATIONS.
   It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this chapter or to
refuse or willfully neglect to obey any lawful regulation or order issued as
provided in this chapter. This provision, however, does not apply to the
refusal of any private organization or members thereof to participate in an
emergency, local emergency or state of emergency as defined by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 3-6-7) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 35: PROCUREMENT CODE
Section
General Provisions
   
35.01   Purpose
   
35.02   Applicability
   
35.03   Responsibility of directors, managers, supervisors and employees
   
35.04   Definitions
   
35.05   Local preference
Procurement and Supply Management
   
35.20   Procurement Agent; authority and duties
   
35.21   Delegation of authority
   
35.22   Modification of standard contract forms
   
35.23   Contract monitoring
Procedure
   
35.35   Specifications
   
35.36   Informal competitive bidding
   
35.37   Purchase authorization
   
35.38   Formal competitive sealed bidding
   
35.39   Competitive acquisition of professional services
   
35.40   Rejection of bids
   
35.41   Sole source procurement
   
35.42   Cooperative purchasing
   
35.43   Emergency procurements
   
35.44   Used heavy equipment and non-durable purchases
Contractual Remedies
   
35.55   Authority to resolve protested solicitations and awards
   
35.56   Authority to debar or suspend
   
35.57   Authority to resolve contract and breach of contract controversies
   
35.58   Time limitations on actions
   
35.59   Expenditures of Federal Transit Administration funds
 
   
35.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 35.01 PURPOSE.
   The purposes of this chapter are:
   (A)   To set forth the procurement procedures of the town;
   (B)   To assure consistency in procurement procedures among the using
departments;
   (C)   To provide for increased public confidence in the procedures used in
public procurement;
   (D)   To ensure the fair and equitable treatment of all persons who deal
with the procurement system of the town;
   (E)   To provide increased economy in town procurements and to maximize to
the fullest extent practicable the purchasing value of public funds of the
town;
   (F)   To foster effective broad-based competition within the free enterprise
system; and
   (G)   To provide safeguards for the maintenance of a procurement system of
quality and integrity.
(Ord. 20-12, passed 10-27-2020)
§ 35.02 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Existing contracts. This chapter applies only to contracts solicited
or entered into after the effective date of this chapter unless the parties
agree to its application to a contract entered into prior to the effective
date. Renewal of existing contracts shall comply with this chapter unless
existing contract terms provide otherwise.
   (B)   Application to town procurement. This chapter shall apply to every
expenditure of public funds regardless of source, including state and federal
assistance monies, by the town, under any contract; except that, nothing in
this chapter shall prevent the town from complying with the terms and
conditions of any grant, gift or bequest or cooperative agreement. This chapter
shall also apply to the disposal of town supplies.
   (C)   Effect of state or federal assistance requirements. In the event state
or federal assistance requirements conflict with the provisions of this
chapter, nothing in this chapter shall prevent the town from complying with the
terms and conditions of the federal assistance requirements and the Procurement
Agent shall have authority to adopt regulations governing town compliance with
federal assistance requirements on any given project.
   (D)   Procurements under A.R.S. Title 34. Notwithstanding any other
provisions of this chapter, the provisions of A.R.S. Title 34 shall apply to
the procurement of services of technical registrants and construction services;
except that, the requirements of this chapter shall apply to the extent A.R.S.
Title 34 does not require bidding or a qualifications-based selection process.
   (E)   Exceptions. This chapter does not apply to land leases entered into by
the town, the purchase of real property, and intergovernmental agreements.
   (F)   Council waiver of bid requirements. Except where bidding or other
competitive process is required by law, the Town Council may waive the bidding
requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 20-12, passed 10-27-2020)
§ 35.03 RESPONSIBILITY OF DIRECTORS, MANAGERS, SUPERVISORS AND EMPLOYEES.
   It is the responsibility of all directors, managers, supervisors and
employees to comply with this chapter. Violation of the requirements of this
chapter are grounds for discipline, up to and including termination.
(Ord. 20-12, passed 10-27-2020)
§ 35.04 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUSINESS. Any corporation, partnership, individual, sole proprietorship,
joint stock company, joint venture or any other legal entity.
   CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION. Any information which is available to an employee
only because of the employee’s status as an employee of the town and is not a
matter of public knowledge or available to the public on request.
   CONSTRUCTION. The process of building, altering, repairing, improving or
demolishing any structure or building, or other improvements of any kind to any
real property. It does not include the routine operation, routine repair or
routine maintenance of existing structures, buildings or real property.
   CONTRACT. Any type of town agreement, regardless of what it may be called,
for the purchase or disposal of supplies, services or construction. It includes
contracts of a fixed-price, cost, cost-plus-a-fixed-fee or incentive type;
contracts providing for the issuance of job or task orders; leases; letter
contracts; and purchase orders. It also includes supplemental agreements with
respect to any of the foregoing.
   CONTRACTOR. Any person or business having a contract with the governmental
body.
   COOPERATIVE PURCHASING. Procurement where the vendor has been selected
through a competitive bidding process by another governmental unit or by a
purchasing cooperative using a competitive bidding process consistent with
public procurement and if, in the opinion of the Purchasing Agent, a separate
bidding process is not likely to result in a lower price for the supply,
service or construction.
   DEBARMENT. The disqualification of a person or business to receive
invitations for bids or requests for proposals or the award of a contract by
the town, for a specified period of time commensurate with the seriousness of
the offense or the failure or the inadequacy of performance.
   DESIGNEE. A duly authorized representative or of a person holding a superior
position.
   EMPLOYEE. An individual drawing a salary from the town, other than members
of the Town Council.
   INVITATION FOR BIDS. All documents, including those attached or incorporated
by reference, utilized for soliciting bids.
   LOCAL BUSINESS. A business located within the boundaries of the town that
has paid all its required taxes, possesses a valid town business license, and
has its headquarters in the town (defined as principal central office,
including where primary headquarters related functions and services are
performed, including financial, personnel, administrative, legal, planning and
similar business functions).
   PROCUREMENT. The buying, purchasing, renting, leasing or otherwise obtaining
any supplies, services or construction. It also includes all functions that
pertain to the obtaining of any supply, service or construction, including
description of requirements, selection and solicitation of sources, preparation
and award of contract and all phases of contract administration.
   PROCUREMENT AGENT. The Town Manager of the town.
   PROFESSIONAL SERVICES. The services of lawyers, certified public
accountants, auditors, consultants, appraisers, engineers, architects,
landscape architects, assayers, geologists and land surveyors and similar
professional occupations involving specialized knowledge, labor or skill
predominantly involving mental or intellectual rather than physical or manual
skills. Questions regarding whether a service is a PROFESSIONAL SERVICE shall
be referred to the Procurement Agent.
   REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS (RFP). All documents, including those attached or
incorporated by reference, utilized for soliciting proposals.
   RESPONSIBLE BIDDER. A person who has the capability in all respects to
perform fully the contract requirements and the integrity and reliability which
will assure performance in compliance with contract documents.
   RESPONSIVE BIDDER. A person who has submitted a bid which conforms in all
material respects to the invitation for bids.
   SERVICES. The furnishing of labor, time or effort by a contractor, not
involving the delivery of a specific end product other than reports which are
merely incidental to the required performance. This term includes “professional
services”, but it does not include employment agreements or collective
bargaining agreements.
   SPECIFICATIONS. Any description of the physical or functional
characteristics, or of the nature of, a supply or service or construction item.
It may include a description of any requirement for inspecting, testing or
preparing a supply, service or construction item for delivery.
   SUPPLIES. All personal property, including, but not limited to, equipment,
parts, materials, printing, insurance and leases on real and personal property,
excluding land or a permanent interest in land.
   SURPLUS SUPPLIES. Any supplies no longer having any use to the town and
having no salvage value. This includes obsolete supplies, scrap materials and
non-expendable supplies that have completed their useful life cycle.
   SUSPENSION. The disqualification of a person to receive invitations for bids
or requests for proposals or the award of a contract by the town, for a
temporary period pending the completion of an investigation, or during any
legal proceedings that may ensue because a person is suspected upon probable
cause of engaging in criminal, fraudulent or seriously improper conduct or
failure or inadequacy of performance which may lead to debarment.
   TOWN. The Town of Quartzsite, Arizona.
   USING DEPARTMENT. Any department which utilizes any supplies, services or
construction purchased under this chapter.
(Ord. 20-12, passed 10-27-2020)
§ 35.05 LOCAL PREFERENCE.
   (A)   Except for contracts awarded pursuant to A.R.S. Title 34, the town may
award up to a 5% local preference for award of public bid for any improvements,
materials, equipment, professional services or supplies up to a contract value
of $25,000 to a local business in order to facilitate increased competition by
such local businesses with larger metropolitan and out of state firms and to
prefer the accessibility and prompt service of a local dealer which is deemed
to offset the price advantage of volume enterprises. If a local business
subcontracts out a portion of the work on the contract at least 50% of the
subcontracted amount must be to other local businesses in order to qualify for
local preference award. Preference may be awarded based upon equal quality and
suitability as deemed solely by the town.
   (B)   In awarding contracts for furnishing any kind of equipment or
materials or construction to a political subdivision of the state, the amount
of any applicable transaction privilege or use tax of a political subdivision
of the state shall not be a factor in determining the lowest bidder whenever a
competing bidder located outside the state is not subject to a transaction
privilege or use tax of a political subdivision of the state.
   (C)   This preference shall not be used where state statute, Title 34
contracts or any applicable federal statute or regulation prohibits the
granting of such preference.
   (D)   In no case, under either state statute or town code, shall any bidder
receive more than 5% total preference.
(Ord. 20-12, passed 10-27-2020)
PROCUREMENT AND SUPPLY MANAGEMENT
§ 35.20 PROCUREMENT AGENT; AUTHORITY AND DUTIES.
   (A)   Principal contracting, procurement officer. The Procurement Agent
shall serve as the principal contracting officer and central procurement
officer of the town.
   (B)   Power to adopt internal operational procedures. Consistent with the
provisions of this chapter, the Procurement Agent may adopt internal
operational procedures governing town purchasing. Such regulations must be
consistent with this chapter and the town code.
   (C)   Duties. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the
Procurement Agent shall:
      (1)   Procure or supervise the procurement of all supplies, services and
construction needed by the town;
      (2)   Exercise supervision and control over all inventories of supplies
belonging to the town;
      (3)   Sell, trade or otherwise dispose of surplus supplies belonging to
the town. Supplies or equipment that have been documented to have some value
shall be disposed of according to A.R.S. § 9-402; and
      (4)   Establish and maintain programs for the inspection, testing and
acceptance of supplies, services and construction.
(Ord. 20-12, passed 10-27-2020)
§ 35.21 DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY.
   The administration of this policy shall be the Town Manager or designee. Any
such delegation must be in writing and set forth the reasons therefor. In all
cases, the Town Manager may delegate such responsibility.
(Ord. 20-12, passed 10-27-2020)
§ 35.22 MODIFICATION OF STANDARD CONTRACT FORMS.
   The Procurement Agent, after consultation with the Town Attorney, may modify
or delete existing and add new contractual provisions and clauses to all form
contracts for the procurement of supplies, services and construction contracts
utilized by the town; provided that, such modification, deletions or additions
are supported by a written determination.
(Ord. 20-12, passed 10-27-2020)
§ 35.23 CONTRACT MONITORING.
   The using department shall be responsible for monitoring contract
performance unless otherwise designated by the Town Manager.
(Ord. 20-12, passed 10-27-2020)
PROCEDURE
§ 35.35 SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Procurement Agent’s duties. The Procurement Agent shall prepare,
issue, revise, maintain and monitor the use of specifications for supplies,
services and construction required by the town, in conjunction with the using
department where appropriate; provided that:
      (1)   The Procurement Agent may delegate to a using department
responsibility for the preparation and maintenance of specifications generally
or for specific supplies, services or construction, subject to approval of any
such specifications by the Procurement Agent; and
      (2)   Any determination modifying or reversing the specifications shall
be in writing.
   (B)   Maximum practicable competition. All specifications shall seek to
promote overall economy for the purposes intended and shall be drafted so as to
ensure the maximum practicable competition for the town’s actual requirements.
   (C)   Specifications prepared by architects and engineers. The requirements
of this section regarding the purposes and non-restrictiveness of
specifications shall apply to all specifications, including but not limited to
those prepared by architects and engineers for public contracts.
   (D)   Conflicting opinions on certain specifications. In the event of a
conflict between the Town Engineer and the Procurement Agent in regard to
specifications requiring the seal of the Town Engineer, the opinion of the Town
Engineer shall control; subject to review by the Town Manager pursuant to
division (A)(1) above.
(Ord. 20-12, passed 10-27-2020)
§ 35.36 INFORMAL COMPETITIVE BIDDING.
   (A)   This section sets forth the standards and expectations governing
budgeted town purchasing thresholds and requirements for:
      (1)   Small purchases of $1 to $4,000;
      (2)   Verbal bids and quotes for purchases of $4,001 to $15,000;
      (3)   Written informal quotes or bids for purchases of $15,001 to
$35,000; and
      (4)   For purchases above $35,000, see §
35.38 of this chapter.
   (B)   Small purchases of $4,000 and less are not subject to the competitive
process. Using department directors are authorized to approve these budgeted
procurements and are responsible to determine the frequency and total dollar
expenditures for such goods and services.
      (1)   Using department directors are responsible for monitoring their
department expenditures ensuring that invoices reflect the actual goods and
services received. Small purchases approved by a using department head for
budgeted transactions up to this limit need to be documented by a signed
requisition.
      (2)   Procurement requirements shall not be artificially divided to a
lower amount so as to constitute a small purchase in order to avoid the
required bidding or approvals.
   (C)   The Procurement Agent or designee will perform regular and random
audits/spot checks on purchases of $4,000 or less. The minimum number of audits
conducted will be 5% per month, and this includes transactions conducted with
credit cards. If violations or deviations from this chapter are discovered, a
department director may have his, her or their small purchases authority
removed or suspended by the Town Manager.
   (D)   For budgeted purchases estimated to cost between $4,001 and $15,000,
three quotes shall be solicited to submit informal verbal quotations.
      (1)   The Procurement Agent or designee will review quotes and may
request additional quotes prior to making the final award decision.
      (2)   Award shall be made to the responsible bidder submitting the
quotation which is most advantageous to the town and conforms to the
solicitation.
      (3)   If only one responsive quotation is received, a statement shall be
included in the contract file setting forth the basis for determining that the
price is fair and reasonable. This determination may be based on a comparison
of the proposed price with prices found reasonable on previous purchases or
current price lists.
      (4)   Purchasing transactions are not to be artificially divided or
fragmented in order to meet the lesser requirements of lower dollar
transactions.
      (5)   Price and other confidential information provided by vendors shall
not be shared with competitors by any individual involved in the process until
after bid opening.
   (E)   For purchases estimated to cost between $15,001 and $35,000, three
bidders shall be solicited to submit informal written quotations.
      (1)   When requested, bidders shall submit quotes on a form approved by
the Procurement Agent and the quotes shall be recorded and placed in the
project file.
      (2)   Award shall be made to the responsible bidder submitting the
quotation which is most advantageous to the town and conforms to the
solicitation.
      (3)   If only one responsive quotation is received, a statement shall be
included in the contract file setting forth the basis for determining that the
price is fair and reasonable. This determination may be based on a comparison
of the proposed price with prices found reasonable on previous purchases or
current price lists.
      (4)   Purchasing transactions are not to be artificially divided or
fragmented in order to meet the lesser requirements of lower dollar
transactions.
      (5)   Price and other confidential information provided by vendors shall
not be shared with competitors by any individual involved in the process until
after bid opening.
(Ord. 20-12, passed 10-27-2020)
§ 35.37 PURCHASE AUTHORIZATION.
   Purchase of supplies or materials utilizing informal competitive bidding
procedures shall be approved and documented as per the following steps.
   (A)   Purchases of less than $100 may be made with petty cash funds by
approval of the department head or finance department.
   (B)   A “purchase requisition supplement” form may be prepared for all
budgeted purchases between $1 and $4,000 and signed by the requestor and
department head.
      (1)   A “purchase requisition” form will be processed by the finance
department prior to expending funds and/or placing orders. This form must be
signed by the department head and for purchases $4,001 and above by the Town
Manager.
      (2)   A “purchase order” is then generated by the finance department for
payment disbursement.
   (C)   Open or “blanket” purchase orders may be used when multiple payments
are made to the same vendor for the same service or product within the same
fiscal year and must be signed by the department head and purchases $4,001 and
above by the Town Manager.
(Ord. 20-12, passed 10-27-2020; Ord. 22-04, passed 8-23-2022)
§ 35.38 FORMAL COMPETITIVE SEALED BIDDING.
   (A)   Invitation for bids. Where the budgeted cost is expected to exceed
$35,000, competitive sealed bidding is required. An invitation for bids shall
be issued at least 15 days before the offer due date and time, which shall
include a purchase description and all contractual terms and conditions
applicable to the procurement.
   (B)   Public notice. Adequate public notice of the invitation for bids shall
be given a reasonable time prior to the date set forth herein for the opening
of bids, as required by law, or in accordance with policy approved by the
Procurement Agent. Such notice may include publication in a newspaper of
general circulation in the town at a reasonable time prior to bid opening.
   (C)   Bid opening. Bids shall be opened publicly in the presence of the Town
Clerk and one or more witnesses at the time and place designated in the
invitation for bids. The amount of each bid and such other relevant information
as may be specified in the invitation for bids, together with the name of each
bidder, shall be recorded. The record of all such bids submitted and each bid
shall be open to public inspection.
   (D)   Bid acceptance and bid evaluation. Bids shall be unconditionally
accepted without alteration or correction, except as authorized in this
chapter. Bids shall be evaluated based on the requirements set forth in the
invitation for bids, which may include criteria to determine acceptability,
such as inspection, testing, quality, workmanship, delivery, availability of
follow-up service and suitability for a particular purpose. Those criteria that
will affect the bid price and which will be considered in evaluation for award
shall be objectively measurable, such as discounts, transportation costs and
total or life-cycle costs. The invitation for bids shall set forth the
evaluation criteria to be used. No criteria may be used in bid evaluation that
are not set forth in the invitation for bids.
   (E)   Award, generally. The contract shall be awarded by written notice to
the lowest responsible and responsive bidder whose bid meets the requirements
and criteria set forth in the invitation for bids, subject to the
qualifications set forth herein, as determined by the Town Council; and a bid
may not be rejected except on the basis of criteria set forth in the invitation
for bids. In the event all bids exceed available funds as certified by the
Finance Manager, and the low responsive and responsible bid does not exceed
such funds by more than 5%, the Procurement Agent is authorized, where
permitted by law, in situations where time or economic considerations preclude
resolicitation of work or a reduced scope, to negotiate an adjustment of the
bid price, including changes in the bid requirements, with the low responsive
and responsible bidder, in order to bring the bid within the amount of
available funds.
   (F)   Award to other than low bidder. When the Procurement Agent recommends
the award of the contract to other than the lowest bidder, a statement of the
reasons for such a recommendation shall be prepared by the Procurement Agent
and filed with the other papers relating to the transaction.
   (G)   Correction or withdrawal of bids; cancellation of awards. Correction
or withdrawal of inadvertently erroneous bids before or after award, or
cancellation of awards or contracts based on such bid mistakes, shall be
permitted in accordance with regulations promulgated by the materials
management division. After bid opening, no changes in bid prices or other
provisions of bids prejudicial to the interest of the town or fair competition
shall be permitted. Except as otherwise provided by regulation, all decisions
to permit the correction or withdrawal of bids, or to cancel awards or
contracts based on bid mistakes, shall be supported by a written determination
made by the Procurement Agent.
   (H)   Change orders. Change orders exceeding 10% of the original contract
require Council approval unless otherwise provided for in the original contract
as approved by the Town Council.
(Ord. 20-12, passed 10-27-2020)
§ 35.39 COMPETITIVE ACQUISITION OF PROFESSIONAL SERVICES.
   (A)   Applicability. Professional services shall be procured in accord with
this chapter, except where otherwise provided in this chapter or required by
A.R.S. Title 34.
   (B)   Policy. It is the policy of the town to publicly announce all
requirements for professional services, unless excepted herein, and to
negotiate contracts on the basis of demonstrated competence and qualification
for the type of services required, and at fair and reasonable prices.
   (C)   Objectives.
      (1)   To secure competent professional services as competitively as
practicable;
      (2)   To require a prohibition against contingent fees in all
professional services contracts;
      (3)   To establish as firmly as possible the total cost, including fee,
of the service to be rendered; and
      (4)   To eliminate cost-plus-a-percentage-of-cost type of contracting.
   (D)   Criteria for selection.
      (1)   Professional technical competence of contractor;
      (2)   Available capacity to perform the specific work within the
stipulated timeframe;
      (3)   The merit of the proposed concept or methods to be used in
achieving the specific desired objective or end product; and
      (4)   Proposed total cost, including fee and construction and life-cycle
costs, where applicable, to the client.
   (E)   Pre-bid activity. Based on the complexity of the project, one or more
of these steps may be omitted if appropriate:
      (1)   Using department to formulate statement of requirements, design or
other applicable criteria, timeframe for performance and other pertinent
criteria. The estimated total cost, including construction if applicable,
should also be established. The request for proposals shall also state the
relative importance of the various criteria including price;
      (2)   When deemed appropriate in the best interest of the town, the Town
Manager may appoint an ad hoc advisory committee, with either in-house or
outside representatives of the disciplines involved. Such committee would
review the stated requirements and establish the extent of anticipated in-house
participation;
      (3)   Formalized advertising of stated requirements;
      (4)   Either the Procurement Agent in conjunction with the using
department head or the ad hoc committee, if one is appointed, shall review the
professional and technical competence of all responding firms and, by an
analysis of prior performance, determine the capacity to render the required
services within the established timeframe;
      (5)   Establishment of a list of prequalified bidders for the specific
project or program by the ad hoc committee or the using department and
procuring activity;
      (6)   Determination of most appropriate method of contracting based on
complexity of the program and extent of in-house participation;
      (7)   Preparation of preliminary set of specifications and other contract
documents by using department and Procurement Agent for review and comments of
prequalified bidders. Criteria to be used in the evaluation of proposals and
determination of successful bidder established;
      (8)   Pre-bid conference conducted by Procurement Agent supported by
requesting department and other in-house groups as required. All prequalified
firms invited to attend for review of specification requirements, predetermined
method of contracting and proposed contract documents. Recommendations and
questions from prospective bidders requested for consideration; and
      (9)   Preparation of all documents required for the solicitation of
proposals by Procurement Agent and using department subject to approval of
evaluation board.
   (F)   Award process.
      (1)   Single-step competitive.
         (a)   Solicitation from prequalified list of contractors. Bid
documents to include requirements for the submission of conceptual approach,
total price including fee and assurance of compliance with stated timeframe;
         (b)   Receipt of proposals. Proposals shall be opened so as to avoid
disclosure of contents to competing offerors during the process of negotiation.
A register of proposals shall be prepared and opened for public inspections;
         (c)   Review, evaluation of conceptual proposals. Review and
evaluation of conceptual proposals by ad hoc committee, or representative of
requesting department and procuring activity, and all acceptable proposals
identified, with record of actions involved. Firms may also be required to have
key personnel, to be used on the project, give a presentation of conceptual
approaches to ad hoc committee; and
         (d)   Award of contract. Award of contract to lowest bidder meeting
all requirements, including budget limitations, as determined by the Town
Council after recommendation by the Procurement Agent or ad hoc committee.
      (2)   Two-step competitive.
         (a)   Solicitation from prequalified list of contractors. Bid
documents to include requirements for the submission of conceptual approach and
methods to be utilized in achieving the specified end product or providing the
desired service within the stipulated timeframe. Cost or pricing data is not
required, unless in two-envelope method;
         (b)   Receipt of proposals. Proposals shall be opened so as to avoid
disclosure of contents to competing offerors during the process of negotiation.
A register of proposals shall be prepared and opened for public inspections;
         (c)   Review, evaluation of conceptual proposals. Review and
evaluation of conceptual proposals by ad hoc committee, or representative of
requesting department and procuring activity, and all acceptable proposals
identified, with record of actions involved. Firms may also be required to have
key personnel, to be used on the project, give a presentation of conceptual
approaches to ad hoc committee;
         (d)   Cost, price request. Request for cost and pricing data from
those firms that submitted acceptable conceptual proposals. Cost proposals must
include appropriate cost elements and show all applicable percentages including
fee or profit; and
         (e)   Cost review. Review of all cost elements by Procurement Agent
assisted by an audit or accounting group, if necessary, and comparison with in-
house estimates. Award of contract to lowest bidder meeting all requirements,
including budget limitations, as determined by the Town Council after
recommendation by the Procurement Agent or ad hoc committee.
      (3)   Competitive negotiation.
         (a)   Discussion and review of requirements by ad hoc committee with
prequalified firms, if possible, regarding anticipated concepts and relative
value of alternate methods of approach. Technical/conceptual proposals only to
be submitted as a result of discussions;
         (b)   Receipt of proposals. Proposals shall be opened so as to avoid
disclosure of contents to competing offerors during the process of negotiation.
A register of proposals shall be prepared and opened for public inspections;
         (c)   Review and evaluation of conceptual proposals by ad hoc
committee, or representative of requesting department and procuring activity,
and all acceptable proposals identified, with record of actions involved. Firms
may also be required to have key personnel, to be used on the project, give a
presentation of conceptual approaches to ad hoc committee;
         (d)   Request for cost and pricing data from those firms that
submitted acceptable conceptual proposals. Cost proposals must include
appropriate cost elements and show all applicable percentages including fee or
profit;
         (e)   Review of all cost elements by Procurement Agent assisted by an
audit or accounting group, if necessary, and comparison with in-house
estimates;
         (f)   Negotiations conducted with top three firms whose price
proposals are within competitive range and whose conceptual proposals are
relatively acceptable or equal;
         (g)   Award of contract, by the Town Council upon recommendation of
the ad hoc committee, under mutually acceptable terms and conditions at
compensation that is considered to be fair and reasonable to both contractor
and client; and
         (h)   Record of all negotiations shall be made for contract file and
reviewing authorities with sufficient detail to reflect significant
considerations leading to finalization of contract.
(Ord. 20-12, passed 10-27-2020)
§ 35.40 REJECTION OF BIDS.
   All bids or proposals may be rejected in whole or in part as may be
specified in the solicitation, only if it is determined by the Council that
such action is taken in the best interests of the town.
(Ord. 20-12, passed 10-27-2020)
§ 35.41 SOLE SOURCE PROCUREMENTS.
   (A)   A contract may be awarded for a material or service without
competition when the Procurement Agent or designee determines in writing that
there is only one source for the required material or service.
   (B)   Sole source procurements should be avoided, unless there is only one
source for the required material or service and no other type of materials or
service will satisfy the requirements of the town.
   (C)   The Procurement Agent or designee shall prepare a written
determination stating the basis for the sole source procurement shall be which
shall be included in the procurement file.
(Ord. 20-12, passed 10-27-2020)
§ 35.42 COOPERATIVE PURCHASING.
   (A)   Purchasing agreements. In an effort to obtain more advantageous
pricing and timing, the town may either participate in, sponsor, conduct or
administer a cooperative purchasing agreement for the procurement of any
supplies, services or construction with one or more public procurement units in
accordance with an agreement entered into between the participants. Such
cooperative purchasing may include, but is not limited to, joint or multiparty
contracts between public procurement units, and open- ended state public
procurement unit contracts which are made available to other public procurement
units.
   (B)   Sale, acquisition or use of supplies. The town may sell to, acquire
from or use any supplies belonging to another public procurement unit
independent of the requirements of §§
35.35 and
35.38 of this chapter.
   (C)   Cooperative use of supplies and services. The town may enter into an
agreement, independent of the requirements of §
35.36 of this chapter, with any other public procurement unit for the
cooperative use of supplies or services, under the terms agreed upon between
the parties.
   (D)   Joint use of facilities. The town may enter into agreements for the
common use or lease of warehousing facilities, capital equipment and other
facilities with another public procurement unit under the terms agreed upon
between the parties.
(Ord. 20-12, passed 10-27-2020)
§ 35.43 EMERGENCY PROCUREMENTS.
   Where permitted by law and notwithstanding any other provision of this
chapter, the Procurement Agent or a designee may make or authorize others to
make emergency procurements when there exists a threat to public health,
welfare or safety under emergency conditions as defined in policy approved by
the Town Manager; provided that, such emergency procurements shall be made with
such competition as is practicable under the circumstances. A written
determination of the basis for the emergency and for the selection of the
particular contractor shall be included in the contract file.
(Ord. 20-12, passed 10-27-2020)
§ 35.44 USED HEAVY EQUIPMENT AND NON-DURABLE PURCHASES.
   Purchases of used heavy equipment and non-durable materials such as fuel and
oil are subject to the informal competitive bidding procedures applicable to
other purchases on the recommendation of the procurement agent and approval of
the Council.
(Ord. 20-12, passed 10-27-2020)
CONTRACTUAL REMEDIES
§ 35.55 AUTHORITY TO RESOLVE PROTESTED SOLICITATIONS AND AWARDS.
   (A)   Right to protest. Any actual or prospective bidder, offeror or
contractor who is aggrieved in connection with the solicitation or award of a
contract may protest to the Town Council. The protest shall be submitted in
writing within ten days to the Town Manager after such aggrieved person knows
or should have known of the facts giving rise thereto, and the Manager, shall
place same on the next Council agenda if not resolved prior to that time.
   (B)   Authority to resolve protests. The Town Council shall have the
authority, prior to the commencement of an action in court concerning the
controversy, to settle and resolve a protest of an aggrieved bidder, offeror,
contractor, actual or prospective, concerning the solicitation or award of a
contract.
   (C)   Decision. If the protest is not resolved by mutual agreement, the
Procurement Agent shall issue notice in writing of the Council’s decision. The
notice shall:
      (1)   State the reasons for the action taken; and
      (2)   Inform the protestant of right to judicial review as provided in
this chapter.
   (D)   Notice of decision. A copy of the decision under this section shall be
mailed or otherwise furnished immediately to the protestant and any other party
intervening.
   (E)   Finality of decision. A decision under this section shall be final and
conclusive unless fraudulent, or unless any person adversely affected by the
decision commences an action in court.
   (F)   Stay of procurements during protests. In the event of a timely protest
under this section, the town shall not proceed further with the solicitation or
with the award of the contract until the Procurement Agent, after consultation
with the head of the using department and the Town Manager, makes a written
determination that the award of the contract without delay is necessary to
protect substantial interests of the town.
(Ord. 20-12, passed 10-27-2020)
§ 35.56 AUTHORITY TO DEBAR OR SUSPEND.
   (A)   Council retains authority; length of debarment or suspension.
      (1)   After reasonable notice to the person involved and reasonable
opportunity for that person to be heard, the Town Council, after a report being
submitted by the Procurement Agent after consultation with the using department
and the Town Attorney, shall have authority to debar a person for cause from
consideration for award of contracts.
      (2)   The debarment shall not be for a period of more than three years.
      (3)   The Council shall under the same terms have authority to suspend a
person from consideration for award of contracts if there is probable cause for
debarment.
      (4)   The suspension shall not be for a period exceeding three months.
   (B)   Causes for debarment or suspension. The causes for debarment or
suspension include the following:
      (1)   Conviction for commission of a criminal offense as an incident to
obtaining or attempting to obtain a public or private contract or subcontract,
or in the performance of such contract or subcontract;
      (2)   Conviction under state or federal statutes of embezzlement, theft,
forgery, bribery, falsification or destruction of records, receiving stolen
property, or any other offense indicating a lack of business integrity or
business honesty which currently, seriously and directly affects responsibility
as a town contractor;
      (3)   Conviction under state or federal antitrust statutes arising out of
the submission of bids or proposals;
      (4)   Violation of contract provisions, as set forth below, of a
character which is regarded by the Procurement Agent to be so serious so as to
justify debarment action:
         (a)   Deliberate failure without good cause to perform in accordance
with the specifications or within the time limit provided in the contract; or
         (b)   A recent record of failure to perform or of unsatisfactory
performance in accordance with the terms of one or more contracts; provided
that, failure to perform or unsatisfactory performance caused by acts beyond
the control of the contractor shall not be considered to be a basis for
debarment.
      (5)   Any other cause the Procurement Agent determines to be so serious
and compelling as to affect responsibility as a town contractor, including
debarment by another governmental entity for any of the causes listed in this
section; and
      (6)   For violation of the ethical standards set forth in this chapter.
   (C)   Decision. The Procurement Agent shall forward in writing notice of any
decision of the Council to debar or suspend. The notice shall:
      (1)   State the reasons for the action taken; and
      (2)   Inform the debarred or suspended firm involved of right to judicial
review as provided in this chapter.
   (D)   Notice of decision. A copy of the decision under this section shall be
mailed or otherwise furnished immediately to the debarred or suspended person
and any other party intervening.
   (E)   Finality of decision. A decision under this section shall be final and
conclusive, unless fraudulent, or unless the debarred or suspended person
commences an action in court.
(Ord. 20-12, passed 10-27-2020)
§ 35.57 AUTHORITY TO RESOLVE CONTRACT AND BREACH OF CONTRACT CONTROVERSIES.
   (A)   Applicability. This section applies to controversies between the town
and a contractor and which arise under, or by virtue of, a contract between
them. This includes without limitation controversies based upon breach of
contract, mistake, misrepresentation or other cause for contract modification
or recision.
   (B)   Council retains authority. The Town Council is authorized, prior to
commencement of an action in a court concerning the controversy, to settle and
resolve a controversy described in this section.
   (C)   Decision. If such a controversy is not resolved by mutual agreement,
the Procurement Agent shall promptly issue a decision in writing setting forth
the decision of the Council. The decision shall:
      (1)   State the reasons for the action taken; and
      (2)   Inform the contractor of right to judicial review as provided in
this chapter.
   (D)   Notice of decision. A copy of the decision under this section shall be
mailed or otherwise furnished immediately to the contractor.
   (E)   Finality of decision. The decision under this section shall be final
and conclusive, unless fraudulent, or unless the contractor commences an action
in court.
   (F)   Failure to render timely decision. If the Procurement Agent does not
issue the written decision required under this section within 120 days after
written request for a final decision, or within such longer period as may be
agreed upon by the parties, then the contractor may proceed as if an adverse
decision had been received.
(Ord. 20-12, passed 10-27-2020)
§ 35.58 TIME LIMITATIONS ON ACTIONS.
   (A)   Protested solicitations and awards. Any legal action under this
chapter shall be initiated within 30 days after the aggrieved person knows or
should have known of the facts giving rise to the action.
   (B)   Debarments and suspensions for cause. Any action challenging a
suspension or debarment shall be commenced within six months after receipt of
the decision of the Procurement Agent under this section.
   (C)   Actions under contracts or for breach of contract. The statutory
limitations on an action between private persons on a contract shall apply to
any action commenced pursuant to a contract entered into pursuant to this
chapter.
(Ord. 20-12, passed 10-27-2020)
§ 35.59 EXPENDITURES OF FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION FUNDS.
   Expenditures of federal funds received from the Federal Transit
Administration (FTA) or through the Arizona Department of Transportation (ADOT)
as a pass-through entity for the FTA in connection with the town’s Camel
Express will be subject to the Town of Quartzsite, AZ Camel Express FTA
Procurement Policy dated February 12, 2024, a copy of which shall remain on
file with the Town Clerk. Purchasing limits provided for in this chapter shall
be modified to comply with the requirements of the FTA and the Town of
Quartzsite, AZ Camel Express FTA Procurement Policy adopted herein. The Town of
Quartzsite, AZ Camel Express FTA Procurement Policy shall be incorporated into
the town’s existing Purchasing Policy and shall be updated as necessary to
accommodate changes in FTA policy.
(Ord. 24-03, passed 4-23-2024)
§ 35.99 PENALTY.
   Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter shall be
guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,500 or by imprisonment for a period not
to exceed six months, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a
violation continues shall be a separate offense punishable as herein described.
(Ord. 20-12, passed 10-27-2020)
CHAPTER 36: TAX CODE
Section
   
36.01   Tax Code adopted by reference
§ 36.01 TAX CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The certain code entitled the “Tax Code of the Town of Quartzsite”,
including any amendments thereto, is hereby adopted by reference and made a
part of this code the same as though said code was specifically set forth in
full herein. At least three copies of said code shall be kept on file in the
office of the Town Clerk.
(Prior Code, Art. 9-1) (Ord. 89-06, passed - -1989; Res. 89-08, passed - -1989;
Ord. 89-11, passed - -1989; Ord. 89-12, passed - -1989; Ord. 89-13, passed - -;
Ord. 90-08, passed - -1990; Res. 90-17, passed - -1990; Ord. 94-03, passed - -
1994; Ord. 95-01, passed - -1995; Res. 95-01, passed - -1995; Ord. 95-07,
passed - -1995; Ord. 96-23, passed - -1996; Ord. 98-05, passed - -1998; Ord.
98-06, passed - -1998; Res. 98-12, passed - -1998; Ord. 99-04, passed - -1999;
Res. 99-21, passed - -1999; Ord. 11-07, passed - -2011; Ord. 20-10, passed 9-8-
2020)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   WATER
      
51.   SEWERS
      
52.   WASTEWATER TREATMENT, DISCHARGE AND REQUIREMENTS
      
53.   BACKFLOW CONTROL PROGRAM
CHAPTER 50: WATER
Section
General Provisions
   
50.01   Definitions
   
50.02   Water connection permit requirements; fees
   
50.03   Water capacity fee; connection fees
   
50.04   Connection required; expenses
   
50.05   Rates and charges
   
50.06   Specific water service areas and area-specific water line extension
fees
   
50.07   Unlawful acts
   
50.08   Violations
   
50.09   Water Department
   
50.10   Easements
Water Fees
   
50.25   Necessity for charges
   
50.26   Charges established
   
50.27   Rate establishment procedures
   
50.28   Water use charge
   
50.29   Water system capacity fee
   
50.30   Tap fees
   
50.31   Turn-on/off fee
   
50.32   Special assessments
   
50.33   Administrative fees
   
50.34   Special assessment fees
   
50.35   Delinquent charges
   
50.36   Distribution of revenue and establishment of special funds
Distribution System Extensions
   
50.50   Minimum size
   
50.51   Grid system
   
50.52   Conditions of line extensions
   
50.53   Distribution line extensions within or bounding a development
Reimbursement Agreements
   
50.65   Eligibility
   
50.66   Reimbursement charge
   
50.67   Cost of construction
   
50.68   Payment by applicant for service connection
   
50.69   Maximum amount of reimbursement
 
   
50.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   A.A.C. The Arizona Administrative Code.
   ADEQ. The Arizona Department of Environmental Quality.
   APPROVED LABORATORY PROCEDURES. The measurements, tests and analyses of the
characteristics of water and wastes in accordance with analytical procedures
determined acceptable by Federal Guidelines as established in 40 C.F.R. part
136, or as approved by the Regional Administrator, U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency.
   A.R.S. The Arizona Revised Statutes.
   AVERAGE QUALITY. The arithmetic average (weighted by flow value) of all the
“daily determinations of concentration”, as that term is defined herein, made
during a calendar month.
   BACKFLOW. The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into
the distributing pipes of a potable supply of water from any source other than
its intended source.
   BACKFLOW PREVENTER. A device or means to prevent backflow into the potable
water system.
   BUILDING WATER LINE. Those pipes commencing at and connecting one or more
plumbing fixtures, usually within a structure, to a point approximately five
feet outside the foundation of the structure.
   CALCULATED DEMAND. The demand from a user which is calculated based upon
estimated average, peak daily and peak hourly water demands as published by
latest engineering design standards.
   CAPITAL RESERVE. The funds remaining on an annual basis from revenue
collected from connection fees, monthly user fees and all other established
fees after payment of all water system expenses, including debt service.
   CERTIFIED COST. All costs as published in the Engineering News Record for
Phoenix, Arizona, on the closest date to January 1 in each year.
   CROSS-CONNECTION. Any connection or arrangement, physical or otherwise,
between a potable water supply system and any plumbing fixture or any tank,
receptacles, equipment or device, through which it may be possible for non-
potable, used, unclean, polluted and contaminated water, or other substances,
to enter into any part of such potable water system under any condition.
   CONNECTION FEES. Those fees collected in return for the right to connect a
“user” to the distribution system.
   DEPARTMENT. The Town of Quartzsite Department of Public Utilities.
   DEMAND. The total use of water required by a user.
   DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM. The series of pipes, reservoirs and pumping stations,
if applicable, whose function it is to deliver water from divergent sources to
deliver same to one central location.
   MAINTENANCE. Keeping the water system in a state of repair, including
expenditures necessary to maintain the capacity (capability) for which said
system was designed and constructed.
   MANAGEMENT CONTRACT. Those professional services with which the town may
contract to perform the duties and functions of the Department as provided
herein.
   PERMITTEE or PERMIT HOLDER. Any person, firm, association, corporation or
trust which owns, operates, processes or controls an establishment or plant
requiring potable water.
   PROPERTY LINE. The boundary between the property owned by a user and
property owned by the town or the water system.
   REPLACEMENT. Those expenditures made for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories or appurtenances during the useful life of the water system which
are necessary to maintain the capacity and performance of the water system for
which they were designed and constructed.
   SERVICE LINE. The water line from the property line of a customer to the
point in the distribution system where the demand exists.
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
   STANDARD METHODS. The procedure as described in the most current edition of
Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the
American Health Association, or the most current edition of Manual of Methods
for Chemical Analysis of Water and Wastes published by the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency.
   SYSTEM DESIGN CAPACITY. The maximum capacity of the well, storage reservoir,
booster pumps and distribution pipes as determined by calculations used in
standard engineering practice.
   TOTAL DEVELOPED COST. The total cost of materials, labor, design, finance,
property acquisition and management necessary to complete all or a portion of a
water system.
   TOWN ENGINEER. A registered professional engineer qualified in all
applicable aspects of standard water design.
   USER. Any person, lot, parcel of land, building, premises, municipal
corporation or other political subdivision that exhibits a demand for potable
water.
   USER FEES. The monthly fees collected from each “user” in return for
supplying potable water that conforms to the ADEQ requirements.
   WATER DEPARTMENT. The town or such person, firm, authority or department as
may be designated by the town to be the responsible administrative body of the
water system.
   WATER SYSTEM. All facilities including all wells, treatment works,
reservoirs, pumps and pipelines necessary for delivering potable water to the
user.
   WATER SYSTEM OWNER. The individual, company or municipality who at any given
time holds title to the improvements described as the “water system”.
(Prior Code, § 17-1-1) (Ord. 96-03, passed - -1996; Res. 96-01, passed - -1996;
Ord. 10-02, passed - -2010; Ord. 18-03, passed 5-8-2018)
§ 50.02 WATER CONNECTION PERMIT REQUIREMENTS; FEES.
   (A)   It is prohibited for any person to tap or connect or cause to tap or
connect any service or other pipe to the water system, or to connect its
property to or with any such tap or other pipe connected with said water system
without first applying for and obtaining connection permit from the Department
in coordination with the Building Department. This permit is to be issued prior
to any town building permit required for any construction to be conducted in
connection therewith.
   (B)   (1)   It is the duty of the town, before issuing said permit to
connect, to investigate and inquire into the conditions of all proposed
connections to such water system for the purpose of ascertaining whether same
can be made in a proper manner, in the event the Department finds that the
proposed connection can be made or installed in a proper manner and upon
receipt of a properly prepared and executed permit application and upon receipt
by the Department of the applicable fee as computed in accordance with §
50.03 of this chapter, it shall be the Department’s duty to issue to the
applicant a permit to make or install said proposed connection in accordance
with the adopted fee schedule.
      (2)   The permit shall apply to the type of user specified on the permit
and shall not be transferable. The permit will expire in the event that a
change of use occurs, a new structure is constructed or an old structure is
enlarged.
   (C)   The Department shall keep a record of all permits issued and all taps
and connections made. The records shall include the names of owners of the
property, their agent or to whom the permit was issued or for whom the tap or
connection was made.
   (D)   All applications for service which would result in the actual total
system capacity exceeding the system design capacity will be rejected.
(Prior Code, § 17-1-2) (Ord. 96-03, passed - -1996; Res. 96-01, passed - -1996;
Res. 96-05, passed - -1996; Ord. 10-02, passed - -2010) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.03 WATER CAPACITY FEE; CONNECTION FEES.
   (A)   Property owners requesting water services for Phase 1 prior to the
last day of February 1996 shall be connected without charge. After February
1996, any property owner within the Phase 1 service area shall be required to
pay all designated fees, including the connection charge.
   (B)   All properties connecting to the water system shall connect all
structures, RV spaces, mobile homes or commercial establishments or facilities
which demand water within that property. No portions or partial service shall
be allowed.
   (C)   The actual rates and categories shall be set by resolution which shall
be amended from time to time. The rates will be established in compliance with
the public hearing requirement of A.R.S. § 9-511.01.
(Prior Code, § 17-1-3) (Ord. 96-03, passed - -1996; Res. 96-01, passed - -1996;
Res. 96-05, passed - -1996; Ord. 10-02, passed - -2010)
§ 50.04 CONNECTION REQUIRED; EXPENSES.
   (A)   All persons owning, leasing or using real property, buildings or
fixtures within the service area of the water system may cause all structures
located on said property to be connected to said water system by submitting the
appropriate permit application and paying the appropriate fees. All expenses of
such connection within the property line (lines) shall be borne by the owner of
said property or building or the person using or leasing the same.
   (B)   All lots, parcels or tracts by which the water line passes or whose
property line is within 200 feet of a water main which are not connected to the
water system in accordance herewith shall connect to the water system within 90
days of notice. As to any provisions of this chapter that conflict with or
contravene this section, this division (B) shall prevail and be construed as if
to give a consistent meaning to such sections.
   (C)   All new residential, commercial or industrial developments shall
connect to the water system if the water main is within 200 feet of the
property line and shall pay the appropriate fees.
   (D)   After completion of the initial phase of construction, property owner
connecting to the water system shall have 60 days to connect to the system. For
those property owners who may require additional time, a written request for a
maximum 30-day extension shall be issued to the town for consideration. The
request shall be presented two weeks prior to the imposed connection time
limit.
   (E)   Any parcel produced from a parcel split shall be required to connect
to the water system.
   (F)   Any existing non-conforming use parcel of land shall be required to
connect to the water system.
(Prior Code, § 17-1-4) (Ord. 96-03, passed - -1996; Res. 96-01, passed - -1996;
Ord. 98-04, passed - -1998; Ord. 10-02, passed - -2010)
§ 50.05 RATES AND CHARGES.
   (A)   Distribution system development charge is a charge for the town
providing adequate sized water distribution lines at the boundaries of a lot,
lots, subdivisions or development.
   (B)   A distribution system development charge shall apply to a property
owner or developer when a connection is made to any portion of the town’s water
distribution system.
   (C)   The charge shall be paid at such time as a water connection permit is
issued for a single lot or at the time the construction assurances are posted
with the Town Engineer for a subdivision or development.
   (D)   No connection to any portion of the town’s water distribution system
is permitted until payment of the charge has been made.
   (E)   A unit of cost rate per acre shall be developed by taking costs of
construction of two miles of 12-inch distribution line and two miles of ten-
inch distribution line and then dividing their sum by 640, the number of acres
in a regular section of land.
   (F)   Allowable items included in the costs of construction of the ten-inch
and 12-inch distribution lines are: material and installation costs of pipe,
valves, tees, crosses and the like; fire hydrants; and costs of engineering,
construction staking and inspection.
   (G)   The unit cost rate shall be revised semi-annually.
   (H)   The two miles of ten-inch and two miles of 12-inch distribution lines
included in the unit cost rate are the number of miles of distribution line in
a typical section of land as required by the Water Master Plan.
   (I)   The unit rate per acre for the year 2000 is $1,200.
   (J)   A system development charge shall be calculated individually for each
connection to the distribution system by multiplying the unit rate per acre by
the total number of acres in the lot or development served by the connection.
The total number of acres in a development shall mean the gross area within the
development boundaries.
(Prior Code, § 17-1-7) (Ord. 96-03, passed - -1996; Res. 96-01, passed - -1996;
Ord. 00-05, passed - -2000; Ord. 10-02, passed - -2010)
§ 50.06 SPECIFIC WATER SERVICE AREAS AND AREA-SPECIFIC WATER LINE EXTENSION
FEES.
   (A)   The Department may recommend to the Council the acceptance of a
specific water service area and the establishment of an area-specific water
extension fee if:
      (1)   An applicant for a permit to construct and extend a water main
requests that the Department approve construction of a water main with a
capacity in excess of the size required to serve his or her development.
      (2)   The Department finds that such construction is:
         (a)   In accordance with the water service plan of the town;
         (b)   In the public interest; and
         (c)   That the water main extension would have sufficient capacity to
serve property not owned by applicant.
      (3)   The owner of the development submits plans and specifications for
construction of the water system in that service area to the Department for
review and approval.
   (B)   The Department may establish a specific water service area and an
area-specific water system extension fee. A specific water service area and/or
fee shall contain the following:
      (1)   A description or map showing the specific water service area;
      (2)   The cost of construction and installation of the water system and
related facilities or a method to determine those costs; and
      (3)   A requirement that all landowners or other persons who connect to
the water system extension shall pay to the Department an amount equal to their
pro rata share of the connection fee or a fee based on acreage or another
appropriate method approved by the town. These payments will pay for the cost
of the supply, the distribution system and related facilities and
administrative costs of the Department incurred in administering the specific
water service area.
   (C)   Prior to connection of the water system mains to the water system
extension and area-specific water main, the Department may require such persons
to pay their pro rata share of the cost as set forth in division (B)(3) above.
   (D)   Upon the recommendation of the Department, the water system may
advance a portion, or all, of the costs of construction of a water system
extension with a capacity to serve a specific water service area and may
establish an area-specific water system extension fee pursuant to division (C)
above. The area-specific water system extension fee shall be utilized to
reimburse the Department for the cost of construction of the water system
extension.
   (E)   (1)   Water system extensions may be granted by the Department at no
cost to the user based on the financial viability of the extension and the
projected user fees to be collected from additional system users connected to
extension.
      (2)   A water system extension is generally determined to be financially
viable if that extension generates sufficient demand and subsequent connection
fees and monthly user fees to cover associated development costs, debt
retirement and its pro rata share of operation and maintenance costs as
determined by the Department.
   (F)   If the developer is required to pay for an oversized water system in
order to facilitate future connections between the town system and the newly
developed property, the town will enter into a development agreement with the
developer which will outline reimbursement for the cost of the oversized
portions of the system.
(Prior Code, § 17-1-8) (Ord. 96-03, passed - -1996; Res. 96-01, passed - -1996;
Ord. 10-02, passed - -2010)
§ 50.07 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   (A)   Any person who interferes with the officers or agents of the
Department in the discharge of their duties or who violates any of the
provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (B)   Such interference’s include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   The tapping of a water main belonging to the system;
      (2)   Laying, connecting, inspecting or repairing of main;
      (3)   The excavating, either directly or indirectly, of a street or alley
for the purpose of connecting to the water system without first obtaining a
permit from the Department and the town’s Building Department; and
      (4)   Illegal use of the water system including, but not limited to:
         (a)   Serving more than one lot or parcel from a single meter; and
         (b)   Being connected to the water main belonging to the system
without a properly installed and maintained backflow assembly, where required.
(Prior Code, § 17-1-10) (Ord. 96-03, passed - -1996; Res. 96-01, passed - -
1996; Ord. 10-02, passed - -2010)
§ 50.08 VIOLATIONS.
   Any person found in violation of the provisions of §
50.05 of this chapter will be subject to the following penalties and cost
recovery.
   (A)   Fines shall be those as set forth for any code violation.
   (B)   In addition to the fine, costs equal to the remedy of the violation
may be assessed. Those costs include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   Uncovering, inspecting, reinstalling (where required) and covering
the tap;
      (2)   Uncovering, inspecting, relaying or repairing the water main;
      (3)   Testing, re-excavating (where required), inspecting, backfilling
and compacting of a street or alley excavated without a permit; and
      (4)   Correcting or repairing any physical damage caused by an illegal
connection.
(Prior Code, § 17-1-11) (Ord. 96-03, passed - -1996; Res. 96-01, passed - -
1996; Ord. 10-02, passed - -2010)
§ 50.09 WATER DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   Design, review and issuance of construction permit. The Water
Department, in conjunction with the town’s Building Department, shall review
all designs, plans, specifications and the like, relating to water supply and
distribution systems, pumping structures and water connections prior to issuing
a construction permit. The Department, in conjunction with the Building
Department, shall issue a construction permit only if they are satisfied that
all departments are in compliance with this code and the water supply and
distribution systems, pumping structures and water connections will operate in
a safe and sanitary manner. Prior to the issuance of a construction permit, the
owner shall pay all fees assessed by the town.
   (B)   Construction inspections. All water lines and service lines to be
attached directly to a water main shall be inspected by personnel of the Water
Department and Building Department during construction. At least 48 hours prior
to tapping the water main, the Water Department and Building Department shall
be notified, in making a connection to a water system, no physical alteration
of the facilities shall commence until a Department Inspector is present. No
water shall be withdrawn from any water main prior to obtaining inspections,
meter installation and approval of construction by the Department. Following
satisfactory completion of construction, inspection, pressure and
microbiological testing, the Department shall issue a construction inspection
certificate.
   (C)   Collection of fees and miscellaneous powers. Fees levied pursuant to
this code shall be collected by the Department. The Department shall enforce
such rules and regulations the Council authorizes as for the safe, economical
and efficient management and protection of the system; for the construction and
use of the waters and connections to the water system; and for the regulation,
collection, rebating and refunding of such water fees.
(Prior Code, § 17-2-1)
§ 50.10 EASEMENTS.
   (A)   All property owners desiring the connection of the improvements on
their property to the water system of the town shall grant to the town, at no
charge, those easements necessary to properly effectuate the water connection
desired.
   (B)   All easements granted to the town shall be subject to the following
restrictions and conditions of use.
      (1)   No person, firm or corporation having charge of property subject to
easement in favor of the town shall hereafter construct, build or establish a
building upon the property subject to said easement. A BUILDING means a house,
commercial building, industrial building or any structure of a size or
construction that the moving thereof would cause great inconvenience to any
person.
      (2)   Should the owner of the property subject to an easement in favor of
the town construct a building thereon in violation of this code, the town may
employ individuals to clear said property and charge the costs of the same to
the owner of the property. Nothing contained herein shall obligate the town to
compensate the owner of the property subject to the easement for the value of a
“building” cleared. The town may take those steps as are required to work in
the easement and preserve the improvement, rather than clear the improvements.
      (3)   No person shall excavate deeper than three feet upon the property
subject to the easement in favor of the town without having first obtained a
permit therefor as herein required. Such permit shall be issued by the town.
Applications for a permit to excavate upon property subject to easement in
favor of the town shall be made in writing to the town and shall state thereon
specifically the size of the space intended to be excavated and the purpose for
the excavation.
      (4)   No person shall plant any trees or shrubbery upon the property
subject to the easement in favor of the town without having secured a permit
therefor. Applications for such permit shall be made to the town. All trees and
shrubs so planted shall be placed subject to the direction and approval of the
town. No boulders, benches or fences shall be built or maintained upon the
property subject to the easement unless approved by the town.
      (5)   In the event any improvements are constructed within the boundaries
of the easement and these create any additional costs to the town because it
must incur additional expenses to repair, install or replace its water system,
the property owner shall be charged all additional costs incurred.
(Prior Code, § 17-2-3) Penalty, see §
10.99
WATER FEES
§ 50.25 NECESSITY FOR CHARGES.
   It is hereby deemed necessary for the protection of the public’s health,
safety and welfare that this system conform with federal, state and local laws
and regulations. It is also necessary that a system of charges for water
service be established which allocates the cost of providing water service to
each user in such a manner that the allocated costs are proportionate to the
cost of providing water service to that user, insofar as those costs can
reasonably be determined.
(Prior Code, § 17-2-2) (Res. 01-06, passed - -2001; Ord. 09-36, passed - -2009)
§ 50.26 CHARGES ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   Water charge categories will include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   Water system capacity fee;
      (2)   Water user deposit;
      (3)   Water use charges;
      (4)   Turn-on fees;
      (5)   Tap fees;
      (6)   Re-read fee (no error only);
      (7)   Administration fees (inspection, plan review and permits);
      (8)   Special assessments; and
      (9)   Delinquent charges.
   (B)   The actual rates and categories will be set by resolution which shall
be amended from time to time. The rate will be established in compliance with
the public hearing requirements of A.R.S. § 9-511.01.
(Prior Code, § 17-2-2) (Res. 01-06, passed - -2001; Ord. 09-36, passed - -2009)
§ 50.27 RATE ESTABLISHMENT PROCEDURES.
   (A)   (1)   Rates for each type of water charge and associated fees shall be
reviewed periodically by the Department or the Town Manager. If the Department
recommends changes to the fee structures, they shall issue a request to the
Council with a recommendation for fee modification.
      (2)   The Council shall then act upon the recommendation in accordance
with A.R.S. § 9-511.01.
   (B)   The rate schedules adopted by the Council shall be based upon the
following factors:
      (1)   Annual debt service charge for the retirement of project debt;
      (2)   The total applicable cost of salaries and benefits of employees
engaged in providing water service;
      (3)   Applicable operating expenses, including parts, materials and
services incurred in providing water service;
      (4)   Applicable equipment replacement costs necessitated by the
provisions of water service;
      (5)   Appropriate indirect costs of the Department and other town
departments in rendering water related services, such as purchasing,
accounting, billing, administration and insurance;
      (6)   Other pertinent factors as determined by the Town Manager;
      (7)   Any shortfalls of operating revenue in prior operating period(s);
and
      (8)   Any reserve funds required by funding agencies.
(Prior Code, § 17-2-2) (Res. 01-06, passed - -2001; Ord. 09-36, passed - -2009;
Ord. 18-03, passed 5-8-2018)
§ 50.28 WATER USE CHARGE.
   (A)   Charge.
      (1)   For the purposes of determining the water use charge, the charge
will be based upon meter size, base rate and actual demand.
      (2)   Water use charges shall commence when connection of the service
line to the facility being served is completed and inspected and shall
terminate only when the facility served is no longer physically connected to
the town water line.
      (3)   Water service charges in this section shall be billed and paid
monthly. The applicant for the service, whether property owner or renter, will
be required to pay a deposit equivalent to two months when water service is
requested. If monthly payments are made on time for 12 months, the deposit will
be refunded, upon written request, to the account holder.
      (4)   The actual rates and categories will be set by resolution which
shall be amended from time to time. The rate will be established in compliance
with the public hearing requirement of A.R.S. § 9-511.01.
   (B)   Water use charge; determination of payments and charges. A
proportionate charge shall be made to all users who use potable water based
upon meter size, base rate and actual demand.
(Prior Code, § 17-2-2) (Res. 01-06, passed - -2001; Ord. 09-36, passed - -2009;
Ord. 19-01, passed 2-12-2019; Res. 22-11, passed 7-12-2022)
§ 50.29 WATER SYSTEM CAPACITY FEE.
   (A)   For the purpose of providing revenue to assist in the financing and to
more equitably distribute the cost of the construction of necessary additions
to the water system, it is hereby determined and declared necessary to provide
for the establishment, exaction and regulation of a water capacity charge as
hereinafter determined, with such charge to be in addition to any and all other
fees which may be imposed with respect to the said water system.
   (B)   The funds received from the collection of such charge, as it is herein
authorized, shall be deposited daily with the town who shall credit them to a
special fund from which the Council may take appropriations for the payment of
the cost and expense of the construction of the water system, wells, pump
stations and appurtenances and for the payment of the cost and expense of
extensions to or the enlargement of same.
   (C)   The Department Director shall be and is hereby authorized and directed
to charge and collect a water system capacity charge whenever:
      (1)   A water system agreement has been executed by the parties;
      (2)   Application is made for the issuance of a water permit to provide
water service to a new structure;
      (3)   At the time an existing structure is enlarged or its use changes;
and
      (4)   When an existing structure is removed and a new structure built and
reuse is made of an existing water service or a new water service is
constructed, where such property is or will be tributary, directly or
indirectly to any water system built by the town.
   (D)   Credit for any existing structure which has a use change or for an
existing structure enlarged or removed may be applied against the system
capacity imposed in the amount of the original structure charge up to, but not
more than, the current charge.
(Prior Code, § 17-2-2) (Res. 01-06, passed - -2001; Ord. 09-36, passed - -2009)
§ 50.30 TAP FEES.
   A water tap is required to connect any building or house to the water
system, the fees for such tap shall be paid prior to the tap construction. The
actual rates and categories will be set by resolution which shall be amended
from time to time. The rate will be established in compliance with the public
hearing requirements of A.R.S. § 9-511.01.
(Prior Code, § 17-2-2) (Res. 01-06, passed - -2001; Ord. 09-36, passed - -2009)
§ 50.31 TURN-ON/OFF FEE.
   A turn-on/off fee must be paid at the time service is rendered. The actual
rates and categories will be set by resolution which shall be amended from time
to time. The rate will be established in compliance with the public hearing
requirements of A.R.S. § 9-511.01.
(Prior Code, § 17-2-2) (Res. 01-06, passed - -2001; Ord. 09-36, passed - -2009)
§ 50.32 SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.
   This fee is applicable in the event of an unusual industrial connection or
in the event of a specific water area or area-specific line extension (see §§
50.50 through 50.53 of this chapter), or in the event of an unforeseen event
which may require specific consideration.
(Prior Code, § 17-2-2) (Res. 01-06, passed - -2001; Ord. 09-36, passed - -2009)
§ 50.33 ADMINISTRATIVE FEES.
   (A)   Administrative fees shall include, but not be limited to:
      (1)   Reimbursable expenses of the Department;
      (2)   Bad check charges;
      (3)   Lien recording fees;
      (4)   Account transfer fees;
      (5)   Plan review fees; and
      (6)   Inspection fees.
   (B)   The actual rates and categories will be set by resolution which shall
be amended from time to time. The rate will be established in compliance with
the public hearing requirements of A.R.S. § 9-511.01.
(Prior Code, § 17-2-2) (Res. 01-06, passed - -2001; Ord. 09-36, passed - -2009)
§ 50.34 SPECIAL ASSESSMENT FEES.
   For properties not within the present service area of the water system, the
applicable fees shall include a connection fee payable on a per parcel basis,
which shall be established by the Council, similar in amount to the costs of
construction of an equivalent water system adjacent to the landowner’s
property, including the cost of construction, engineering, legal and
administrative services, and in accordance with the benefit received, plus a
fee for each service line constructed in the public right-of-way to service the
property; said money to be paid directly to the Department prior to the time of
the connection to the Department water system. Said money so collected is to be
used to pay all or part of the cost of installing other water mains in the town
as and when designated by the Council, or the costs of construction of
additional system capacity. When said moneys are not being expended for that
purpose, they are to be invested or spent at the discretion of the Council. The
actual rates and categories will be set by resolution which shall be amended
from time to time. The rate will be established with the public hearing
requirements of A.R.S. § 9-511.01.
(Prior Code, § 17-2-2) (Res. 01-06, passed - -2001; Ord. 09-36, passed - -2009)
§ 50.35 DELINQUENT CHARGES.
   (A)   All rates and service charges are due and payable when rendered and
shall be delinquent 15 days after the date of the billing. Any delinquent
account requiring special collection effort may be assessed a delinquent
collection charge. The actual rates and categories will be set by resolution
which shall be amended from time to time. The rate will be established in
compliance with the public hearing requirements of A.R.S. § 9-511.01. If the
total of such delinquent charges is not received within five days after date of
delinquency and notice of delinquency having been given, water service shall be
disconnected, from the premises of the delinquent consumer and a delinquent
turnoff fee charged to the customer’s account. The delinquent turnoff fee, plus
the total amount of the bill due and any deposit used to remedy the
delinquency, shall be collected before providing water service again to
delinquent customer.
   (B)   Customer’s water service may be disconnected for non-payment of a bill
for water services rendered at a previous location; provided, such bill is not
paid within 20 days after the unpaid bill has been presented to the customer at
his or her new location.
   (C)   Any expense caused to the Department for the repair or replacement of
damaged, stolen, tampered or misused water facilities shall be charged against
and collected from the person who caused the expense.
   (D)   When a user of the water system has been notified of amount of water
use charges remaining due after the deduction of his or her user deposit and
payment of same has not been received within five days, the Department shall
assign the account to a bona fide collection agency.
   (E)   Before water service will be provided to any premises, all charges
against the premises then due and payable to the Department, as required by
this code, or including any of the following items must have been paid: on
account of labor supplied or materials furnished by the Department in the
installation of service lines connecting the premises with the town water mains
or for tapping the system water lines; on account of services of water service
previously supplied to the premises, whether used by the applicants or by some
previous occupant of the premises; or on account of the assessment of any fine
or penalty; or for turning water service off or on; or for repair or
replacement of damaged, stolen or misused water supply and distribution
facilities.
   (F)   Before disconnecting water for non-payment of any water user charge,
deposit or other assessment provided for in this code, the Department shall
give written notice of the discontinuance to the person and afford him or her
or his or her designee an opportunity to appear before the Department on any
disputed matter relative to the discontinuance of water service.
   (G)   (1)   A water customer who defaults in his or her obligation for the
payment of utility moneys owed to the town is liable for any and all fees and
charges assessed by a collection agency that is licensed pursuant to A.R.S.
Title 32, Ch. 9, Art. 2, and that is engaged by the town to collect and enforce
such payment.
      (2)   The collection fees and charges assessed by the collection agency
shall be added to the sum or sums due from and chargeable against the customer.
(Prior Code, § 17-2-2) (Res. 01-06, passed - -2001; Ord. 09-36, passed - -2009)
§ 50.36 DISTRIBUTION OF REVENUE AND ESTABLISHMENT OF SPECIAL FUNDS.
   (A)   There shall be established the following funds into which the water
charges, as levied herein, shall be distributed.
      (1)   Water System Operations, Maintenance and Capital Outlay Fund. The
Water System Operations, Maintenance and Capital Outlay Fund shall be used
exclusively for debt service, operational expenses and equipment replacement
expenses associated with the provision of water system services.
      (2)   Renewal and Replacement Fund. The Water System Renewal and
Replacement Fund shall be used as follows:
         (a)   To fund any budget shortages in the Water System Operations,
Maintenance and Capital Outlay Fund; and
         (b)   Funds collected in the Renewal and Replacement Fund in excess of
1.25 times the annual system debt service and operation and maintenance costs
shall be utilized within the system as deemed appropriate by the Council on
recommendation by the Town Manager and the Department.
      (3)   Water System Users Deposit Fund. The water system users’ deposits
shall be utilized exclusively for the purpose of temporarily paying a
customer’s delinquent fees.
   (B)   The distribution of water charges shall be as follows.
      (1)   Water system capacity charges. All water system capacity fees
(connection fees) will be deposited in the Renewal and Replacement Fund.
      (2)   Water system user charges and tap fees. Water user fees shall be
allocated to the Water System Operations and Capital Outlay Fund.
      (3)   Water system user deposits. One hundred percent of the Water User
Deposit Fund shall be used to assure payment of monthly users fees by customer,
as follows.
         (a)   If a customer is delinquent (see §
50.34 of this chapter) in paying their monthly user fee, then the Department
may utilize a portion of that user’s deposit to bring the account current.
         (b)   The customer will be considered delinquent until the deposit is
returned to the full amount.
         (c)   If a customer in good standing is disconnected and/or sells his
or her property, the total amount of the deposit will be refunded upon written
request.
      (4)   Special assessments.
         (a)   Special assessments shall be utilized in accordance with the
agreement between the Water Department and the customer.
         (b)   Additional connection applications may not be accepted after the
plant reaches “calculated design capacity” without review and approval by the
Department confirming that actual maximum measured demand does not exceed
design capacity.
(Prior Code, § 17-2-2) (Res. 01-06, passed - -2001; Ord. 09-36, passed - -2009)
DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM EXTENSIONS
§ 50.50 MINIMUM SIZE.
   No water line less than eight inches inside diameter shall be accepted as
part of the town’s water system.
(Prior Code, § 17-1-5) (Ord. 96-03, passed - -1996; Res. 96-01, passed - -1996;
Ord. 00-05, passed - -2000; Ord. 10-02, passed - -2010)
§ 50.51 GRID SYSTEM.
   Distribution water lines of 12 inches inside diameter are required on all
section lines and distribution water lines of ten inches inside diameter are
required on all half section lines and distribution water lines of eight inches
inside diameter are required on all one-sixteenth lines, except where otherwise
called for by the town’s Water Master Plan.
(Prior Code, § 17-1-5) (Ord. 96-03, passed - -1996; Res. 96-01, passed - -1996;
Ord. 00-05, passed - -2000; Ord. 10-02, passed - -2010)
§ 50.52 CONDITIONS OF LINE EXTENSIONS.
   (A)   All line extensions to serve a lot, lots, subdivisions or developments
shall begin at the nearest adequate existing distribution line as determined by
the Department and Town Engineer.
   (B)   (1)   All water distribution lines other than those provided for in §
50.53 of this chapter shall extend across the total frontage of the property or
development to be served. Where the property or development is on a corner and
fronts two exterior sides, total frontage shall mean one exterior side of the
property or the development as determined by the Town Engineer in accordance
with the Water Distribution System Master Plan.
      (2)   For a property on a corner that abuts a section line and a half-
section line, or that abuts two section lines or two half section lines, the
frontage for a line extension shall mean the longest of the two exterior sides
abutting the section or half section lines.
      (3)   Those properties, meeting the conditions of division (B)(2) above
where a line extension is required across the longest exterior frontage of the
property, are exempt from any reimbursement charge for a connection to a line
extension on the property’s short exterior frontage when required by the town
for the purpose of looping the distribution system.
      (4)   For those properties meeting the conditions of division (B)(2)
above and where an adequate water distribution line already exists along one of
the two exterior frontages at the time of development, a line extension is
required to be installed across the property’s remaining exterior frontage. The
property is exempt from any reimbursement charge for connection to the existing
water distribution system.
   (C)   Distribution lines shall be installed only in public streets, alleys,
roads and highways and on other public and private property where satisfactory
right-of-way can be obtained without involving direct purchase or lease of land
by the Department.
   (D)   Distribution lines may be installed in private streets or
thoroughfares to provide water service to premises along such street upon
approval of the Department, providing:
      (1)   Right-of-way or easement provided is satisfactory to the
Department; and
      (2)   The Department has no responsibility to maintain or repair the
surface of the street other than to restore it to its original condition after
cutting the street for installation of the water line or after repairs to the
line.
   (E)   Distribution lines which are extended or installed will become the
property of the town after final inspection and acceptance by the town and ADEQ
approval of construction.
   (F)   Construction drawings for water line extensions certified by a
registered engineer shall be submitted to the Department and Town Engineer for
approval and shall be in accordance with the town’s Standard Specifications for
Utility Installations, as adopted.
   (G)   (1)   Payment is required for all water used in construction,
sterilization and testing of water main extensions and the contractor or
developer shall be held accountable for that cost.
      (2)   Amount of water used shall be estimated by the Department.
(Prior Code, § 17-1-5) (Ord. 96-03, passed - -1996; Res. 96-01, passed - -1996;
Ord. 00-05, passed - -2000; Ord. 10-02, passed - -2010)
§ 50.53 DISTRIBUTION LINE EXTENSIONS WITHIN OR BOUNDING A DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   Installed by developer.
      (1)   Distribution lines shall be installed within or bounding the
development to locations and grades and of such sizes as approved by the Town
Engineer and Department and in conformance with town standards as adopted.
Distribution lines of sizes and at locations approved by the Town Engineer and
Department and in conformance with the town standards shall be installed for
each lot within the development prior to paving the adjacent street.
      (2)   Where the line extensions or a portion of the line extension does
not meet the requirements listed in division (B) below, the developer will be
required to pay the full cost of the line extension or portion of the line
extension.
      (3)   The town will enter into a reimbursement agreement with the
developer requiring future customers to pay a pro rata share of the cost of the
line extension if such initial service is taken during the term of the
agreement. See §§
50.65 through
50.69 of this chapter.
      (4)   The developer shall install a minimum one-inch water service
connection for each lot within the development is his or her expense,
concurrently with the water line construction in the development. The service
connections installed by a developer shall be guaranteed against any and all
defects by the developer for a period of one year after acceptance of the
installations by the town. No one except authorized town personnel shall be
authorized to install, remove or reinstall water meters and in the event the
developer’s contractor, plumber, (or others), removes, changes or relocates
water maters, the developer shall be charged the cost to the town for restoring
meters to his or her authorized and designated locations.
      (5)   Fire hydrants shall be installed within and along perimeter streets
of the development at locations and to lines and grades approved by the Town
Engineer and in conformance with town standards.
      (6)   The developer shall be responsible for adjusting all water valves,
meter boxes and appurtenances to the approved final grade before acceptance of
the system by the town.
      (7)   A letter of acknowledgment shall be submitted by the developer
concurrently with the submittal of proposed project design drawings. Included
in the letter will be:
         (a)   Identification of the proposed project;
         (b)   Identification of the project developer; and
         (c)   Acknowledgment of the project developer.
            1.   The developer shall cause his or her professional engineer to
submit all documentation required by the state’s Department of Environmental
Quality (ADEQ) Engineering Bulletin No. 10, as applicable, to the ADEQ for
review and approval and to obtain all permits required to facilitate completion
of the proposed project.
            2.   The developer shall contract a professional engineer to
provide detailed construction inspection services for the proposed project.
Upon completion of the project, the developers engineer shall forward a copy of
same, including one set of Mylar, reproducible as-built drawings, affixed with
the developer’s engineer’s seal, and an electronic file to the town’s
Department of Public Utilities, for review and approval.
            3.   Upon issuance of the approval to operate by ADEQ, final
acceptance of the facility will be acknowledged by the town and the one-year
warranty period shall commence.
   (B)   Installed by town.
      (1)   Subject to the limitation set forth below water line extensions of
ten-inch or larger sizes as required by the Water Master Plan located on
section lines and half section lines shall be installed by town employees or by
contract at town expense.
      (2)   Extensions installed and paid for by the town will include the
appropriate valves, tees, crosses and the like, as well as fire hydrants.
      (3)   Water service installations to serve individual lots shall not be
considered as part of the line extension installed at town expense, but may be
included at the time of construction at the developer’s expense.
      (4)   Line extensions are limited to a maximum per subdivision per fiscal
year as budgeted in compliance with water adequacy.
      (5)   Any line extensions in excess of the limitations set forth in §§
50.50 through
50.53 of this chapter as revised will be eligible for a reimbursement agreement
under the provisions of §§
50.65 through
50.69 of this chapter.
   (C)   Limitation on town installation.
      (1)   Funds for town installed line extensions are derived from system
development charge.
      (2)   The total dollar amount of funds available in any one year for
construction of distribution line extensions is limited by the town to an
amount equal to the cost of construction of a combination of one-half mile of
ten-inch and 12-inch main extensions.
      (3)   Distribution of available funds for line extensions each fiscal
year shall be on a first come basis. The project effective date for
availability of funds is the date of the posting of construction assurances
with the Town Engineer.
(Prior Code, § 17-1-5) (Ord. 96-03, passed - -1996; Res. 96-01, passed - -1996;
Ord. 00-05, passed - -2000; Ord. 10-02, passed - -2010)
REIMBURSEMENT AGREEMENTS
§ 50.65 ELIGIBILITY.
   (A)   When a ten-inch or larger line extension conforming to the Water
Master Plan is installed outside, abutting or within the applicant’s lot, lots,
subdivision or development, and does not meet the requirements of §
50.53(B) and (C) of this chapter for a line extension by the town then the
applicant shall be eligible for a line extension agreement. A line extension
smaller than ten inches paid for by the applicant, which may be used by
property other than that being developed by the applicant shall be eligible for
a reimbursement agreement.
   (B)   The town will enter into an agreement with the original applicant of
the line extension and will collect and return to the applicant as provided in
the agreement a distribution line reimbursement charge from parties connecting
laterally to the line extension.
   (C)   To be eligible for a reimbursement agreement, the original applicant
for the line extension must submit the certified costs of the extension as
prescribed in §
50.66 of this chapter within 120 days from the date of acceptance of the line
extension by the town. Eligibility must be established in a timely manner so
that project records and the utility atlas is fully updated. The applicant
shall be notified in writing of the availability of a reimbursement agreement
by the town’s Utility Department.
(Prior Code, § 17-1-6) (Ord. 96-03, passed - -1996; Res. 96-01, passed - -1996;
Ord. 00-05, passed - -2000; Ord. 10-02, passed - -2010)
§ 50.66 REIMBURSEMENT CHARGE.
   (A)   The reimbursement charge will be based on one-half the cost per lineal
foot of the water line extension abutting the premises of the party desirous of
obtaining a connection or connections to the line or by a fee per parcel for
the area serviced by the connection.
   (B)   The certified cost per lineal foot of the water line extension shall
be obtained by taking the total cost of construction of the extension divided
by the total lineal feet of the water line extension that was installed. Such
costs must be certified by both the developer’s engineer and the Town Engineer.
The per parcel fee shall be determined either by obtaining the total cost of
construction of the extension minus the pro rata share of cost for the line
extension belonging to the original applicant served by the line extension; or
by setting a fixed cost per parcel. Such cost to be certified by the
developer’s engineer and the Town Engineer. The method used for determining per
parcel cost shall be determined by the Town Engineer.
(Prior Code, § 17-1-6) (Ord. 96-03, passed - -1996; Res. 96-01, passed - -1996;
Ord. 00-05, passed - -2000; Ord. 10-02, passed - -2010)
§ 50.67 COST OF CONSTRUCTION.
   The cost of construction of a line extension shall include in addition to
the actual material and installation costs of piping, valves and other
appurtenances, the engineering costs for preparation of plans and
specifications and costs of inspection and staking. The cost of water service
connections shall not be included in the cost of construction of the water line
extension for reimbursement purposes.
(Prior Code, § 17-1-6) (Ord. 96-03, passed - -1996; Res. 96-01, passed - -1996;
Ord. 00-05, passed - -2000; Ord. 10-02, passed - -2010)
§ 50.68 PAYMENT BY APPLICANT FOR SERVICE CONNECTION.
   (A)   An applicant for a service connection from a line which is subject to
a reimbursement agreement shall pay the appropriate reimbursement charges. Such
charge(s) shall be in addition to all other applicable charges provided by
these regulations, including charges for service connections, capacity charges
and fees for meter installation.
   (B)   A corner property meeting the provisions of §
50.52(E)(3) or (E)(4) of this chapter is exempt from payment of a reimbursement
charge for connection to a line extension on the property’s other exterior
frontage when for the purpose of looping the system.
   (C)   Applicants shall pay the distribution line reimbursement charge before
construction of their connection to the line extension. This charge shall be in
addition to all other applicable charges provided by these regulations,
including charges for service connection, capacity charges and meter
installations.
(Prior Code, § 17-1-6) (Ord. 96-03, passed - -1996; Res. 96-01, passed - -1996;
Ord. 00-05, passed - -2000; Ord. 10-02, passed - -2010)
§ 50.69 MAXIMUM AMOUNT OF REIMBURSEMENT.
   (A)   The maximum amount of any reimbursement shall be identified in the
agreement and shall not exceed 100% of the total certified construction cost of
the extension. Interest to be compounded yearly and calculated based on the
interest rate of U.S. Government Treasury Bills dated January 1 of each year
following the date of acceptance of the line extension. The interest rate for
the last months of a reimbursement period, if short of a full year, shall be at
the interest rate as of January 1 of that year.
   (B)   The reimbursement cost shall be calculated using the reimbursement
charge and multiplying it by the appropriate interest rate for each one-year
period or portion of one-year period, interest begins at the date of acceptance
of the line and ends at the date of connection to that line by that particular
applicant. Compound interest to be calculated by adding the calculated interest
in the succeeding years period to the reimbursement charge amount before that
period’s interest is calculated. The reimbursement cost will then be the sum of
the reimbursement charge and each of the periods interest amounts.
   (C)   The reimbursement agreement shall have a maximum term of five years
and shall close at the end of that period whether or not the total amount of
reimbursement has been made.
   (D)   All reimbursement agreements shall comply with the above terms.
(Prior Code, § 17-1-6) (Ord. 96-03, passed - -1996; Res. 96-01, passed - -1996;
Ord. 00-05, passed - -2000; Ord. 10-02, passed - -2010)
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Violations are as mandated by §
50.04(B) of this chapter and may consist of a criminal penalty of a Class I
misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 180 days, or a fine of
up to $2,500, or both fine and imprisonment.
      (2)   Violations are as mandated by §
50.04(C) of this chapter and may consist of a criminal penalty of a Class I
misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 180 days, or a fine of
up to $2,500, or both fine and imprisonment.
(Prior Code, § 17-1-4) (Ord. 96-03, passed - -1996; Res. 96-01, passed - -1996;
Ord. 98-04, passed - -1998; Ord. 10-02, passed - -2010)
CHAPTER 51: SEWERS
Section
General Provisions
   
51.01   Definitions
   
51.02   Sewer connection permit requirements; fees
   
51.03   Sewer capacity fee; connection fees
   
51.04   Connection required; expenses; abatement of existing facilities
   
51.05   Specific sewer service areas and area-specific sewer line extension
fees
   
51.06   Water closet required
   
51.07   Unlawful acts
Public Sewer System Extensions
   
51.20   Size requirements for public sewer and service laterals
   
51.21   Engineering requirements
   
51.22   Conditions of public sewer extensions
   
51.23   Public sewer extensions within or bounding a development
   
51.24   Trunk sewer extension by others
Reimbursement Agreements
   
51.35   Eligibility
   
51.36   Reimbursement charge
   
51.37   Cost of construction
   
51.38   Payment by applicant for service connection
   
51.39   Maximum amount of reimbursement
   
51.40   Terms of agreement
   
51.41   Applicability
 
   
51.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   A.A.C. The Arizona Administrative Code.
   ADEQ. The Arizona Department of Environmental Quality.
   APPROVED LABORATORY PROCEDURES. The measurements, tests and analyses of the
characteristics of water and wastes in accordance with analytical procedures
determined acceptable by federal guidelines as established in 40 C.F.R. part
136, or as approved by the Regional Administrator, U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency.
   A.R.S. The Arizona Revised Statutes.
   AVERAGE QUALITY. The arithmetic average (weighted by flow value) of all the
“daily determinations of concentration”, as that term is defined herein, made
during a calendar month.
   BOD (BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). The oxygen utilized in the biochemical
oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory conditions for five days
at a temperature of 20°C, reported in milligrams per liter.
   BUILDING SEWER. Those drains commencing at and connecting one or more
plumbing fixtures, usually within a structure, to a point approximately five
feet outside the foundation of the structure.
   CALCULATED DESIGN CAPACITY. The maximum capacity of the treatment plant as
determined by calculations used in standard engineering practice.
   CALCULATED DISCHARGE. The discharge from a user which is calculated based
upon estimated waste/sewage flow rates as published by the latest edition of
the Uniform Plumbing Code.
   CAPITAL RESERVE. The funds remaining on an annual basis from revenue
collected from connection, monthly user fees and septage fees after payment of
all wastewater treatment system expenses including debt service.
   CERTIFIED COST. All costs as published in the Engineering News Record for
Phoenix, Arizona, on the closest date to January 1 in each year. (See TOTAL
DEVELOPMENT COST.)
   CLEAN OUT. A device which provides access from the surface to an underground
sewer line.
   COD (CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). The series of pipes, manholes and pumping
stations, if applicable whose function it is to gather wastewater from
divergent sources and deliver same to one central location.
   COLLECTION SYSTEM. The series of pipes, manholes and pumping stations, if
applicable, whose function it is to gather wastewater from divergent sources
and deliver same to one central location.
   CONNECTION FEES. Those fees collected in return for the right to connect a
“source” to the collection system.
   COOLING WATER. The clean wastewater discharged from any heat transfer
system, such as condensation, air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration.
   DAILY COMPOSITE SAMPLE. A sample of wastewater continuously collected over a
normal operating day.
   DAILY COMPOSITE SAMPLE QUALITY. The concentration of some parameter tested
in a “daily composite sample”, as that term is defined herein, and reported
proportional to flow.
   DAILY DETERMINATION OF CONCENTRATION. For composite samples, the same as
“daily composite sample quality”, as that term is defined herein. For grab
samples, the arithmetic average (weighted by flow value) of all “grab sample
qualities”, as that term is defined herein, determined by any calendar day.
   DEPARTMENT. The town’s Department of Public Utilities.
   DISCHARGE. The deposit of sewage, water or any liquid from any sewer user
into the sewer system.
   DOMESTIC WASTE. A typical, residential type waste which requires no
pretreatment under the provisions of this chapter before discharging into the
sanitary sewer system, excluding all commercial manufacturing and industrial
wastes.
   DOWNFLOW. The direction of flow in a sewer line.
   EQUIVALENT PLUMBING UNITS. The method of calculating probable discharge
based upon the quantity and/or size of plumbing fixtures on the property of a
user.
   EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL UNIT. The method of calculating discharge to the
sewer based upon the average flow from a typical residence, set at 200 gallons
per day per residence.
   ESTABLISHMENT, PLANT. Any establishment or plant producing liquid waste,
with or without suspended solids, required to be discharged into the sewer
system.
   EXTERIOR INVERT. The transition from sewer pipe to manhole at the entrance
or “upstream” side of any manhole.
   GARBAGE. Solid waste generated by owner-users.
   GRAB SAMPLE. An individual sample of sewage collected in less than 15
minutes.
   GRAB SAMPLE QUALITY. The concentration of some parameter tested in a grab
sample, as that term is defined herein.
   INDUSTRIAL USER. Any non-governmental, non-residential user of the sewer
system which discharges any industrial waste and is identified in the Standard
Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, Office of Management and Budget, as
amended and supplemented under one of the following divisions: A; B; D; E; I.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Any liquid, free-flowing waste, including cooling water,
resulting from any industrial or manufacturing process or from the development,
recovery or processing of natural resources, with or without suspended solids.
   INFLATION FACTOR. A modification in construction costs to achieve, as
closely as possible constant 1-1-1993 dollars.
   INFLOW. Water other than wastewater that enters a sewer system (including
sewer service connections) from sources such as roof leaders, cellar drains,
foundation drains, drains from springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross-
connections between storm sewer and sanitary sewers, catch basins, cooling
towers, storm sewers, surface runoff, street wash waters or drainage.
   INTERFERENCE. Inhibition or disruption of the sewer system, treatment
processes or operations which contribute to a violation of any requirement of a
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit pursuant to § 307(b) and
(c) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended by the Clean Water
Act of 1977, being 33 U.S.C. § 1317(b) and (c).
   LATERAL COLLECTION SYSTEM. The sewer line or series of sewer lines which
connect two or more “sources” lying wholly within the property lines of a
“user”. A LATERAL SEWER SYSTEM is constructed by or for and is maintained by or
for a single “user”.
   LATERAL SEWER LINE. The portion of a sewer system commencing at a point five
feet outside of the foundation of a “source” being served to the connection of
another LATERAL SEWER LINE after which the combined line shall be referred to
as a “lateral collection system” or to the property line of the “user”. A
LATERAL SEWER LINE OR COLLECTION SYSTEM is constructed by or for and maintained
by or for a single “user”.
   MAINTENANCE. Keeping the treatment works in a state of repair, including
expenditures necessary to maintain the capacity (capability) for which said
works were designed and constructed.
   MANAGEMENT CONTRACT. The town may by contract employ professional services
to perform the duties and functions of the Department as provided herein.
   MANHOLE. A structure located at regular intervals along a sewer pipe line of
sufficient size for a work person to enter for the purpose of cleaning or
maintaining the collection system.
   MASTER LEASE. The authority appointed by the town may lease the entire
wastewater treatment system. This lease shall be described as the MASTER LEASE.
   OUTFALL SEWER. The series of pipes, manholes and pumping stations, if
applicable, necessary to convey the wastewater from the end of the collection
system to the wastewater treatment plant.
   PERMITTEE or PERMIT HOLDER. Any person, firm, association, corporation or
trust which owns, operates, processes or controls an establishment or plant
being operated under a valid industrial waste permit to discharge waste into
the sewer system.
   PRODUCER. Any person, firm, association, corporation or trust which owns,
operates, possesses or controls an establishment or plant, whether or not a
permittee.
   PROPERTY LINE. The boundary between the property owned by a user and
property owned by the town or the wastewater treatment system.
   REPLACEMENT. Those expenditures made for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories and/or appurtenances during the useful life of the treatment works,
which are necessary to maintain the capacity and performance of the treatment
works for which they were designed and constructed.
   RESIDENTIAL UNITS.
      (1)   FAMILY. One or more person occupying a premise and living as a
single housekeeping unit as distinguished from a group occupying a
boardinghouse, lodging house or hotel.
      (2)   MOBILE HOME DWELLING/INTEGRATED HOME. A structure transportable in
one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be
used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation, when connected to
the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning
and electrical system contained therein.
      (3)   MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING. A building or portion thereof designed
for occupancy by three or more families.
      (4)   SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING. A building or pre-manufactured structure
designed for occupancy by one family.
      (5)   TWO-FAMILY DWELLING. A building designed for occupancy by two
families.
   RV DWELLING. A transportable structure which is designed to be used as a
dwelling with or without a permanent foundation, when connected to the required
utilities and has RV-type self containment, which means grey water, black water
and fresh water tanks.
   SEGMENT. A portion of a sewer line commencing at the exterior upflow invert
of a manhole and including all of that sewer line upflow to, and including, the
next manhole.
   SEPTAGE AND SCAVENGER WASTE. Any discharge of concentrated wastewater into
the system from a non-continuous source and shall include sludge removed from
septic tanks and the accumulated waste from RVs.
   SERVICE LINE. The sewer line from the property line of a customer to the
point in the collection system where the discharge from the customer joins the
discharge from one or more additional customers.
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
   SOURCE. The point, located at or within five feet of a structure from whence
wastewater initially enters the wastewater collection system.
   STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION. A coded classification of industries
based upon economic activity developed by the U.S. Department of Commerce as
published in the Standard Industrial Classifications Manual, 1972, Office of
Management and Budget and its amendments.
   STANDARD METHODS. The procedure as described in the most current edition of
Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the
American Health Association, or the most current edition of Manual of Methods
for Chemical Analysis of Water and Wastes, published by the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS). Solids measured in milligrams per liter that either
float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, wastewater or other
liquids and which are largely removable by a laboratory filtration device, as
defined in Standard Methods, as defined herein.
   SYSTEM DESIGN CAPACITY. The design capacity for normal domestic wastewater
as established by accepted engineering standards.
   TOTAL DEVELOPED COST. The total cost of materials, labor, design, finance,
property acquisition and management necessary to complete all or a portion of a
collection system or treatment plant.
   TOTAL ORGANIC CARBON (TOC). The total of all organic compounds expressed in
milligrams per liter as determined by the combustion-infrared method prescribed
by approved laboratory procedure.
   TOWN ENGINEER. A registered professional engineer qualified in all
applicable aspects of standard sewer design.
   TREATMENT PARAMETER. A fundamental characteristic of sewage around which
treatment is designed, such as, but not limited to flow, BOD, suspended solids
and phosphorus.
   UPFLOW. The direction in a sewer line opposite the direction of flow.
   USER. Any person, lot, parcel of land, building, premises, municipal
corporation or other political subdivision that discharges, causes or permits
the discharge of wastewater in the sewer system.
   USER FEES. The monthly fees collected from each “user” in return for
treating the “wastewater” produced by the “source”.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT. The portion of a wastewater treatment system
commencing at manhole one, the most downstream manhole, and including all
devices, holding areas, buildings, property and equipment involved in the
actual treatment of the wastewater and the disposal of the effluent.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEM. All facilities including the “wastewater
treatment plant” and “collection system” for collecting, pumping, treating and
disposing of wastewater, the residue thereof and the effluent water. A
WASTEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEM is owned by the “wastewater treatment system
owner”. A collection system may be maintained by a wastewater treatment system
manager or the wastewater treatment system owner.
   WATER CLOSET. Toilet existing within a residential or commercial structure
connected directly to a sanitary sewer system. This shall exclude recreational
vehicle toilets that are connected to a holding tank.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT DEPARTMENT. The town or such person, firm, authority or
department as may be designated by the town to be the responsible
administrative body of the wastewater treatment system.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEM OWNER. The individual, company or municipality
who, at any given time, holds title to the improvements described as the
wastewater treatment system.
(Prior Code, § 16-1-1) (Ord. 91-02, passed - -1991; Ord. 91-04, passed - -1991;
Res. 91-09, passed - -1991; Ord. 92-04, passed - -1992; Res. 92-04, passed - -
1992; Res. 94-22, passed - -1994; Ord. 10-01, passed - -2010; Ord. 18-02,
passed 5-18-2018)
§ 51.02 SEWER CONNECTION PERMIT REQUIREMENTS; FEES.
   (A)   It is prohibited for any person to tap or connect or cause to be
tapped or connected any service, drain or other pipe to the sewer system or to
connect its property to or with any such tap, drain or other pipe connected
with said sewer system without first applying for and obtaining connection
authorization from the Department in coordination with the town’s Building
Department. This authorization is to be issued prior to any town building
permit required for any construction to be conducted in connection therewith.
   (B)   (1)   It is the duty of the town, before issuing said authorization to
connect, to investigate and inquire into the conditions of all proposed
connections to such sewer system for the purposed of ascertaining whether same
can be made in a proper manner. In the event the Department finds that the
proposed connection can be made or installed in a proper manner and upon
receipt of a properly prepared and executed application and upon receipt by the
Department of the applicable fee as computed in accordance with §
51.03 of this chapter, it shall be the Department’s duty to issue to the
applicant a permit to make or install said proposed connection in accordance
with the adopted fee schedule.
      (2)   The permit shall apply to the type of user specified on the permit
and shall not be transferable. The permit will expire in the event that a
change of use occurs, a new structure is constructed or an old structure is
enlarged.
   (C)   The Department shall keep a record of all permits issued and all taps
and connections made. The records shall include the names of owners of the
property, their agents or to whom the permit was issued or for whom the tap or
connection was made.
   (D)   All applications for service which would result in the actual total
system capacity exceeding the system design capacity, will be rejected.
   (E)   The Council, on the recommendation of the Town Manager, may prescribe
by resolution such additional regulations and requirements governing
connections and the use of said sewer system as may be proper and expedient.
(Prior Code, § 16-1-1) (Ord. 91-02, passed - -1991; Ord. 91-04, passed - -1991;
Res. 91-09, passed - -1991; Ord. 92-04, passed - -1992; Res. 92-04, passed - -
1992; Res. 94-22, passed - -1994; Res. 01-06, passed - -2001; Ord. 10-01,
passed - -2010; Ord. 18-02, passed 5-8-2018)
§ 51.03 SEWER CAPACITY FEE; CONNECTION FEES.
   (A)   Property owners requiring sewer connection for Phase I prior to 10-3-
1994 shall be connected without charge. After 10-3-1994, any property owner
within the Phase I service area shall be required to pay all designated fees
including the connection charge.
   (B)   All properties connecting to the sewer shall connect all structures:
RV spaces; mobile homes; commercial establishments or facilities which generate
wastewater within that property. No portions or partial service will be
allowed.
   (C)   The actual rates and categories will be set by resolution which may be
amended from time to time. The rates will be established in compliance with the
public hearing requirements of A.R.S. § 9-511.01.
(Prior Code, § 16-1-3) (Ord. 91-02, passed - -1991; Ord. 91-04, passed - -1991;
Res. 91-09, passed - -1991; Ord. 92-04, passed - -1992; Res. 92-04, passed - -
1992; Res. 94-22, passed - -1994; Res. 95-16, passed - -1995; Res. 96-05,
passed - -1996; Res. 98-09, passed - -1998; Res. 01-06, passed - -2001; Ord.
10-01, passed - -2010; Res. 22-12, passed 7-12-2022)
§ 51.04 CONNECTION REQUIRED; EXPENSES; ABATEMENT OF EXISTING FACILITIES.
   (A)   All persons owning, leasing or using real property, buildings or
fixtures within the service area of the wastewater treatment system may cause
all structures located on said property to be connected with said sewer system
by submitting the appropriate application and paying the appropriate fees. All
expenses of such connection within the property line (lateral lines) shall be
borne by the owner of said property or building, or the person using or leasing
the same.
   (B)   It is prohibited for any person who connects to the wastewater
treatment system to fail to abate, in conformance with the applicable
standards, all cesspools, septic tanks, leach lines, privies and open and
unconnected drains within structures and property connected to the wastewater
system. All abated cesspools, septic tanks, leach lines and privies shall be
inspected and approved by a department or town representative prior to final
connection to the wastewater system.
   (C)   All lots, parcels or tracts by which the sewer line passes or whose
property line is within 200 feet of the sewer which are not connected to the
sewer in accordance with §
51.02 of this chapter shall connect to the sewer within 90 days of notice. Any
line extensions from the sewer to the lot’s, parcel’s or tract’s property line
shall be at the expense of the town. As to any provisions of this chapter that
conflict with or contravene this division (C), this division (C) shall prevail
and be construed as if to give a consistent meaning to such sections.
Exemptions shall be given by the town when the cost of connection is not
financially viable. A sewer line extension is generally determined to be
financially viable if that extension generates sufficient flow in sewage and
subsequent connection fees and monthly user fees to cover associated
development costs, debt retirement and its pro rata share of operation and
maintenance costs as determined by the Department.
   (D)   All new residential, commercial or industrial developments shall
connect to the sewer if the sewer is within 200 feet of the property line and
shall pay the appropriate fees. Exemptions shall be given by the town when the
cost of connection does not meet cost effectiveness.
   (E)   After completion of any new sewer line development, property owner
connecting to the sewer shall have six months to connect to the system. For
those property owners who may require additional time, a written request for a
maximum three-month extension shall be submitted to the Public Utilities
Department for consideration. The request shall be presented 60 days prior to
the imposed connection time limit.
   (F)   Any parcel produced from a parcel split shall be required to connect
to the sewer, as per division (D) above.
   (G)   Any existing non-conforming use parcel of land shall be required to
connect to the sewer, as per division (D) above.
(Prior Code, § 16-1-4) (Ord. 91-02, passed - -1991; Ord. 91-04, passed - -1991;
Res. 91-09, passed - -1991; Ord. 92-04, passed - -1992; Res. 92-04, passed - -
1992; Res. 94-22, passed - -1994; Ord. 98-04, passed - -1998; Ord. 10-01,
passed - -2010)
§ 51.05 SPECIFIC SEWER SERVICE AREAS AND AREA-SPECIFIC SEWER LINE EXTENSION
FEES.
   (A)   The Department may recommend to the Council the acceptance of a
specific sewer service area and the establishment of an area-specific sewer
extension fee if:
      (1)   An applicant for a permit to construct and extend a sewer line
requests that the Department approve construction of a sewer line with a
capacity in excess of the size required to serve his development;
      (2)   The Department finds that such construction is:
         (a)   In accordance with the sewer service plan of the town;
         (b)   The construction is in the public interest; and
         (c)   The sewer line extension would have sufficient capacity to serve
property not owned by applicant.
      (3)   The owner of the development submits plans and specifications for
construction of the sewer in that service area to the Department for review and
approval.
   (B)   The Department may establish a specific sewer service area and an
area-specific sewer line extension fee. A specific sewer service area and/or
fee shall contain the following:
      (1)   A description or map showing the specific sewer service area;
      (2)   The cost of construction and installation of the sewer line and
related facilities or a method to determine those costs; and
      (3)   A requirement that all landowners or other persons who connect to
the sewer line extension shall pay, to the Department an amount equal to their
pro rata share of the connection fee (in accordance with division (A) above) or
a fee based on parcel, lot, or tract or another appropriate method approved by
the town. These payments will pay for the cost of the plant, the collections
system and related facilities and administrative costs of the Department
incurred in administering the specific sewer service area.
   (C)   Prior to connection of the wastewater treatment system lines to the
sewer line extension and area-specific sewer line, the Department shall require
such persons to pay their pro rata share of the cost as set forth in division
(B)(3) above.
   (D)   (1)   Upon the recommendation of the Department, the wastewater
treatment system may advance a portion, or all, of the costs of construction of
a sewer line extension or a sewage lift station with a capacity to serve a
specific sewer service area and may establish an area-specific sewer line
extension fee pursuant to division (C) above.
      (2)   The area-specific sewer line extension fee shall be utilized to
reimburse the Department for the cost of construction of the sewer line
extension and/or lift station.
   (E)   (1)   Sewer line extensions may be granted by the Department at no
cost to the user based on the financial viability of the extension and the
projected user fees to be collected from additional system users connected to
extension.
      (2)   A sewer line extension is generally determined to be financially
viable if that extension generates sufficient flow in sewage and subsequent
connection fees and monthly user fees to cover associated development costs,
debt retirement and its pro rata share of operation and maintenance costs as
determined by the Department.
   (F)   If the developer is required to pay for an oversized sewer in order to
facilitate future connections between the town interceptor and the newly
developed property, the town will enter into a development agreement with the
developer which will outline reimbursement for the cost of the oversized
portions of the sewer.
(Prior Code, § 16-1-7) (Ord. 91-02, passed - -1991; Ord. 91-04, passed - -1991;
Res. 91-09, passed - -1991; Ord. 92-04, passed - -1992; Res. 92-04, passed - -
1992; Res. 94-22, passed - -1994; Ord. 00-04, passed - -2000; Ord. 10-01,
passed - -2010)
§ 51.06 WATER CLOSET REQUIRED.
   It is prohibited for any person to occupy a residence or dwelling
permanently connected to the wastewater treatment and collection system unless
such residence or dwelling is equipped with a water closet in good working
order, properly connected with the sanitary sewer where such sanitary sewer is
available or connected to an on-site wastewater disposal facility in good
working order.
(Prior Code, § 16-1-8) (Ord. 91-02, passed - -1991; Ord. 91-04, passed - -1991;
Res. 91-09, passed - -1991; Ord. 92-04, passed - -1992; Res. 92-04, passed - -
1992; Res. 94-22, passed - -1994; Ord. 10-01, passed - -2010) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.07 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   (A)   Any person who interferes with the officers or agents of the
Department in the discharge of their duties or who violate any of the
provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. Such interferences
include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   The tapping of either main or lateral sewer pipe belonging to the
system;
      (2)   Laying, connecting, inspecting or repairing of either main or
lateral sewer pipes;
      (3)   The excavating, either directly or indirectly, of a street or alley
for the purpose of connecting with the sewer system without first obtaining a
permit from the Department and the town’s Building Department;
      (4)   Illegal use of the wastewater treatment and collection system
including, but not limited to:
         (a)   Illegal deposit of any liquid or solid waste known to be not in
compliance within acceptable waste treatment requirements;
         (b)   Illegal connection of additional sources of sewer system (i.e.,
RVs connected to single-family residential sewer laterals); and
         (c)   Illegal operation of a commercial dump station connected to the
wastewater system without first obtaining a dump station operation permit.
      (5)   It is unlawful for any person whose property is connected to the
wastewater system to allow any individual to dump septage into the wastewater
system through their lawful connection without first paying the appropriate
connection fees and monthly user fees.
   (B)   No person shall discharge the contents of a swimming pool into a
sanitary sewer.
   (C)   No person shall connect roof drains or storm water drains to the
sanitary sewer.
(Prior Code, § 16-1-9) (Ord. 91-02, passed - -1991; Ord. 91-04, passed - -1991;
Res. 91-09, passed - -1991; Ord. 92-04, passed - -1992; Res. 92-04, passed - -
1992; Res. 94-22, passed - -1994; Ord. 10-01, passed - -2010) Penalty, see §
51.99
PUBLIC SEWER SYSTEM EXTENSIONS
§ 51.20 SIZE REQUIREMENTS FOR PUBLIC SEWER AND SERVICE LATERALS.
   (A)   Gravity public sewers shall be eight inches in diameter, or larger, to
be accepted as part of the town’s wastewater collection system, except as
provided in division (B) below.
   (B)   Six-inch diameter public sewers will be accepted as part of the town’s
wastewater collection system when:
      (1)   The sewer serves only a small restricted area and is designed so
that it cannot be extended to serve any additional area;
      (2)   The service does not exceed 250 feet in length; or
      (3)   A manhole is located at the upstream terminus of the sewer.
   (C)   The minimum size of a service lateral connecting to a public sewer
shall be four inches in diameter.
(Prior Code, § 16-1-5) (Ord. 91-02, passed - -1991; Ord. 91-04, passed - -1991;
Res. 91-09, passed - -1991; Ord. 92-04, passed - -1992; Res. 92-04, passed - -
1992; Res. 94-22, passed - -1994; Ord. 00-04, passed - -2000; Ord. 10-01,
passed - -2010)
§ 51.21 ENGINEERING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The design and engineering of all public sewers shall be in
conformance with the Town of Quartzsite’s Standard Specifications for Utility
Installations.
   (B)   All public sewers must be of a size to provide adequate capacity to
service a specific designated area.
   (C)   Construction drawings for such public sewers shall be certified by a
registered engineer and shall be submitted to the Town Engineer for approval.
   (D)   A letter of acknowledgment shall be submitted by the developer
concurrently with the submittal of proposed project design drawings. Included
in the letter will be:
      (1)   Identification of the proposed project;
      (2)   Identification of the project developer; and
      (3)   Acknowledgment of the project developer that:
         (a)   The developer shall cause his or her professional engineer to
submit all documents, required by the state’s Department of Environmental
Quality (ADEQ) Engineering Bulletin No. 10, as applicable, to the ADHS for
review and approval and to obtain all permits required to facilitate completion
of the proposed project;
         (b)   The developer shall contract a professional engineer to provide
detailed construction inspection services for the proposed project. Upon
completion of the project, the developer’s engineer shall complete the ADEQ
“approval of construction” documentation. Concurrently, the developer’s
engineer shall forward a copy of same, including one set of Mylar, reproducible
as-built drawings, affixed with the developer’s engineer’s seal, and one
electronic file to the town’s Department of Public Utilities and Town Engineer
for review and approval; and
         (c)   Upon issuance of the approval of construction by ADEQ final
acceptance of the facility will be acknowledged by the town and the one-year
warranty period shall commence.
(Prior Code, § 16-1-5) (Ord. 91-02, passed - -1991; Ord. 91-04, passed - -1991;
Res. 91-09, passed - -1991; Ord. 92-04, passed - -1992; Res. 92-04, passed - -
1992; Res. 94-22, passed - -1994; Ord. 00-04, passed - -2000; Ord. 10-01,
passed - -2010)
§ 51.22 CONDITIONS OF PUBLIC SEWER EXTENSIONS.
   (A)   All extensions to the town’s wastewater collection system shall begin
at the nearest adequate public sewer, as determined by the Department and the
Town Engineer.
   (B)   A public sewer extension shall be required to extend across the total
frontage of the property or development to be served.
   (C)   Where the property or development is on a corner and includes two
frontages, total frontage shall mean extension across one exterior side of the
property or of the development, as determined by the Town Engineer in
accordance with Sanitary Sewer Collection System Master Plan. All public sewer
extensions will be eligible for reimbursements as provided in §§
51.35 through
51.41 of this chapter.
   (D)   The extension shall terminate at an upstream manhole, as determined by
the town with respect to the complete system, rather than at the end of the
particular extension.
   (E)   Public sewer extension shall be installed only in public streets,
alleys, roads, highways and other public and private property where
satisfactory rights-of-way can be obtained by the town.
   (F)   The town has no responsibility to maintain or repair the surface of
any right-of-way or easement other than to restore it to its original condition
following installation of any sewer extension.
(Prior Code, § 16-1-5) (Ord. 91-02, passed - -1991; Ord. 91-04, passed - -1991;
Res. 91-09, passed - -1991; Ord. 92-04, passed - -1992; Res. 92-04, passed - -
1992; Res. 94-22, passed - -1994; Ord. 00-04, passed - -2000; Ord. 10-01,
passed - -2010)
§ 51.23 PUBLIC SEWER EXTENSIONS WITHIN OR BOUNDING A DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   Public sewers shall be installed to size, grade and location as
approved by the Town Engineer and in conformance with town and ADEQ standards.
Service laterals shall be installed to each lot within the development prior to
paving the adjacent street. Where it is necessary to extend public sewer from
an existing adequate sewer to the development, the developer will be required
to pay full cost of the line extension. The town will enter into a
reimbursement agreement with the developer as provided in §§
51.35 through
51.41 of this chapter.
   (B)   The developer shall install service laterals, manholes and other
appurtenances including, but not limited to, sewer clean out, shut off valve at
his or her expense concurrently with the public sewer construction in the
development. All sewer improvements installed by a developer shall be
guaranteed by the developer against any and all defects for a period of one-
year after acceptance of the installation by the town and ADEQ.
   (C)   The developer shall be responsible for ensuring that all conditions
specified on the approved construction drawings have been met and certified by
the Town Engineer prior to final acceptance of the system by the town.
   (D)   In the event that a public sewer is planned by a developer, and the
area served by the development is smaller in size than the maximum area to be
serviced by the proposed public sewer extension and its ultimate branches and
laterals, the public sewer line shall be designed, engineered and constructed
to service the maximum service area, as defined by the Sanitary Sewer
Collection System Mater Plan.
   (E)   In the event that the area to be developed is smaller than the maximum
area to be serviced by the proposed public sewer, the town may enter into a
reimbursement agreement with the developer under provisions of §§
51.35 through
51.41 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 16-1-5) (Ord. 91-02, passed - -1991; Ord. 91-04, passed - -1991;
Res. 91-09, passed - -1991; Ord. 92-04, passed - -1992; Res. 92-04, passed - -
1992; Res. 94-22, passed - -1994; Ord. 00-04, passed - -2000; Ord. 10-01,
passed - -2010)
§ 51.24 TRUNK SEWER EXTENSION BY OTHERS.
   (A)   Conformed to requirements of §§
51.20 through
51.24 of this chapter. Trunk sewer extensions, when undertaken by others, shall
conform to the requirements of this subchapter.
   (B)   Sanitary Sewer Collection Master Plan. All trunk sewer extension shall
conform to the Sanitary Sewer Collection System Master Plan.
   (C)   Plans and specifications.
      (1)   The town shall not perform field engineering or provide detailed
plans and specifications for the developer.
      (2)   Final detailed plans and specifications, easements and agreements
for the trunk sewer extension and/or connection(s) must be signed and approved
by the town and ADEQ before construction begins.
      (3)   The construction shall meet town and ADEQ specifications, and will
be subject to inspection by the Town Engineer during this construction.
   (D)   Adequate capacity. The maximum area to be served by any proposed trunk
sewer extension and its ultimate branches shall be determined by the town based
on the Sanitary Sewer Collection System Master Plan and ADEQ approval.
   (E)   Contracting for construction.
      (1)   Sealed bids shall be required for any proposed trunk sewer line on
which a reimbursement agreement is to be written. The bids shall be submitted
to the town for review after having been received and reviewed by the
developer.
      (2)   The town as well as the developer shall have the right to reject
any and all bids. Project construction cost shall be approved by the town prior
to commencement of construction.
      (3)   Collector sewers, serviced laterals and their appurtenances shall
not be included in the trunk sewer project.
   (F)   Reimbursement of costs where applicable. No costs will be reimbursed,
except on the basis of a reimbursement agreement in accordance with provisions
of §§
51.35 through
51.41 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 16-1-5) (Ord. 91-02, passed - -1991; Ord. 91-04, passed - -1991;
Res. 91-09, passed - -1991; Ord. 92-04, passed - -1992; Res. 92-04, passed - -
1992; Res. 94-22, passed - -1994; Ord. 00-04, passed - -2000; Ord. 10-01,
passed - -2010)
REIMBURSEMENT AGREEMENTS
§ 51.35 ELIGIBILITY.
   (A)   When a public sewer extension is installed outside or abutting the
applicant’s lot, lots, subdivision or development, the applicant may be
eligible for a public sewer extension reimbursement.
   (B)   The town will enter into an agreement with the original applicant of
the public sewer extension and will collect and return to the applicant, as
provided in the agreement, a public sewer reimbursement charge from parties
wishing to make lateral connection to the sewer extension.
   (C)   To be eligible for a reimbursement agreement, the original applicant
for the public sewer extension must submit the certified costs of the extension
as prescribed in §
51.36 of this chapter within 120 days from the date of acceptance of the line
extension by the town. Eligibility must be established in a timely manner so
that project records and the utility atlas are fully updated. The applicant
will be notified in writing of the availability of a reimbursement agreement by
the Public Utilities Department.
(Prior Code, § 16-1-6) (Ord. 91-02, passed - -1991; Ord. 91-04, passed - -1991;
Res. 91-09, passed - -1991; Ord. 92-04, passed - -1992; Res. 92-04, passed - -
1992; Res. 94-22, passed - -1994; Ord. 00-04, passed - -2000; Ord. 10-01,
passed - -2010)
§ 51.36 REIMBURSEMENT CHARGE.
   (A)   A public sewer reimbursement charge will be based on either one-half
the cost per lineal foot of the sewer main extension abutting the premises of
the part desiring to obtain a connection or connections to the main, or by an
agreed upon fee per acre for the area served by the connection.
   (B)   A certified cost per lineal foot of the sewer main extension shall be
obtained by taking the total cost of construction of the extension divided by
the total lineal feet of the sewer main extension installed.
   (C)   The per parcel cost for reimbursement shall be obtained by one of the
following methods, as appropriate:
      (1)   Dividing the total cost of construction of the sewer main extension
by the total number of parcels to be served by the extension and subtracting
the number of parcels to be served in the applicant’s development; or
      (2)   Determining the difference between the total cost of construction
of the sewer main extension and the cost for constructing an extension adequate
to serve only the area of the applicant’s development and dividing the
difference by the number of parcels served in addition to the applicant’s
development.
(Prior Code, § 16-1-6) (Ord. 91-02, passed - -1991; Ord. 91-04, passed - -1991;
Res. 91-09, passed - -1991; Ord. 92-04, passed - -1992; Res. 92-04, passed - -
1992; Res. 94-22, passed - -1994; Ord. 00-04, passed - -2000; Ord. 10-01,
passed - -2010)
§ 51.37 COST OF CONSTRUCTION.
   The cost of construction of a main extension shall include in addition to
the actual materials and installation costs of piping, manholes, wyes and other
appurtenances, including, but not limited to, sewer clean out shut off valve
and the engineering costs for preparation of plans and specifications, and
costs for inspection and staking. The cost of service laterals shall not be
included in the cost of construction of the sewer main extension for
reimbursement purposes.
(Prior Code, § 16-1-6) (Ord. 91-02, passed - -1991; Ord. 91-04, passed - -1991;
Res. 91-09, passed - -1991; Ord. 92-04, passed - -1992; Res. 92-04, passed - -
1992; Res. 94-22, passed - -1994; Ord. 00-04, passed - -2000; Ord. 10-01,
passed - -2010)
§ 51.38 PAYMENT BY APPLICANT FOR SERVICE CONNECTION.
   (A)   Every applicant for a service connection from a public sewer which is
subject to a reimbursement agreement shall pay the appropriate public sewer
reimbursement charge.
   (B)   Applicants shall pay the public sewer reimbursement charge before
construction of their connection to the sewer extension. This charge shall be
in addition to all other applicable charges provided by these regulations,
including the direct connection charge, inspection fees and capacity charges.
(Prior Code, § 16-1-6) (Ord. 91-02, passed - -1991; Ord. 91-04, passed - -1991;
Res. 91-09, passed - -1991; Ord. 92-04, passed - -1992; Res. 92-04, passed - -
1992; Res. 94-22, passed - -1994; Ord. 00-04, passed - -2000; Ord. 10-01,
passed - -2010)
§ 51.39 MAXIMUM AMOUNT OF REIMBURSEMENT.
   (A)   The maximum amount of any reimbursement shall be identified in the
agreement and shall not exceed 100% of the total certified construction cost of
the extension, plus accumulated interest. Interest to be compounded yearly and
calculated based on the interest rate of U.S. Government Treasure Bills dated
January 1 of each year following the date of acceptance of the line extension.
The interest rate for the last months of a reimbursement period, if short of a
full year, shall be at the interest rate as of January 1 of that year.
   (B)   The reimbursement cost shall be calculated using the reimbursement
charge and multiplying it by the appropriate interest for each one-year period
or portion of one-year period. Interest begins at the date of acceptance of the
line and ends at the date of connection to that line by adding the calculated
interest to be calculated in the succeeding year’s period to the reimbursement
charge amount before that period’s interest is calculated. The reimbursement
cost will then be the sum of the reimbursement charge and each of the period’s
interest amounts.
(Prior Code, § 16-1-6) (Ord. 91-02, passed - -1991; Ord. 91-04, passed - -1991;
Res. 91-09, passed - -1991; Ord. 92-04, passed - -1992; Res. 92-04, passed - -
1992; Res. 94-22, passed - -1994; Ord. 00-04, passed - -2000; Ord. 10-01,
passed - -2010)
§ 51.40 TERMS OF AGREEMENT.
   The reimbursement agreement shall have a maximum term of five years and
shall close at the end of that period whether or not the total amount of
reimbursement has been made.
(Prior Code, § 16-1-6) (Ord. 91-02, passed - -1991; Ord. 91-04, passed - -1991;
Res. 91-09, passed - -1991; Ord. 92-04, passed - -1992; Res. 92-04, passed - -
1992; Res. 94-22, passed - -1994; Ord. 00-04, passed - -2000; Ord. 10-01,
passed - -2010)
§ 51.41 APPLICABILITY.
   All reimbursement agreements shall comply with the above terms.
(Prior Code, § 16-1-6) (Ord. 91-02, passed - -1991; Ord. 91-04, passed - -1991;
Res. 91-09, passed - -1991; Ord. 92-04, passed - -1992; Res. 92-04, passed - -
1992; Res. 94-22, passed - -1994; Ord. 00-04, passed - -2000; Ord. 10-01,
passed - -2010)
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person found violating the provisions of this chapter shall be
subject to the following penalties and cost recovery.
      (1)   Fines shall be those as set forth for a Class I misdemeanor.
      (2)   In addition to the fine, costs equal to the remedy of the violation
shall be assessed. Those costs include, but are not limited to:
         (a)   Uncovering, inspecting, reinstalling (where required) and
covering the tap;
         (b)   Uncovering, inspecting, relaying or repairing the sewer;
         (c)   Testing, re-excavating (where required), inspecting, backfilling
and compacting of a street or alley excavated without a permit;
         (d)   Correcting or repairing any physical damage caused by an illegal
discharge; and
         (e)   Correcting any process malfunctions and the resultant ADEQ fines
(if accessed) caused by an illegal discharge.
(Prior Code, § 16-1-10)
   (B)   (1)   Violations of §
51.04(C) of this chapter shall consist of a criminal penalty of a Class I
misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for not more than 180 days, or a fine
of up to $2,500, or both fine and imprisonment.
      (2)   Violations of §
51.04(D) of this chapter may consist of a criminal penalty of a Class I
misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for not more than 180 days, or a fine
of up to $2,500, or both fine and imprisonment.
(Prior Code, § 16-1-4)
(Ord. 91-02, passed - -1991; Ord. 91-04, passed - -1991; Res. 91-09, passed - -
1991; Ord. 92-04, passed - -1992; Res. 92-04, passed - -1992; Res. 94-22,
passed - -1994; Ord. 10-01, passed - -2010)
CHAPTER 52: WASTEWATER TREATMENT, DISCHARGE AND REQUIREMENTS
Section
General Provisions
   
52.01   Septic tank, scavenger waste haulers and commercial dump stations
   
52.02   Accidental discharges
   
52.03   Discharge restrictions
   
52.04   Industrial pretreatment requirements
   
52.05   Violations
   
52.06   Easements
Wastewater Treatment Department
   
52.20   Design, review and issuance of construction permit
   
52.21   Inspection
   
52.22   Collection of fees and miscellaneous powers
Sewer Fees
   
52.35   Necessity for charges
   
52.36   Charges established
   
52.37   Rate establishment procedures
   
52.38   Sewer use charge; determination of payments and charges
   
52.39   Determination of wastewater quality
   
52.40   Sewer system capacity fee
   
52.41   Tap fees
   
52.42   Special assessments
   
52.43   Septage and scavenger waste fees
   
52.44   Administrative fees
   
52.45   Special assessment fees
   
52.46   Delinquent charges
   
52.47   Distribution of revenue and establishment of special funds
Industrial User Requirements
   
52.60   Sewer charges
   
52.61   Permits required
   
52.62   Permit application requirements and conditions
   
52.63   Industrial agreements
   
52.64   Waste monitoring program
   
52.65   Reporting requirements
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 52.01 SEPTIC TANK, SCAVENGER WASTE HAULERS AND COMMERCIAL DUMP STATIONS.
   (A)   Unlawful. It is unlawful to discharge or to allow to discharge septage
and/or scavenger wastes into the system without a septage discharge permit.
   (B)   Permit to discharge. All person or companies wishing to operate a
commercial dump station, or to discharge septage or scavenger wastes into the
sewer system must first obtain a scavenger waste discharge permit from the
Department. Permit applications shall include information on company ownership,
identification and license number of all trucks to be used for delivery of
waste to sewer facilities. It shall also include truck capacity and other
information relating to the method of metering the septage or scavenger wastes
into the system. Permit applications shall be signed by a responsible owner or
manager of the company applying for permission to discharge. All waste hauling
equipment and waste collection tanks operated by companies with permits shall
be registered with the Department and shall be identifiable by display of an
assigned registration number and the truck or tank capacity in gallons.
   (C)   Permit to operate dump station. All persons wishing to operate a dump
station for the purpose of collection of septage from non-continuous sources
shall first apply for and receive a dump station permit from the Department.
All dump stations must consist of holding tanks with the capability of being
sealed and locked, thus prohibiting collection when not in use. Each tank must
be independently connected to the wastewater collection system and contain a
lockable valve by which the discharge of the collected septage shall be
regulated.
      (1)   The permits provided for in this section shall be issued by the
Department to all applicants who comply with the terms and conditions set forth
in this section and who pay the permit fee set annually by Council resolution,
which fee reasonably corresponds to the expenses incurred in processing the
application, and which fee is proportionally greater for accepting septic and/
or scavenger wastes for discharge into the system.
      (2)   The permits issued, as provided for in this section, shall expire
one year after the date of issuance.
      (3)   Non-compliance with any part of this section or subsequent
regulations shall subject the permit holder to revocation of permit to utilize
the services of the town sewer system for disposal of septic and/or scavenger
wastes. Re-issuance of permit to discharge after revocation shall be at the
discretion of the Department and shall be made subject to such conditions as it
deems appropriate.
   (D)   Regulations. The Council, by resolution, shall establish such
regulations as deemed necessary to control the discharge of scavenger wastes to
the sewer system.
   (E)   Provision of services.
      (1)   Normal wastes from septic tanks, sewage treatment plants and the
like shall with the appropriate permit be discharged routinely. Permission to
discharge other wastes that are not readily biodegradable or are not known to
be compatible to the operation of wastewater treatment plants shall be refused.
Special request shall be made to the Department prior to discharge of any
material of questionable acceptability. Some specific reasons for refusal of
service shall include:
         (a)   Material deleterious to treatment plant operation or operators,
such as oils, greases, gasoline, toxins, volatile solvents, sand, metallic
particles or paints;
         (b)   Materials which would cause unusual expense in handling and
treatment unless prior arrangements have been made for the payment of
additional costs of service; and
         (c)   Materials which would inhibit the performance of the treatment
plant, such as acids, plating wastes or toxic materials.
      (2)   The discharge of septic and/or scavenger wastes shall be permitted
only at locations and during such hours as shall be established by the
Department. The discharge of septic and/or scavenger wastes to the sewer system
at any other location is prohibited.
   (F)   Dump stations. Discharge of septage into the wastewater collection
system from commercial dump station collection tanks shall be supervised by a
Department representative according to the following procedure.
      (1)   Amount of septage collected in tank(s) shall be verified by
department representative. Tank(s) shall then be sealed by Department
representative to prevent further collection of septage.
      (2)   Tank(s) will be opened to allow septage discharge into collection
system at an acceptable discharge rate to be determined by Department
representative based upon current system loading.
      (3)   Upon notification that tank(s) are empty, a Department
representative shall unseal tank for acceptance of septage.
   (G)   Fees and charges. Fees and charges for treatment of normal septage
and/or scavenger wastes shall be based on the costs of providing such services
and on the expected overall average characteristics of such discharges which
shall be designated as 500 mg/l BOD and 500 mg/l SS. The department shall
designate characteristics on which to base charges in special situations, such
as discharges from sewage holding tanks, on submission of proof that waste
discharges have other than expected overall average concentrations and with
provision of positive identification procedures. Charges shall be billed at
monthly intervals or at the discretion of the Department and shall be
considered delinquent if not paid within 30 days of billing date. Delinquency
in payment shall be on the basis of revocation of permit. The actual rates and
categories will be set by resolution which shall be amended from time to time.
The rate shall be established in compliance with the public hearing
requirements of A.R.S. § 9-511.01. The fees shall be set periodically and shall
be based upon:
      (1)   The actual measured discharge or truck capacity as appropriate;
      (2)   The amount of BOD contained in the discharge;
      (3)   The amount of suspended solids contained in the discharge;
      (4)   A service fee for each load discharged; and
      (5)   Such other factors as are determined by the Council as pertinent.
(Prior Code, § 16-2-4)
§ 52.02 ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGES.
   (A)   Each permittee shall provide protection from accidental discharge of
prohibited materials or other wastes regulated by this code.
   (B)   For countermeasures to be taken by the Department to minimize damage
to the sanitary sewer system and/or degradation of the receiving waters, the
permittee shall notify the Department immediately upon accidentally discharging
wastes in violation of this code. This notification shall be followed within 15
days of the date of occurrence by a detailed written statement describing
causes of the accidental discharge and the measures being taken to prevent
future occurrence. Such notification will not relieve the permittee of
liability for any expense, loss or damage to the sanitary sewer system or for
any fines imposed on the Department on account thereof and/or for any
enforcement action pursuant to this occurrence.
   (C)   In order that officers, agents and employees of permittees be informed
of the Department’s requirements, the permittee shall make available to their
employees copies of this code, together with such other wastewater information
and notices which may be furnished by the Department from time to time for the
purpose of improving and making more effective water pollution control. A
notice shall be furnished and permanently posted on the permittee’s bulletin
board advising officers, agents and employees whom to call in case of an
accidental discharge in excess of the limits authorized by the permit.
   (D)   Any possible connection or entry point for a hazardous and/or
prohibited substance to the permittee’s plumbing or drainage system shall be
appropriately labeled to warn operating personnel against discharge of such
substance in violation of this section.
(Prior Code, § 16-2-5)
§ 52.03 DISCHARGE RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   The Department shall determine the acceptability or unacceptability of
any discharge to the system. Such a determination shall be made on the basis of
sound engineering and operational evaluations, taking into consideration the
nature and concentration of the discharge, its point of entry into the system,
its compatibility with other discharges in the system, its compatibility with
the treatment facility receiving it and all other factors pertinent to the
effect of the discharge on any part of the system or treatment process. The
Department shall impose charges on any user of the sewage works who discharges
wastes having a strength greater than normal sewage or containing non-
permissible quantities or prohibited substances into the public sewer system.
The charges so imposed shall be based on the extra costs incurred by the
Department in surveillance, sampling and testing of the discharges, additional
operating and maintenance expenses and any other actions required to identify,
handle, process or supplement normal activities due to the unauthorized
discharge of excessive strength or unusual character wastes, plus overhead
charges. Failure by a user to pay the charges and to provide such corrective
measures as may be required to prevent further unauthorized discharges, after
due notice by the Department and being given a reasonable time to comply, shall
be sufficient cause to discontinue sewer service to the premises.
   (B)   Unacceptable discharges shall include, but not necessarily be limited
to, those which have been determined by the Department to:
      (1)   Contain materials or substances which would constitute a hazard to
life of personnel engaged in inspection, maintenance and operation of the
system;
      (2)   Contain materials or substances which are toxic, as defined in this
code;
      (3)   Contain materials or substances which are in any way deleterious to
any part of the system;
      (4)   Contain concentrations of any toxic or deleterious materials or
substances in excess of any limits set thereon, in accordance with this code;
      (5)   Cause the Department to incur excessive expense in the handling or
treatment thereof;
      (6)   Be incompatible with the treatment process or inhibit the
performance of the treatment process at the town wastewater facility;
      (7)   Be of such volume or contain such BOD, suspended solids or other
material load which could cause the treatment facility to exceed its design
capabilities;
      (8)   Cause a treatment facility of the Department to fail to meet
effluent requirements set by state and federal regulatory agencies or cause
such effluent to have a degrading effect on the receiving body of water; and
      (9)   Contain viable pathogenic organisms in such quantities as to be a
hazard to public health.
   (C)   The Department shall refuse the service of the facilities to any
person whose discharge is determined by the Department to be unacceptable in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (D)   No person shall release or cause to be released or allow to run, leak
or escape into the sewer system any discharge containing any materials or
substances considered by the Department to be toxic, as defined in this code,
or to be in any way deleterious to any part of the sewer system or treatment
process. Certain materials shall, by their nature, be considered by the
Department to be toxic or deleterious, except in small quantities or
concentrations. Such materials or substances shall include by not necessarily
be limited to:
      (1)   Construction materials, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings,
metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastic, wood, paunch manure, fur, waste or
any solid or viscous substance capable of or causing obstruction to the flow in
sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewer system;
      (2)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquids, solids or gases;
      (3)   Steam or hot water above 105°F (40°C);
      (4)   Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may
solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 33°F and 150°F (1°C and
65°C);
      (5)   Any water or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.5
or having any other corrosive property apt to cause damage or hazard to
structures, equipment of the sewer system or personnel employed in its
operation;
      (6)   Any water or waste contain readily releasable cyanide (cyanide
released at a temperature of 150°F/65° and pH=2.5) in excess of two mg/l; any
water or water containing total cyanide in excess of five mg/l;
      (7)   Coal tar, its derivatives and waste;
      (8)   Any liquids or wastes containing toxic, radioactive, poisonous or
other substances in sufficient quantities or rate of flow as to injure or
interfere with any of the sewage treatment process, to cause corrosive
structural damage, to constitute a hazard to human beings or animals or to
create any hazard in the receiving waters; and
      (9)   Any storm water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, surface
drainage, cooling water or unpolluted process water.
   (E)   Certain toxic substances and pathogenic bacteria, admission of which
into the system would otherwise be prohibited, shall be acceptable in a
discharge if reduced by treatment at the source to a point that it will meet
the general purposes of these rules and regulations or come within any
applicable standards set thereon now or hereafter in accordance with these
regulations, or discharge in such small concentrations so as to not be
injurious to personnel; sewers; any biochemical, biological or other sewage
treatment process or receiving water. Such substances shall include, but not
necessarily be limited to:
      (1)   Any alcoholic, antibiotics, arsenic, bromine, iodine, chlorine,
copper, copper salts, creosols, creosotes, fluorine, formaldehydes, mercury,
phenols, phenol derivatives, silver, silver compounds, toxic dyes (organic or
mineral) or zinc;
      (2)   Any strong oxidizing agents, such as chromates, dichromates,
permanganates or peroxides;
      (3)   Any chemical compounds producing toxic, flammable or explosive
gases either upon acidification, alkalization, oxidation or reduction;
      (4)   Any strong reducing agents such as nitrates, sulfides, sulfites and
thiosulfates; and
      (5)   Any waste from industrial process, hospital procedures or
commercial processes containing viable pathogenic organisms.
   (F)   The following table lists the maximum allowable values of certain
materials in or characteristics of wastewater entering the sewer system. The
Department reserves the right to establish standards for substances not
contained in this list. In setting additional standards, the Department will
generally follow the standards of the Water Pollution Control Federation. In
defining and interpreting the values of the following table, reference shall be
made to Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, American
Waterworks Association, latest edition.
   (G)   (1)   Any discharge to the sewer system containing garbage may be made
acceptable by means of grinding and dilution; provided, however, that, the
installation of and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor are
subject to review and approval by the Department prior to such installation and
operation and are subject to periodic inspection by the Department thereafter.
Material or Characteristic Maximum Allowable Value
Material or Characteristic Maximum Allowable Value
Arsenic                    0.1 ppm
Boron                      1.0 ppm
Barium                     10.0 ppm
Chromium, total            10.0 ppm
Copper                     10.0 ppm
Cyanides                   2.0 ppm
Cadmium                    2.0 ppm
Lead                       0.1 ppm
Manganese                  0.5 ppm
Mercury                    0.05 ppm
Nickel                     10.0 ppm
Selenium                   0.1 ppm
Silver                     0.5 ppm
Zinc                       10.0 ppm
Iron                       25.0 ppm
Phenols                    0.5 ppm
Temperature                105°F
 
      (2)   The above limitations are intended to apply generally to all
industrial users within the sewer system. If, and when, state and federal
regulatory agency regulations require a specific pretreatment concentration for
a specific industry, whichever is the more stringent concentration level
between these regulations shall apply.
(Prior Code, § 16-2-6)
§ 52.04 INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Pretreatment will be required in the following instances and the
Department shall submit to the applicant the pretreatment levels which must be
obtained.
      (1)   If the Department determines upon the initial application for a
permit under this section that the proposed industrial waste must be pretreated
by the applicant to lower the level of any of the components of the industrial
waste discharge to the sewer.
      (2)   In the event that the Department must improve the discharge from
its wastewater treatment plant or plants, the Department shall require that a
permit holder install or enlarge pretreatment facilities to lower the affected
component of the permittee’s industrial waste discharge.
      (3)   If any wastewater prohibited under the conditions of this code is
produced, such producer shall pretreat the wastewater to the extent required to
comply with the standards established herein before discharging to any sewer.
      (4)   The acceptability of a pretreatment method for any given discharge,
an application for which has been made in accordance with this section and the
terms for the installation and use thereof, shall be reviewed by the
Department. Such a review shall be made on the basis of sound engineering and
operational evaluation, taking into consideration all factors pertinent to the
effect of the discharge, both before and after pretreatment on any part of the
system.
      (5)   Pretreatment facilities shall at all times be subject to inspection
by the Department in order to determine if such facilities are efficiently
performing the function for which they are installed.
      (6)   If the Department determines that a permittee, because of plant
expansion and/or changes in plant operations, has increased either the strength
or volume of the discharge, the Department may require additional pretreatment
to lower the level of the volume and/or any components of the industrial waste
before discharge, unless such permittee has previously made industrial cost
recovery payment for reservation of additional industrial capacity.
      (7)   Pretreatment facilities required under divisions (A)(1) through (A)
(7) above shall be provided, operated and maintained at the permit holder’s
expense.
   (B)   Any sludge or other material removed from the industrial waste by the
pretreatment facility shall be disposed of in accordance with applicable
federal, state and local laws.
   (C)   (1)   Dilution of waste discharged to the sanitary sewer system is
prohibited, whether accomplished by the combination of two or more waste
streams by a producer or producers, or by the addition of other liquids solely
for the purpose of diluting the quality of the waste discharge.
      (2)   One or more producers may, upon application and approval by the
Department, combine industrial waste streams prior to discharge to the town
sanitary sewer system if, and only if, such combination of industrial waste
streams produces a combined discharge of better quality than the two industrial
waste streams would have been if discharged separately. However, if one or more
producers are allowed to mix industrial waste streams to produce a better
discharge, the user charge established herein, based on the quality of its
industrial waste streams prior to combination, shall be paid to the town.
   (D)   (1)   Detailed plans showing any pretreatment facilities shall be
submitted to the Department for approval before construction of the facilities.
The review of such plans will in no way relieve such permit holders from the
responsibility of modifying and operating the facilities to produce an effluent
complying with the established conditions of the permit and federal
regulations. Any subsequent, significant changes in the approved facilities or
methods of operation shall be reported to the Department and must be reviewed
and approved by the Department as complying with the provisions herein
established.
      (2)   Furthermore, all facilities, methods of operation and discharges
must comply with the rules and regulations contained in 40 C.F.R. part 403.
   (E)   After the construction plans for such pretreatment plants have been
approved and a permit issued, the plans shall be placed on file in permanent
reproducible form with the Department without cost to the Department before a
connection permit will be issued.
(Prior Code, § 16-2-7)
§ 52.05 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   There shall be a penalty imposed for violation of any of the following
requirements, conditions, limitations or restrictions established in this code.
The fines shall be those as set forth for any code violation:
      (1)   Exceed quantity discharge limitations as set forth herein or as
made part of an industrial wastewater permit;
      (2)   Permit the discharge of excessive concentrations of substances
limited by this chapter or by an industrial wastewater permit issued pursuant
to this chapter;
      (3)   Permit the discharge of any substance prohibited by this code or by
a permit issued pursuant to this chapter;
      (4)   Fail to pay any applicable sewer charge established by this code;
and
      (5)   Knowingly misrepresent or omit any pertinent information from
application permits or reported required by this code.
   (B)   The imposition of a fine pursuant to this code shall not preclude the
Department from taking any other action necessary to recover fees, penalties or
damages due and owing and arising out of the same occurrence.
(Prior Code, § 16-2-8) (Ord. 98-04, passed - -1998)
§ 52.06 EASEMENTS.
   (A)   All property owners desiring the connection of the improvements on
their property to the sewer system of the town shall grant to the town, at no
charge, those easements necessary to properly effectuate the sewer connection
desired.
   (B)   All easements granted to the town shall be subject to the following
restrictions and conditions of use.
      (1)   No person, firm or corporation having charge of property subject to
easement in favor of the town shall hereafter construct, build or establish a
building upon the property subject to said easement. A BUILDING means a house,
commercial building, industrial building or any structure of a size or
construction that the moving thereof would cause great inconvenience to any
person.
      (2)   Should the owner of the property subject to an easement in favor of
the town construct a building thereon in violation of this code, the town shall
employ individuals to clear said property and charge the costs of the same to
the owner of the property. Nothing contained herein shall obligate the town to
compensate the owner of the property subject to the easement for the value of a
“building” cleared. The town shall take those steps as are required to work in
the easement and preserve the improvement, rather than clear the improvements.
   (C)   No person shall excavate deeper than three feet upon the property
subject to the easement in favor of the town without having first obtained a
permit therefor, as herein required. Such permit shall be issued by the town.
Applications for a permit to excavate upon property subject to easement in
favor of the town shall be made in writing to the town and shall state thereon
specifically the size of the space intended to be excavated and the purpose for
the excavation.
   (D)   No person shall plant any trees or shrubbery upon the property subject
to the easement in favor of the town without having secured a permit therefor.
Applications for such permit shall be made to the town. All trees and shrubs so
planted shall be placed subject to the direction and approval of the town. No
boulders, benches or fences shall be built or maintained upon the property
subject to the easement unless approved by the town.
   (E)   In the event any improvements are constructed within the boundaries of
the easement and these create any additional costs to the town because it must
incur additional expenses to repair, install or replace its sewer, the property
owner shall be charged all additional costs incurred.
(Prior Code, § 16-2-9) Penalty, see §
10.99
WASTEWATER TREATMENT DEPARTMENT
§ 52.20 DESIGN, REVIEW AND ISSUANCE OF CONSTRUCTION PERMIT.
   The town’s Wastewater Treatment Department, in conjunction with the town’s
Building Department, shall review all designs, plans, specifications and the
like relating to connection systems, pumping structures, monitoring stations,
pretreatment works and sewer connections prior to issuing a construction
permit. The Department, in conjunction with the town’s Building Department,
shall issue a construction permit only if they are satisfied that all documents
are in compliance with this code and the connection systems, pumping
structures, monitoring stations, pretreatment works and sewer connections will
operate in a safe and sanitary manner. Prior to the issuance of a construction
permit, the owner shall pay all fees assessed by the town.
(Prior Code, § 16-2-1)
§ 52.21 INSPECTION.
   (A)   Inspectors. Inspections of every facility that is involved either
directly or indirectly with the discharge of wastewater to the sewer system may
be made by the Town Engineer, the Wastewater Treatment Department, the town’s
Building Department or their designate as they may deem necessary.
      (1)   These facilities shall include, but not be limited to, sewer,
sewage pumping plants, pollution control plant, all industrial processes,
industrial wastewater generation, conveyance and pretreatment facilities,
devices, connecting sewers and all similar sewage facilities. Inspections may
be made to determine that such facilities are maintained and operated properly
and are adequate to meet the provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   Access to all of the above facilities, or to other facilities
directly or indirectly connected to the sewage systems, shall be given to
authorized personnel of the Department and/or the town at all reasonable times,
including those occasioned by emergency conditions. Any permanent or temporary
obstruction to easy access to the sewage facility to be inspected shall
promptly be removed by the facility user or owner at the written or verbal
request of the town department or its designate.
      (3)   No person shall interfere with, delay, resist or refuse entry to an
authorized department or town inspector attempting to inspect any wastewater
generation, conveyance or treatment facility connected directly or indirectly
to the sewage system.
   (B)   Construction inspections. All sewers to be attached directly to a
sewer shall be inspected by personnel of the Wastewater Treatment Department
and town’s Building Department during construction. At least 48 hours prior to
taping the sewer, the Wastewater Treatment Department and the town’s Building
Department shall be notified. In making a connection to a sewer, no physical
alteration of the facilities shall commence until an inspector is present. No
wastewater shall be discharged into any sewage facility prior to obtaining
inspections and approval of construction from the Town Department. Following
satisfactory completion of construction, the Department shall issue a
construction inspection certificate.
(Prior Code, § 16-2-1) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.22 COLLECTION OF FEES AND MISCELLANEOUS POWERS.
   (A)   Fees levied pursuant to this code shall be collected by the
Department.
   (B)   The Department shall enforce such rules and regulations the Council
authorizes as for the safe, economical and efficient management and protection
of the system; for construction and use of the sewers and connection to the
sewer system and for the regulation, collection, rebating and refunding of such
sewer fees.
(Prior Code, § 16-2-1)
SEWER FEES
§ 52.35 NECESSITY FOR CHARGES.
   It is hereby deemed necessary for the protection of the public’s health,
safety and welfare that this system conform with federal, state and local laws
and regulations. It is also necessary that a system of charges for sewer
service be established which allocates the cost of providing sewer service to
each user in such a manner that the allocated costs are proportionate to the
cost of providing sewer service to that user, insofar as those costs can
reasonably be determined.
(Prior Code, § 16-2-2) (Res. 01-06, passed - -2001; Ord. 09-36, passed - -2009)
§ 52.36 CHARGES ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   Sewer charge categories will include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   Sewer system capacity fee;
      (2)   Sewer user deposit;
      (3)   Sewer use charges;
      (4)   Hook-up fees;
      (5)   Tap fees;
      (6)   Septage or scavenger waste fees;
      (7)   Industrial cost recovery fees;
      (8)   Administration fees (inspection, plan review and permits);
      (9)   Special assessments; and
      (10)   Delinquent charges.
   (B)   The actual rates and categories will be set by resolution which shall
be amended from time to time. The rate will be established in compliance with
the public hearing requirements of A.R.S. § 9-511.01.
(Prior Code, § 16-2-2) (Res. 01-06, passed - -2001; Ord. 09-36, passed - -2009)
§ 52.37 RATE ESTABLISHMENT PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Rates for each type of sewer charge and associated fees shall be
reviewed periodically by the Department and/or the Town Manager. If the
Department recommends changes to the fee structure, it shall issue a request to
the Council with a recommendation for fee modification. The Council shall then
act upon the recommendation in accordance with the A.R.S. § 9-511.01.
   (B)   The rate schedules adopted by the Council shall be based upon the
following factors:
      (1)   Annual debt service charge for the retirement of project debt;
      (2)   The total applicable cost of salaries and benefits of employees
engaged in providing sewer service;
      (3)   Applicable operating expenses, including parts, materials and
services incurred in providing sewer service;
      (4)   Applicable equipment replacement costs necessitated by the
provision of sewer service;
      (5)   Appropriate indirect costs of the Department and other town
departments in rendering sewer related services, such as purchasing,
accounting, billing and administration and insurance;
      (6)   Other pertinent factors as determined by the Town Manager and/or
the Council;
      (7)   Any shortfalls of operating revenue in prior operating period(s);
and
      (8)   Any reserve funds required by funding agencies.
(Prior Code, § 16-2-2) (Res. 01-06, passed - -2001; Ord. 09-36, passed - -2009;
Ord. 18-02, passed 5-8-2018)
§ 52.38 SEWER USE CHARGE; DETERMINATION OF PAYMENTS AND CHARGES.
   (A)   Charge.
      (1)   General. For the purposes of determining the sewer use charge, the
charge shall be based upon equivalent residential units. Each contributor on
the system shall be evaluated as to their flow contribution and set as their
proportionate share of the equivalent residential unit. Sewer use charges shall
commence when connection of the sewer line to the facility being served is no
longer physically connected to the town sewer line. The service charge shall be
collected from the property owner whether or not said unit is occupied during
the building period or any period when the property is not occupied.
      (2)   Billing and payment. Sewer service charges in this section shall be
billed and paid monthly. The applicant for the service, whether property owner
or renter shall be required to pay a deposit equivalent to two months when
sewer service is requested. If monthly payments are made on time for twelve
months, the deposit will be refunded, upon written request, to the account
holder.
      (3)   Rate schedule.
         (a)   The actual rates and categories will be set by resolution which
shall be amended from time to time. The rate shall be established in compliance
with the public hearing requirement of A.R.S. § 9-511.01.
         (b)   Industrial rates shall be based upon volume of wastewater
discharged and BOD and SS of the wastewater discharged. The actual rates and
categories shall be set by resolution which may be amended from time to time.
The rates shall be established in compliance with the public hearing
requirements of A.R.S. § 9-511.01.
   (B)   Sewer use charge; determination of payments and charges. A
proportionate charge shall be made to all users who discharge wastewater,
either directly or indirectly into the sewer system based upon equivalent
residential units.
(Prior Code, § 16-2-2) (Res. 01-06, passed - -2001; Ord. 09-36, passed - -2009;
Ord. 15-08, passed 11-10-2015; Ord. 19-01, passed 2-12-2019)
§ 52.39 DETERMINATION OF WASTEWATER QUALITY.
   For industrial discharges, wastewater quality shall be determined from
actual testing or from historical data, whichever is appropriate. The Council,
on recommendation of the Town Manager, shall, as necessary, modify these
determinations and/or revise classifications in a continuing attempt to
maintain equitable charges for the service required.
   (A)   Testing by direct sampling, utilizing recognized field techniques,
equipment and procedures shall be used for all industrial users. The BOD5 test
shall be considered the standard test; however COD or TOC tests may be
substituted in cases where it has been determined by the Wastewater Treatment
Department that the BOD5 test is not representative of actual wastewater
loading. Wastewater characteristics shall be determined by the Wastewater
Treatment Department on the basis of monitored wastewater discharged, a
certified statement from the user or on the best available data as to the
characteristics of such discharges.
   (B)   Any change in the ongoing process(es) employed by a user contributing
industrial waste which results in a variation of more than 25% in one or more
of the effluent loading concentrations shall be reported to the Wastewater
Treatment Department within 30 days of such change.
   (C)   If it is determined through testing that a significant variation
exists between the user’s certified data and the discharge characteristics
monitored by the Wastewater Treatment Department, the Department shall adjust
the sewer use charge based on the monitored data from the original date of
certification, unless written communication has occurred, notifying the
Wastewater Treatment Department of changes in loading and giving specific dates
of changes.
   (D)   Where sampling and gauging of a specific user is not practical for
physical, economic, safety or other reasons, the Wastewater Treatment
Department shall designate values for concentrations of the wastes discharged
into the sewer system for all users in the same standard industrial
classification or sub-classification.
(Prior Code, § 16-2-2) (Res. 01-06, passed - -2001; Ord. 09-36, passed - -2009;
Ord. 18-02, passed 5-8-2018)
§ 52.40 SEWER SYSTEM CAPACITY FEE.
   (A)   For the purpose of providing revenue to assist in the financing and to
more equitably distribute the cost of the construction of necessary additions
to the sewer system and the sewage treatment facilities, it is hereby
determined and declared necessary to provide for the establishment, exaction
and regulation of a sewer capacity charge as hereinafter determined, with such
charge to be in addition to any and all other fees which shall be imposed with
respect to the said sewer system.
   (B)   The funds received from the collection of such charge, as it is herein
authorized, shall be deposited daily with the town who shall credit them to a
special fund from which the Council may take appropriations for the payment of
the cost and expense of the construction of the sanitary sewer system, pump
stations and sewage treatment works and for the payment of the cost and expense
of extensions to, or the enlargement of, same.
   (C)   The Department Director shall be and is hereby authorized and directed
to charge and collect a sewer system capacity charge whenever:
      (1)   A sewer system agreement has been executed by the parties;
      (2)   Application is made for the issuance of a sewer permit to provide
sanitary sewer service to a new structure;
      (3)   At the time an existing structure is enlarged or its use changes;
or
      (4)   When an existing structure is removed and a new structure built and
reuse is made of an existing sanitary sewer service or a new sanitary sewer
service is constructed, where such property is or will be tributary, directly
or indirectly to any sanitary sewer built by the town.
   (D)   Credit for any existing structure which has a use change, or for an
existing structure enlarged or removed, may be applied against the system
capacity imposed in the amount of the original structure charge up to, but not
more than, the current charge.
(Prior Code, § 16-2-2) (Res. 01-06, passed - -2001; Ord. 09-36, passed - -2009)
§ 52.41 TAP FEES.
   If a sewer tap is required to connect any building sewer or house sewer to
the sewer system, a deposit for such tap shall be paid prior to the tap
construction. The actual rates and categories shall be set by resolution which
shall be amended from time to time. The rate shall be established in compliance
with the public hearing requirements of A.R.S. § 9-511.01.
(Prior Code, § 16-2-2) (Res. 01-06, passed - -2001; Ord. 09-36, passed - -2009)
§ 52.42 SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.
   This fee is applicable in the event of an unusual industrial Connection (see
§
52.43 of this chapter or, in the event of a specific sewer service area or
area-specific line extension, see §
51.03 of this code of ordinances), or in the event of an unforeseen event which
shall require specific consideration.
(Prior Code, § 16-2-2) (Res. 01-06, passed - -2001; Ord. 09-36, passed - -2009)
§ 52.43 SEPTAGE AND SCAVENGER WASTE FEES.
   Fees and charges for treatment of normal scavenger wastes shall be based on
the costs of providing such services and on the expected overall average
characteristics of such discharges, which shall be designated as 500 mg/l BOD
and 500 mg/l suspended solids. The Department shall designate characteristics
on which to base charges in special situations such as discharges from sewage
holding tanks on submission of proof that waste discharges have other than
expected overall average concentrations and with provision of positive
identification procedures. Charges shall be billed to licensed haulers at
monthly intervals or at the discretion of the Council and shall be considered
delinquent if not paid within 30 days of the billing date. Delinquency in
payment shall be basis for revocation of permit.
(Prior Code, § 16-2-2) (Res. 01-06, passed - -2001; Ord. 09-36, passed - -2009)
§ 52.44 ADMINISTRATIVE FEES.
   (A)   Administrative fees shall include, but not be limited to:
      (1)   Reimbursable expenses of the Department;
      (2)   Bad check charges;
      (3)   Lien recording fees;
      (4)   Account transfer fees;
      (5)   Plan review fees; and
      (6)   Inspection fees.
   (B)   The actual rates and categories will be set by resolution which shall
be amended from time to time. The rate will be established in compliance with
the public hearing requirements of A.R.S. § 9-511.01.
(Prior Code, § 16-2-2) (Res. 01-06, passed - -2001; Ord. 09-36, passed - -2009)
§ 52.45 SPECIAL ASSESSMENT FEES.
   For properties not within the present service area of the sewer system, the
applicable fees shall include a connection fee payable on a lot or per parcel
basis, which shall be established by the Council, similar in amount to the
costs of construction of an equivalent collector sewer system adjacent to the
landowner’s property, including the cost of construction, engineering, legal
and administrative services, and in accordance with the benefit received, plus
a fee for administrative services and in accordance with the benefit received,
plus a fee for each lateral constructed in the public right-of-way to service
the property; said money to be paid directly to the Department in cash prior to
the time of the connection to the Department sewer system. Said money so
collected is to be used to pay all or part of the cost of installing other main
line sewers in the town as and when designated by the Council, or the costs of
construction of additional sewage capacity. When said moneys are not being
expended for that purpose they are to be invested or spent at the discretion of
the Council. The actual rates and categories shall be set by resolution which
shall be amended from time to time. The rate shall be established in compliance
with the public hearing requirements of A.R.S. § 9-511.01.
(Prior Code, § 16-2-2) (Res. 01-06, passed - -2001; Ord. 09-36, passed - -2009)
§ 52.46 DELINQUENT CHARGES.
   (A)   All rates and service charges are due and payable when rendered and
shall be delinquent 15 days after the date of the billing. Any delinquent
account requiring special collection effort shall be assessed a delinquent
collection charge. The actual rates and categories shall be set by resolution
which shall be amended from time to time. The rate shall be established in
compliance with the public hearing requirements of A.R.S. § 9-511.01. If the
total of such delinquent charges is not received within five days after date of
delinquency and notice of delinquency having been given, sewer service shall be
disconnected, after notice, to the premises of the delinquent consumer and a
delinquent disconnect fee charged to the customer’s account. The delinquent
disconnect fee, plus the total amount of the bill due, and any deposit used to
remedy the delinquency shall be collected before providing sewer service again
to delinquent customer.
   (B)   Customer’s sewer service shall be disconnected for non-payment of a
bill for sewer services rendered at a previous location, provided such bill is
not paid.
   (C)   Any expense caused to the Department for the repair or replacement of
damaged, stolen, tampered or misused sewer facilities shall be charged against
and collected from the person who caused the expense.
   (D)   When a user of the sewer system has been notified of amount of sewer
use charges remaining due after the deduction of his or her user deposit and
payment of the same has not been received within five days, the Department
shall assign the account to a bona fide collection agency.
   (E)   Before sewer service will be provided to any premises, all charges
against the premises then due and payable to the Department, as required by
this code, or including any of the following items must have been paid; on
account of labor supplied or materials furnished by the Department in the
installation of service pipes connecting the premises with the town sewer mains
or for tapping the system sewer line; on account of service of sewer service
previously supplied to the premises, whether used by the applicants or by some
previous occupant of the premises; or on account of the assessment of any fine
or penalty; or for turning sewer service off or on; or for repair or
replacement of damaged, stolen or misused sewer works facilities.
   (F)   Before disconnecting sewer for non-payment of any sewer user charge,
deposit or other assessment provided for in this code, the Department shall
give written notice of the discontinuance to the person and afford him or her
or his or her designee an opportunity to appear before the Department on any
disputed matter relative to the discontinuance of sewer service.
   (G)   A water/sewer customer who defaults in his or her obligation for the
payment of utility moneys owed to the town is liable for any and all fees and
charges assessed by a collection agency that is licensed pursuant to A.R.S.
Title 32, Ch. 9, Art. 2, and that is engaged by the town to collect and enforce
such payment. The collection fees and charges assessed by the collection agency
shall be added to the sum or sums due from and chargeable against the customer.
(Prior Code, § 16-2-2) (Res. 01-06, passed - -2001; Ord. 09-36, passed - -2009)
§ 52.47 DISTRIBUTION OF REVENUE AND ESTABLISHMENT OF SPECIAL FUNDS.
   (A)   There shall be established the following funds into which the sewer
charges, as levied herein, shall be distributed.
      (1)   Sewer System Operations, Maintenance and Capital Outlay Fund. The
Sewer System Operations, Maintenance and Capital Outlay Fund shall be used
exclusively for debt service, operational expenses and equipment replacement
expenses associated with the provision of sewer system services.
      (2)   Renewal and Replacement Fund. The Sewer System Renewal and
Replacement Fund shall be used as follows:
         (a)   To fund any budget shortages in the Sewer System Operations,
Maintenance and Capital Outlay Fund; and
         (b)   Funds collected in the Renewal and Replacement Fund in excess of
1.25 times the annual system debt service and operation and maintenance costs
shall be utilized within the system as deemed appropriate by the Council on
recommendation by the Town Manager and the Department.
      (3)   Sewer System Users Deposit Fund. The sewer system users deposits
shall be utilized exclusively for the purpose of temporarily paying a
customer’s delinquent fees.
   (B)   The distribution of sewer charges shall be as follows:
      (1)   Sewer system capacity charges. All sewer system capacity fees
(connection fees) will be deposited in the Renewal and Replacement Fund.
      (2)   Sewer system user charges. Sewer user fees shall be allocated to
the Sewer System Operations and Capital Outlay Fund.
      (3)   Sewer system user deposits. One hundred percent of the Sewer User
Deposit Fund shall be used to assure payment of monthly users fees by customer,
as follows:
         (a)   If a customer is delinquent (see §
52.47 of this chapter) in paying his, her or their monthly user fee, then the
Department may utilize a portion of that user’s deposit to bring the account
current.
         (b)   The customer will be considered delinquent until the deposit is
returned to the full amount.
         (c)   If a customer in good standing is disconnected and/or sells
their property, the total amount of the deposit will be refunded upon written
request.
      (4)   Special assessments.
         (a)   Special assessments shall be utilized in accordance with the
agreement between the Wastewater Department and the customer.
         (b)   Additional connection applications shall not be accepted after
the plant reached calculated design capacity without review and approval by
Department confirming that actual maximum measured flow and treatment capacity
does not exceed design capacity.
(Prior Code, § 16-2-2) (Res. 01-06, passed - -2001; Ord. 09-36, passed - -2009;
Ord. 18-02, passed 5-8-2018)
INDUSTRIAL USER REQUIREMENTS
§ 52.60 SEWER CHARGES.
   (A)   Industrial users shall be required to pay a user fee.
   (B)   The actual rates and categories shall be set by resolution which shall
be amended from time to time.
   (C)   The rate will be established in compliance with the public hearing
requirements of A.R.S. § 9-511.01.
(Prior Code, § 16-2-3)
§ 52.61 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   All industrial users, as defined herein, shall obtain a permit for
connection and discharge to the town’s sewer system from the Department.
(Prior Code, § 16-2-3)
§ 52.62 PERMIT APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS AND CONDITIONS.
   (A)   An industrial user shall make application for a permit on a form
provided by the Department.
   (B)   The application will not be accepted unless the fee is paid.
   (C)   An applicant, upon compliance with the terms and conditions
established by this code for the issuance of industrial wastewater discharge
permits and upon payment of established fees, shall be issued an industrial
wastewater discharge permit which shall be valid for a period of one year from
the date of issuance.
   (D)   An applicant, upon continued compliance with the terms and conditions
discharge permits, shall file an application for renewal of an industrial
wastewater discharge permit, shall pay the town the appropriate renewal fees
and shall be issued a renewed industrial wastewater discharge permit which
shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance of the
renewal.
   (E)   An applicant seeking an industrial wastewater discharge permit must
submit, as part of its application, the results of an analysis, compliance with
standard methods, as that term is herein defined, and conducted by a
professional testing laboratory acceptable to the Department of a grab sample
or a daily composite sample, as those terms are defined herein, of the effluent
discharge from the applicant’s plant.
   (F)   An applicant shall submit, as part of its application for a permit, a
discharge report which must include, but not be limited to, nature of process,
volume, rates of flow, production quantities or any other information that is
relevant to the generation of waste, including substances and concentrations in
the wastewater discharge.
   (G)   An applicant shall, as part if its application for a permit, submit a
plat showing location and size of on-site sewers, sampling points, pretreatment
facilities, sewers and any other pertinent details.
   (H)   An applicant shall, as part of its application for a permit, list each
product reproduced by type, amount and rate of production and the chemical
components and quantity of liquid or gaseous materials stored on site, even
though they may not normally be discharged into the sewer system.
   (I)   In the event a producer of industrial waste who is authorized to make
a connection to the sewer for industrial waste disposal under the provisions
hereof, is sold, leased or whose operation is assumed or taken over by another
person other than that named in the permit, a new application for permit shall
be made by the new owner, lessee or operator. No permit issued under the
provisions hereof shall be assignable, and a violation of this provision shall
be grounds for summary suspension or revocation of such permit by the
Wastewater Treatment Department.
   (J)   It shall be a condition of the permit that the Department may at any
time test any of the wastes being discharged by the company or plant for
quality or quantity. A duly authorized Department representative may enter the
permittee’s premises at any time during business or operation hours for the
purpose of inspecting plant operations to estimate quality and quantity of
wastes, as defined herein.
   (K)   It shall be a condition of a permit that the permittee will install
facilities (sampling well) at the permittee’s expense for the purpose of the
Wastewater Department’s representative inspecting, observing and sampling
representative flows.
   (L)   It shall be a condition of the permit that periodic reports,
hereinafter set forth or as required by the Department, be submitted to the
Department.
   (M)   Issuance of an industrial wastewater discharge permit shall not
release the permit holder from the obligation to comply with all other
provisions of this section.
   (N)   The Department shall change the conditions of any permit from time to
time as circumstances, laws or regulations enacted by the state or federal
government may require.
(Prior Code, § 16-2-3)
§ 52.63 INDUSTRIAL AGREEMENTS.
   Agreements between an industrial user and the Department shall be entered
into when any of the following conditions exists:
   (A)   The user desires to reserve excess capacity in the sewer system. In
such a case, the industrial user may be obligated to pay user charges on the
capacity reserved for a minimum period of time as agreed to by the parties; or
   (B)   The user is a significant user as defined in this section.
(Prior Code, § 16-2-3)
§ 52.64 WASTE MONITORING PROGRAM.
   (A)   In order to ensure continuing compliance with the limitations and
restrictions set forth in this chapter, each industrial user shall monitor its
discharge to the sewer system by testing the discharge with sufficient
frequency to ensure that such limitations are not exceeded and such
restrictions not violated. Such testing may be accomplished by a professional
laboratory, or in cases where the user has sufficient testing capability,
facilities and expertise by the user itself.
   (B)   The Department shall require a laboratory analysis of a user’s
discharge at any time. Such analysis shall be performed by:
      (1)   An independent laboratory acceptable to the Department;
      (2)   A department laboratory operated by the Department; or
      (3)   The user itself.
   (C)   The authority to determine who shall perform the analysis rests with
the Department. The Department shall require that all costs associated with
such analysis be borne by the user.
   (D)   The user shall permit access to the sampling point or sampling well to
the Department’s representative or the independent laboratory for the purpose
of obtaining a sample during any hours of operation by the plants.
(Prior Code, § 16-2-3)
§ 52.65 REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   A verified report shall be filed annually by all users with industrial
wastewater discharge permits. Those users seeking renewal of an industrial
wastewater discharge permit shall file said report with the application for
renewal.
   (B)   The report shall include, at a minimum, the following:
      (1)   The results of the test of quantity, using measuring equipment as
required by this chapter; and
      (2)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has made any changes
in its operations that has or will, within the terms of the permit, increase
the strength, volume or any other characteristic of the applicant’s discharge
into the sanitary sewer system.
   (C)   If the applicant has made changes in its operations that have or will
increase, during the term of the permit, the strength, volume or any other
characteristics of the user’s discharge into the sewer system, then:
      (1)   The applicant shall describe the changes in operation that alter
the strength, volume or any other characteristics of the discharge.
      (2)   The applicant shall, if the Department so requires, submit an
analysis complete with standard methods and conducted in accordance with this
section.
   (D)   It shall be prohibited for a permit holder to change its industrial
process without approval of the Department if such change results in the user
exceeding the levels for flow and discharge quality stated in the user’s
permit.
(Prior Code, § 16-2-3)
CHAPTER 53: BACKFLOW CONTROL PROGRAM
Section
   
53.01   Purpose
   
53.02   Responsibility
   
53.03   Definitions
   
53.04   Water system
   
53.05   Policy and requirements
§ 53.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is:
   (A)   To protect the public water supply of the town from the possibility of
contamination or pollution by isolating to the consumer’s internal distribution
system(s) or the consumer’s private water system(s) contaminants or pollutants
that could backflow into the public water systems; and
   (B)   To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of backflow
prevention, which will systematically and effectively prevent the contamination
or pollution of all potable water systems.
(Prior Code, § 17-1-9) (Ord. 00-11, passed - -2000; Ord. 01-15, passed - -2001;
Ord. 09-39, passed - -2009)
§ 53.02 RESPONSIBILITY.
   The town (“Water Department”) shall be responsible for the protection of the
public potable water distribution system from contamination or pollution due to
the backflow of contaminants or pollutants through the water service
connection. An approved backflow prevention assembly is required at the
consumer’s water service connection, for the safety of the water system, if any
auxiliary water supply exists. The Water Department or its designated agent
shall give notice in writing to said consumer to install such an approved
backflow prevention assembly on the consumer’s premises. The consumer shall
immediately install such an approved backflow prevention assembly at the
consumer’s own expense; and, failure, refusal or inability on the part of the
consumer to install, have tested and maintained said assembly shall constitute
grounds for discontinuing water service to the premises immediately until such
requirements have been met satisfactorily. Commercial and industrial consumers
shall be required to install an approved backflow assembly to protect the
potable water distribution system from contamination or pollution.
(Prior Code, § 17-1-9) (Ord. 00-11, passed - -2000; Ord. 01-15, passed - -2001;
Ord. 09-39, passed - -2009)
§ 53.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPROVED. A water supply that has been approved by the town’s Water
Department. The term APPROVED, as herein used in reference to an air gap, a
reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly or other backflow
prevention assemblies or methods, shall mean APPROVED by the town.
   AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY. Any water supply on or available to the premises
other than the town-approved public water supply will be considered as an
AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY. These AUXILIARY WATERS may include water from another
purveyor’s public potable water supply or any natural source(s) such as a well,
spring, river, stream, harbor and the like or used waters or industrial fluids.
These waters may be contaminated or polluted or they may be objectionable and
constitute an unacceptable water source over which the Water Department does
not have sanitary control.
   BACKFLOW. The undesirable reversal of flow of water or mixtures of water and
other liquids, gases or other substances into the distribution pipes of the
potable supply of water from any source or sources. See terms BACKSIPHONAGE and
BACKPRESSURE.
   BACKPRESSURE. Any elevation of pressure in the downstream piping system (by
pump, elevation of piping or stream and/or air pressure) above the supply
pressure at the point of consideration, which would cause, or tend to cause, a
reversal of the normal direction of flow.
   BACKSIPHONAGE. A form of backflow due to a reduction in system pressure,
which causes a sub-atmospheric pressure to exist at a site in the water system.
   BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY. An assembly or means designed to prevent
backflow and includes the following.
      (1)   AIR-GAP. A physical separation between the free flowing discharge
end of a potable water supply pipeline and an open or non-pressure receiving
vessel. An APPROVED AIR GAP shall be at least double the diameter of the supply
pipe measured vertically above the overflow rim of the vessel, in no case less
than one inch (2.54 cm).
      (2)   REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY. An
assembly containing two independently acting approved check valves together
with a hydraulically- operating, mechanically-independent pressure differential
relief valve located between the check valves and at the same time below the
first check valve. The unit shall include properly located resilient seated
test cock and tightly closing resilient seated shutoff valves at each end of
the assembly. This assembly is designed to protect against a non-health (i.e.,
pollutant) or a health hazard (i.e., contaminant). This assembly shall not be
used for backflow prevention of sewage or reclaimed water.
   CONTAMINATION. An impairment of the quality of water, which creates an
actual hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of
disease by sewage, industrial fluids, waste and the like.
   CROSS-CONNECTION. Any unprotected actual or potential connection or
structural arrangement between the public and a consumer’s potable water system
and any other source or system through which it is possible to introduce into
any part of the potable system any used water, industrial fluid, gas or
substance other than the intended potable water with which the system is
supplied. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel
or changeover devices and other temporary or permanent devices through which or
because of which backflow can or may occur are considered to be CROSS-
CONNECTIONS.
      (1)   The term DIRECT CROSS-CONNECTION shall mean a cross connection
which is subject to both backsiphonage and backpressure.
      (2)   The term INDIRECT CROSS-CONNECTION shall mean a cross-connection
which is subject to backsiphonage only.
   CROSS CONNECTIONS, CONTROLLED. A connection between a potable water system
and a non-potable water system with an approved backflow prevention assembly
properly installed and maintained so that it will continuously afford the
protection commensurate with the degree of hazard.
   HAZARD, DEGREE OF. A pollutional (non-health) or contamination (health)
hazard and is derived from the evaluation of conditions within a system.
   HAZARD, HEALTH. An actual or potential threat of contamination of a physical
or toxic nature to the public potable water system or the consumer’s potable
water system that would be a danger to health.
   HAZARD, PLUMBING. An internal or plumbing type cross-contamination in a
consumer’s potable water system that may either be a pollutional or
contamination type hazard. This includes, but is not limited to, cross-
connections to toilets, sinks, lavatories, wash trays and lawn sprinkling
systems. Plumbing-type cross-connections can be located in many types of
structures including homes, apartment houses, hotels and commercial or
industrial establishments. Such a connection, if permitted to exist, must be
properly protected by an appropriate type of backflow prevention assembly from
a pollutional or a contamination type hazard.
   HAZARD, POLLUTIONAL. An actual or potential threat to the physical
properties of the water system or the potability of the public potable water
system but that would not constitute a health or system hazard, as defined. The
maximum degree or intensity of pollution to which the potable water system
could be degraded under this definition would cause a nuisance or be
aesthetically objectionable or could cause minor damage to the system or its
appurtenances.
   HAZARD, SYSTEM. An actual or potential threat of sever danger to the
physical properties of the public potable water system or of a pollutional or
contamination hazard that would have a protracted effect on the quality of the
potable water in the system.
   INDUSTRIAL FLUIDS. Any fluid or solution which may be chemically,
biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration
which would constitute a health, system, pollutional or plumbing hazard if
introduced into an approved water supply. This may include, but not be limited
to: polluted or contaminated used water; all types of process waters and used
water originating from the public potable water system which may deteriorate in
sanitary quality; chemicals in fluid form, planting acids and alkalies;
circulated cooling waters connected to an opening cooling tower and/or cooling
waters that are chemically or biologically treated and stabilized with toxic
substances; contaminated by natural waters such as from wells, springs,
streams, rivers, bays, harbors, seas, irrigation canals or systems and the
like; oils, gases, glycerin, paraffin, caustic and acid solutions and other
liquid and gaseous fluids used industrially, for other processes or for
firefighting purposes.
   POLLUTION. An impairment of the quality of the water to a degree which does
not create a hazard to the public health, but which does adversely and
unreasonably affect the aesthetic qualities of such waters for domestic use.
   SERVICE PROTECTION. The appropriate type or method of backflow protection at
the service connection, commensurate with the degree of hazard of the
consumer’s potable water system.
   WATER DEPARTMENT. The Town of Quartzsite (“Water Department”) is invested
with the authority and responsibility for the implementation of an effective
cross-connection control program and for the enforcement of the provisions of
this chapter.
   WATER, POTABLE. Any public water supply, that has been investigated and
approved by the state’s Department of Environmental Quality (ADEQ). The system
must be operating under a valid health permit. In determining what constitutes
an approved water supply, ADEQ has final judgment as to its potability.
   WATER, NON-POTABLE. A water supply that has not been approved for human
consumption by ADEQ.
   WATER, SERVICE CONNECTION. The terminal end of a service connection from the
public potable water system, (i.e., where the Water Department may lose
jurisdiction and sanitary control of the water at its point of delivery to the
consumer’s water system). If a water meter is installed at the end of the
service connection, then the SERVICE CONNECTION shall mean the downstream end
of the water meter.
   WATER, USED. Any water supplied by the Water Department, from a public
potable water system to a consumer’s water system, after it has passed through
the service connection and is no longer under the control of the Water
Department.
(Prior Code, § 17-1-9) (Ord. 00-11, passed - -2000; Ord. 01-15, passed - -2001;
Ord. 09-39, passed - -2009)
§ 53.04 WATER SYSTEM.
   (A)   The water system shall be considered as made up of two parts: the town
of quartzsite’s system and the consumer’s system.
   (B)   The town’s system shall consist of the source facilities and the
distribution system; and shall include all those facilities of where the water
system under the complete control of the Water Department, up to the point
where the consumer’s system begins.
   (C)   The source facilities shall include all components utilized in the
production, treatment, storage and delivery of water to the distribution
system.
   (D)   The distribution system shall included the network of conduits used
for the delivery of water from the source facilities to the consumer’s system.
   (E)   The consumer’s system shall include those parts of the facilities
beyond the termination of the town’s system that are utilized in conveying
potable water to points of use.
(Prior Code, § 17-1-9) (Ord. 00-11, passed - -2000; Ord. 01-15, passed - -2001;
Ord. 09-39, passed - -2009)
§ 53.05 POLICY AND REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or
maintained by the town’s Water Department unless the water supply is protected
as required by town laws and regulations and this chapter. Service of water to
any premises shall be discontinued by the town’s Water Department if a backflow
prevention assembly required by this chapter is not installed, tested and
maintained, or if it is found that a backflow prevention assembly had been
removed, bypassed or if an unprotected cross-connection exists on the premises.
Service will not be restored until such conditions or defects are corrected.
Appropriate fees shall be assessed for the disconnection and reconnection of
water service to the consumer.
   (B)   (1)   The consumer’s system should be open for inspection at all
reasonable times to authorized representatives of the town’s Water Department,
to determine whether unprotected cross-connections or other structural or
sanitary hazards, including violations of these regulations, exist. When such a
condition becomes known, the town’s Water Department shall deny or immediately
discontinue service to the premises by providing for a physical break in the
service line until the consumer has corrected the condition(s) in conformance
with the town’s ordinances and codes relating to plumbing and water supplies
and the regulations adopted pursuant thereto. Appropriate fees shall be
assessed for disconnection and reconnection of water service to the consumer.
      (2)   An approved backflow prevention assembly shall also be installed on
each vice line to a consumer’s water system at or near the property line or
immediately inside the building being served; but in all cases, before the
first branch line leading off the service line wherever the following
conditions exist:
         (a)   In the case of premises having an auxiliary water supply, the
public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by
installing an approved backflow prevention assembly in the service line
commensurate with the degree of hazard.
         (b)   In the case of premises on which any industrial fluids or any
other objectionable substance is handled in such a fashion as to create an
actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public water system
shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing an approved
backflow prevention assembly in the service line commensurate with the degree
of hazard. This shall include the handling of processed waters and waters
originating from the water purveyor’s system which have been subject to
deterioration in quality.
         (c)   In the case of premises having internal cross-connections that
cannot be permanently corrected or protected against, or intricate plumbing or
piping arrangements or where entry to all portions of the premises is not
readily accessible for inspection purposes, making it impracticable or
impossible to ascertain whether or not dangerous cross-connections exist, the
public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by
installing an approved backflow prevention assembly in the service line.
   (C)   The type of protective assembly required by divisions (C)(1), (C)(2)
and (C)(3) below shall depend upon the degree of hazard which exists as
follows.
      (1)   In the case of any premises where there is an auxiliary water
supply as stated in division (B)(2)(a) above and it is not subject to any of
the following rules, the town’s system shall be protected by an approved air
gap or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly.
      (2)   In the case of any premises where there is any material dangerous
to health, which is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or
potential hazard to the town’s system, the town’s system shall be protected by
an approved air gap or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow
prevention assembly. Examples of premises where these conditions may exist
include sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations, chemical
manufacturing plants, hospitals, mortuaries and plating plants.
      (3)   In the case of any premises where there are unprotected cross-
connections, either actual or potential, the town’s system shall be protected
by an approved air gap or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow
prevention assembly at the service connection.
      (4)   In the case of any premises where, because of security requirements
or other prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make
a complete in-plant cross-connection survey, the town’s system shall be
protected against backflow from the premises by either an approved air gap or
an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly on each
service to the premises.
      (5)   Any backflow prevention assembly required herein shall be a make,
model and size approved by the town’s Water Department. An APPROVED BACKFLOW
PREVENTION ASSEMBLY shall mean an assembly that has been manufactured in full
conformance with the standards established by the American Waterworks
Association (AWWA) entitled: AWWA/ANS1 C511-07, Standard for Reduced Pressure
Principle Backflow Prevention Assemblies.
   (D)   It shall be the duty of the consumer at any premises where backflow
prevention assemblies are installed to have an initial field test performed by
a certified backflow prevention assembly tester at the time of the initial
installation and on a yearly basis herein after the initial installation.
   (E)   The town’s Water Department shall notify the consumer when the annual
test is required. Thirty days shall be allowed for the consumer to complete the
annual test. Failure to have the approved backflow assembly tested within the
30-day time period shall result in a ten-day door notice of disconnection of
service. Upon expiration of the ten-day notice without the completion and
submission to the Water Department of a satisfactory annual test, service to
the consumer shall be disconnected. Appropriate fees shall be assessed for
disconnection and reconnection of water service to the consumer.
   (F)   In those instances where the town’s Water Department deems the hazard
to be serious in the sole discretion of the Water Department, the Water
Department may require field tests at more frequent intervals. These tests
shall be at the expense of the consumer, and shall be performed by a certified
tester approved by the town’s Water Department. It shall be the duty of the
town’s Water Department, to see that these tests are made in a timely manner.
The consumer may notify the Department in advance when the tests are to be
undertaken so that an official representative may witness the field tests, if
so desired. Backflow prevention assemblies shall be repaired, overhauled or
replaced at the expense of the consumer whenever said assemblies are found to
be defective. Records of such tests, repairs, and overhauls shall be kept and
copies filed with the town’s Water Department.
   (G)   The town’s Water Department shall keep an inventory of all records for
a period of at least three years for State Department of Environmental Quality
inspection purposes as required.
   (H)   All presently installed backflow prevention assemblies which do not
meet the requirements of this chapter, but were approved devices for the
purposes described herein at the time of installation and which have been
properly maintained, shall, except for the testing and maintenance requirements
under division (F) above, be excluded from the requirements of these rules so
long as the town’s Water Department finds that they will satisfactorily protect
the town’s water system. Whenever the existing device is moved from the present
location or requires more than minimum maintenance or when the town’s Water
Department finds that the maintenance constitutes a hazard to health, the
backflow prevention assembly shall be replaced by an approved backflow
prevention assembly meeting the requirements of this chapter or any related
regulation.
   (I)   All backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed to allow
adequate space for testing and maintenance; provide for adequate drainage;
allow adequate room for shut off valve rotation; allow space for attaching
fittings and hoses to test cocks; include union coupling needed for removal of
or repair to backflow; include Y-type strainer used for protection of backflow
device; include riser uprights that are copper wrapped in a minimum ten mil
wrapping tape or PVC that may be wrapped; risers shall be a minimum of 12
inches above and a maximum of 30 inches above grade; dissimilar metals shall be
avoided to prevent electrolysis by using recommended PVC; consumers shall
assure there are no physical connections between the meter and the backflow
device; install a box cover to protect the backflow from heat and freezing; and
install new pipe at a depth of no less than 18 inches.
   (J)   The town’s Water Department shall submit to the state’s Department of
Environmental Quality and the local health authority a written cross-connection
incident report within five business days of a cross-connection problem, which
has resulted in the contamination of the public water system, including the
information required in A.A.C.R. 18-4-215.H.
   (K)   The town’s Water Department is authorized to make all necessary and
reasonable rules and policies with respect to the enforcement of this chapter.
All such rules and policies shall be consistent with the provisions of this
chapter and shall be effective 30 days after being filed with the Town Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 17-1-9) (Ord. 00-11, passed - -2000; Ord. 01-15, passed - -2001;
Ord. 09-39, passed - -2009)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
      
71.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
72.   PARKING RULES
      
73.   TRUCKS
      
74.   TRAFFIC AND PARKING SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
70.01   Directing traffic
   
70.02   Obedience to traffic regulations
   
70.03   Toy vehicles
   
70.04   Traffic-control devices
   
70.05   Authority to designate signals, signs and locations
Administration; Accidents and Violations
   
70.20   Duty of Police Department
   
70.21   Records of traffic violations
   
70.22   Police Department to investigate accidents
   
70.23   Traffic accident studies
   
70.24   Traffic accident reports
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 DIRECTING TRAFFIC.
   (A)   The police officers are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by
voice, hand or signal.
   (B)   Firefighters, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist a
police officer in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity.
(Prior Code, § 12-2-1)
§ 70.02 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
   It is unlawful, except as otherwise provided in this code, for any person to
do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required by this traffic code
or willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a
police officer or of any Fire Department official.
(Prior Code, § 12-2-2) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.03 TOY VEHICLES.
   No person upon roller skates or riding any coaster, toy vehicle or similar
device shall go upon any roadway, except while crossing a street on a crosswalk
and, when crossing, such person shall be granted all the rights and shall be
subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians.
(Prior Code, § 12-2-3) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.04 TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   (A)   The Police Chief, with the approval of the Council, shall place and
maintain traffic-control devices, signs and signals when and as required under
the traffic regulations of the town to make effective the provisions of said
regulations, and may place and maintain such additional traffic-control devices
as he or she may deem necessary to regulate traffic under the traffic laws of
the town or under state law or to guide or warn traffic.
   (B)   The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official
traffic-control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the traffic
regulations of the town unless otherwise directed by a police officer, subject
to the exceptions granted in this chapter or by state law.
(Prior Code, § 12-2-4)
§ 70.05 AUTHORITY TO DESIGNATE SIGNALS, SIGNS AND LOCATIONS.
   (A)   Crosswalks, establish safety zones and mark traffic lanes. The Police
Chief is hereby authorized, on approval by the Council:
      (1)   To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines
upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where, in his or
her opinion, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway,
and at such other places as he or she may deem necessary;
      (2)   To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such
places as he or she may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians; and
      (3)   To mark lanes for traffic on street pavement at such places as he
or she may deem advisable, consistent with the traffic laws of the town.
(Prior Code, § 12-2-5)
   (B)   Authority to place and obedience to turning markers.
      (1)   The Police Chief is authorized to place markers, buttons or signs
within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by
vehicles turning at such intersections, and such course to be traveled as so
indicted may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law.
      (2)   When authorized markers, buttons or other indications are placed
within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning
thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such
indications.
(Prior Code, § 12-2-6)
   (C)   Authority to place and obedience to restricted turn signs.
      (1)   The Police Chief, on approval by the Council, is hereby authorized
to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a
right, left or U-turn and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The
making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and
permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on
the signs, or such signs may be removed when such turns are permitted.
      (2)   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or
left or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the
directions of any such sign.
(Prior Code, § 12-2-7)
ADMINISTRATION; ACCIDENTS AND VIOLATIONS
§ 70.20 DUTY OF POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Police Department, under the direction of
the Police Chief, to provide for the enforcement of the street traffic
regulations of the town and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street
traffic in the town, to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate
accidents and to assist in developing ways and means to improve traffic
conditions and to carry out all duties specially imposed by this traffic code.
   (B)   Any peace officer of the town may stop and detain a person as is
reasonably necessary to investigate an actual or suspected violation of this
traffic code and to serve a copy of the traffic complaint for any alleged civil
or criminal violation of this traffic code.
   (C)   The duties imposed on the Police Department by this traffic code may
be performed by a police agency under contract with and authorized by the town.
(Prior Code, § 12-1-1)
§ 70.21 RECORDS OF TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   The Police Department, under the direction of the Police Chief, shall
keep a record of all violations of the traffic laws of the town or of the state
vehicle laws of which any person has been charged, together with a record of
the final disposition of all such alleged offenses. Such record shall
accumulate during at least a five-year period and from that time on the record
shall be maintained complete for at least the most recent five-year period.
   (B)   All forms for records of violation and notices shall be serially
numbered. For each month and year, a written record shall be kept available to
the public showing the disposal of all such forms.
   (C)   All records and reports shall be public records.
(Prior Code, § 12-1-2)
§ 70.22 POLICE DEPARTMENT TO INVESTIGATE ACCIDENTS.
   It shall be the duty of the Police Department, under the direction of the
Police Chief, to investigate traffic accidents and to arrest and assist in the
prosecution of those persons charged with violations of law causing or
contributing to such accidents.
(Prior Code, § 12-1-3)
§ 70.23 TRAFFIC ACCIDENT STUDIES.
   Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the
Police Chief shall conduct studies of such accidents and determine remedial
measures.
(Prior Code, § 12-1-4)
§ 70.24 TRAFFIC ACCIDENT REPORTS.
   (A)   The Police Department, under the direction of the Police Chief, shall
maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident reports. Accident reports
or cards referring to them shall be filed alphabetically by location.
   (B)   The Police Department, under the direction of the Police Chief, shall
receive and properly file all accident reports made to it under state law or
under any law of the town. All such accident reports made by drivers shall be
for the confidential use of the town. No such report shall be admissible in any
civil or criminal proceeding other than upon request of any person making such
report or upon request of the court having jurisdiction, to prove compliance
with the laws requiring the making of any such report.
(Prior Code, § 12-1-5)
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
   
71.01   Limitations on turning around
   
71.02   One-way streets and alleys
   
71.03   Traffic at intersections
   
71.04   Drivers to obey signs
   
71.05   Processions
Cross-reference:
   Traffic and Parking Schedules, see
Ch. 74
§ 71.01 LIMITATIONS ON TURNING AROUND.
   The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in
the opposite direction upon any street in a business district, nor shall a
driver upon any other street so turn a vehicle unless such movement can be made
in safety and without interfering with other traffic.
(Prior Code, § 12-2-8) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 71.02 ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS.
   (A)   The Council shall, by resolution, designate any streets or alleys
which are to be limited to one-way traffic.
   (B)   When any resolution of the Council designates any one-way street or
alley, the Police Chief shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof,
and no such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs
indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every
intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 12-2-9) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 71.03 TRAFFIC AT INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   The Council shall, by resolution, designate through streets,
intersections where stops are required and intersections where vehicles shall
yield the right-or-way.
   (B)   When any resolution of the Council shall designate any through street
or intersection where vehicles are to stop or yield the right-of-way, the
Police Chief shall erect and maintain the appropriate signs at every location
where a vehicle must stop or yield the right-of-way.
(Prior Code, § 12-2-10)
§ 71.04 DRIVERS TO OBEY SIGNS.
   Whenever traffic signs are erected as provided in this chapter, every driver
of a vehicle shall obey such signs unless directed to proceed by a police
officer or a traffic-control signal. No driver shall drive upon or through any
private property such as an oil station, vacant lot or similar property to
avoid obedience to any regulation included in this traffic code.
(Prior Code, § 12-2-11) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 71.05 PROCESSIONS.
   (A)   No procession or parade, except funeral processions, shall be held
without first securing a permit from the Police Chief, and all such requests
for permits shall state the time, place of formation, proposed line of march,
destination and such other information as the Police Chief may request.
   (B)   A funeral procession composed of a procession of vehicles shall be
identified by such methods as may be determined and designated by the Police
Chief.
   (C)   No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a
funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such
vehicles are conspicuously designed. This provision shall not apply at
intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals or a
police officer.
   (D)   Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to
the right-hand edge of the roadway as practical and shall follow the vehicle
ahead as close as is practical and safe.
(Prior Code, § 12-2-12) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 72: PARKING RULES
Section
   
72.01   Method of parking
   
72.02   Blocking traffic
   
72.03   Parking adjacent to schools
   
72.04   Authority to erect signs restricting parking
   
72.05   Parking vehicles on sidewalks
   
72.06   Abandoned vehicles on public property
   
72.07   Restricted parking areas for persons with disabilities
   
72.08   Fire lanes on public or private property
Cross-reference:
   Traffic and Parking Schedules, see
Ch. 74
§ 72.01 METHOD OF PARKING.
   Except as otherwise provided by resolution of the Council, every vehicle
stopped or parked upon a roadway where there are adjacent curbs shall be so
stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels of such vehicle parallel to and
within 18 inches of the right-hand curb.
(Prior Code, § 12-3-1) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.02 BLOCKING TRAFFIC.
   (A)   No person shall stop, stand or park any motor vehicle, or other
vehicle, upon a street in the town in such a manner or under such conditions as
to leave available less than 20 feet of the width of the roadway for the free
movement of vehicular traffic; except that, a person may stop temporarily, in
the actual loading or unloading of passengers or, when necessary, in the
observance of traffic signs or signals of a police officer.
   (B)   No person shall park a motor vehicle, or other vehicle, within an
alley or entrance to a private driveway, except for the loading or unloading of
material, and not then unless such loading or unloading can be accomplished
without blocking the alley to the free movement of vehicular traffic.
(Prior Code, § 12-3-2) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.03 PARKING ADJACENT TO SCHOOLS.
   When signs are erected indicating no parking on that side of the street
adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such
designated place for one hour before school opens until one hour after school
closes on any school day.
(Prior Code, § 12-3-3) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.04 AUTHORITY TO ERECT SIGNS RESTRICTING PARKING.
   The Police Chief, upon approval by the Council, may erect signs requiring
parking at an angle to the curb, allowing parking on the left hand curb on one-
way streets, notifying drivers that parking is prohibited and restricting
parking in any way that may be necessary. No parking restrictions shall become
effective until such restricted parking area is specifically designated by
resolution of the Council and signs have been erected as authorized by this
section. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle in disobedience to such
parking restrictions.
(Prior Code, § 12-3-4) (Res. 92-14, passed - -1992) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.05 PARKING VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS.
   No person shall park any vehicle, whether in usable condition or not, nor
shall an owner permit his or her vehicle to be parked upon any sidewalk.
(Prior Code, § 12-3-5) (Ord. 98-01, passed - -1998) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.06 ABANDONED VEHICLES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   Any vehicle remaining parked upon any sidewalk of the town for more than
three days, or any disabled vehicle remaining parked upon any street of the
town for more than seven days, is declared to be an abandoned vehicle and the
police shall forthwith remove the same from the sidewalks or streets of the
town at the expense of the owner of such vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 12-3-6) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.07 RESTRICTED PARKING AREAS FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES.
   No person shall park a vehicle in a parking space set aside and identified
for use only by persons with physical disabilities, unless the vehicle has
displayed thereon a distinguishing insignia or numbered plates bearing the
international wheelchair symbol as provided in A.R.S. § 28-882.
(Prior Code, § 12-3-7) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.08 FIRE LANES ON PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   The Fire Chief may require that fire lanes for new and existing
structures by established on private or public property to provide access for
fire-suppression operations by the use of an improved public street, areaway,
parking lot, driveway or roadway.
   (B)   A fire lane is an area, parking lot, driveway, roadway or portion
thereof that shall be:
      (1)   Designated or approved by the Fire Chief; or
      (2)   Identified with red painted curbs or six inch wide red stripe the
full length of the fire lane, or each fire lane shall have approved signs at
the beginning and end of the fire lane, with spacing between the signs not to
exceed 75 feet. The signs shall be approved by the Fire Chief and comply with
division (K) below. Each sign shall face in the direction of oncoming traffic.
Signs that identify entranceways only as a fire lane area shall be identified
with approved fire lane signs on each side facing forward, and the area between
the signs shall be red striped.
   (C)   A fire lane sign shall be:
      (1)   Affixed to a stationary pole or object;
      (2)   Plainly visible; and
      (3)   Maintained clear of obstructions its entire length.
   (D)   It is unlawful for any person to park any vehicle with or without
power within, or otherwise obstruct any fire lane, except as may be
specifically permitted by the Fire Chief.
   (E)   Any vehicle stopped or parked within a fire lane established,
designated and marked in accordance with this section shall be issued a “notice
of ordinance violation” by any member of a law enforcement agency or any
representative the Fire Chief or the town’s Police Department designates. Any
vehicle stopped or parked within a designated fire lane may be removed at the
vehicle owner’s expense. Removal of a vehicle under such circumstances may be
authorized by the person in lawful possession of the property or by the Fire
Chief or the town’s Police Department or their representatives.
   (F)   Fire lanes shall:
      (1)   Extend to within 150 feet of an entrance to the interior, or to a
point as approved by the Fire Chief for buildings two stories or less in
height;
      (2)   Extend to within 50 feet of an entrance to the exterior, or to a
point approved by the Fire Chief for a building three stories or more in
height;
      (3)   Be a minimum of 20 feet in width and have vehicle passing points 20
feet in width and of length and interval as designated by the Fire Chief;
      (4)   Be surfaced to support the maximum weight of fire apparatus.
Surfacing may be concrete, asphaltic concrete, brick, stone, but not
necessarily limited to such materials, as approved by the Fire Chief.
Engineering data shall be submitted with plans review submittal to substantiate
weight-bearing capacity when required by the Fire Chief;
      (5)   Have a vertical clearance of no less than 13 feet, six inches;
      (6)   Have a maximum gradient of 8% (eight inches in 100 feet);
      (7)   Have 45-foot minimum centerline radius on curves; and
      (8)   Be dead ended at no more than 200 feet maximum length; or allow
through passage; or terminate in minimum 45-foot centerline radius cul-de-sac
or hammerhead turning area.
   (G)   It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to post a fire lane sign
without the approval of the Fire Chief or his or her authorized representative.
   (H)   Fire lanes established for new and existing structures shall conform
to fire lane requirements applicable at the time of construction; provided
that, if no fire lane requirements were applicable at the time of construction,
the Fire Chief may require establishment of fire lanes to conform with the
current requirements.
   (I)   The specific requirements for this section as applicable to a specific
structure may be modified by the Fire Chief in recognition of varying
occupancies, sizes and hazards of building and the provisions of other means of
access or fixed fire protection.
   (J)   No person shall place or keep any vehicle, post, fence, growth, trash
or other material or thing near any fire hydrant, fire sprinkler connection or
fire standpipe connection that would prevent them from being immediately
discernable or in immediate access to them for use. Signs or red painted curbs
or six-inch wide red stripes the full length of the restricted area,
prohibiting blocking of such fire protection equipment, may be required on
private property installation.
   (K)   Marking of fire lanes on public or private property shall be clearly
marked in one of the following manners.
      (1)   Vertical curbs six inches in height shall be painted red on the top
and side, extending the length of the designated fire lane. The pavement
adjacent to the painted curbs shall be marked with block lettering a minimum of
18 inches in height and with a three-inch brush stroke reading: “no parking -
fire lane.” Lettering shall be red and spaced at no more than 50-foot
intervals.
      (2)   Rolled curbs or surface without curbs shall have a red six-inch-
wide stripe painted extending the length of the designated fire lane. The
surface adjacent to the strip shall be marked with block lettering a minimum of
18 inches in height and with a minimum three-inch brush stroke reading: “no
parking - fire lane.” Lettering shall be in red and spaced at no more than 50-
foot intervals.
      (3)   Fire lane signs shall be as follows:
         (a)   Reflective in nature;
         (b)   Use red letters on white background;
         (c)   Use three-inch lettering, to read “no parking - fire lane;”
         (d)   A minimum of 12 inches wide by 18 inches tall;
         (e)   Spaced no more than 50 feet apart and posted on or immediately
next to the curb or side of the road;
         (f)   Top of the sign to be not less than four feet nor more than six
feet from the ground;
         (g)   Signs may be placed on a building when approved by the Fire
Chief in coordination with the Building Official;
         (h)   When posts are required for signs, they shall be a minimum of
two-inch galvanized steel or four- by four-inch pressure treated wood; and
         (i)   Signs are to be placed so they face the direction of vehicular
travel.
(Prior Code, § 12-3-8) (Ord. 93-08, passed - -1993) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 73: TRUCKS
Section
   
73.01   Purpose and authority
   
73.02   Definitions
   
73.03   Restrictions and notices
   
73.04   Exemptions
   
73.05   Permits
   
73.06   Administration and enforcement
 
   
73.99   Penalty
§ 73.01 PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY.
   The purpose of this chapter is to prevent in the town the following
incidents which may be caused by vehicles of excessive weight (80,000 pounds
GVW or more): to decrease damage to town roadways, roadside improvements and
bridges; to lessen safety hazards and the risk of injury to the traveling
public; to extend the life expectancy of town roadways, roadside improvements,
and bridges; and to reduce the public expense of their maintenance and repair.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to A.R.S. § 28-1106.
(Prior Code, § 12-5-1)
§ 73.02 DEFINITIONS.
   The definitions contained in A.R.S. Title 28 shall govern the construction
of words contained in this chapter, unless specifically defined herein. Any
words not defined therein shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. For
the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY. Town Manager and Police Department.
   EXCESS MAINTENANCE. Maintenance or restoration or both (but not betterment)
of a posted highway in excess of normal maintenance, caused by use of over-
posted-weight vehicles.
   LOCAL TRAFFIC.
      (1)   The following shall be regarded as local traffic:
         (a)   Emergency vehicles;
         (b)   School buses;
         (c)   Recreational vehicles;
         (d)   Vehicles and combinations of governmental agencies and utilities
or their contractors engaged in construction or maintenance on a posted highway
or in a location, which can be reached only via a posted highway; and
         (e)   Vehicles and combinations going to or coming from a residence
for deliveries, commercial establishment or farm, excluding those vehicles
going to and from Justice or Magistrate Court, located on a posted highway or
which can be reached only via a posted highway.
      (2)   These vehicles shall require evidence/proof of their status
pursuant to §
73.05(C) of this chapter listed below, unless exempt pursuant to §
73.04 of this chapter as contained herein.
   MOTOR HOME.
      (1)   A non-commercial passenger vehicle defined as a “house car” and
commonly referred to as a recreation vehicle, house car as a motor vehicle
originally designed, or permanently altered, and equipped for human habitation,
or to which a camper has been permanently attached.
      (2)   A MOTOR HOME should not to be confused with a tour bus also called
“motor coach”, which is used for commercial passenger transportation and
requires a commercial driver license to operate.
   NORMAL MAINTENANCE. The usual and typical activities necessary to maintain
the roadway, shoulders and drainage facilities in the state of repair existing
at the date of the inspection relating to use under permit.
   POSTED ROADWAY, STREET. A roadway or street having a posted weight limit
and/or designated and posted as “NO TRUCKS”.
   POSTED WEIGHT LIMIT. A restricted weight limit posted on a roadway under
authority.
   POSTING AUTHORITY. The Town Council, Public Works Director and Police Chief.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Any self-contained unit used for recreational
purposes.
   TRUCK(S). Any vehicle of a combination weight of 80,000 pounds GVW (gross
vehicle weight).
(Prior Code, § 12-5-2)
§ 73.03 RESTRICTIONS AND NOTICES.
   (A)   Restrictions. The posting authority may impose such restrictions on
roadways and on the gross registered weight of vehicles as may, in their
judgment, be necessary to protect the traveling public and prevent abuse of the
highways, and designate the town roadways, roadside improvements and bridges to
which the restrictions shall apply. (See A.R.S. § 28-627.)
   (B)   Classification of roadway. All town roads shall be designated “NO
TRUCKS”, unless exempted by statute. Streets and roads shall be designated by
classification as outlined in the “Transportation Element” of the Town of
Quartzsite’s General Plan (June 2003) and any subsequent amendments thereto.
   (C)   Posting by sign. Notice shall be by the use of selective exclusion
signs as outlined in the Manual on Uniform Traffic-Control Devices (MUTCD) with
the designated words “NO TRUCKS”, or the alternate symbol sign. The notice
shall contain, at a minimum, the following information: designation as “NO
TRUCKS” or the alternate symbol sign and the provisions of this chapter or
resolution at each end of the portion of the roadway thereby affected. (See
A.R.S. § 28-1106.)
   (D)   Posting notice.
      (1)   The notice shall be conspicuously posted at each end of the
restricted portion of the roadway, roadside improvement or bridge in a location
clearly visible from the travelway.
      (2)   Whenever a restriction expires or is lifted, the signs shall be
removed wherever posted.
      (3)   Whenever a restriction is revised or extended, existing signs shall
be removed and replaced with new signs reflecting such ordinance amendment.
   (E)   Application. This chapter shall not apply to any state highway in the
National System of Interstate and Defense Highways.
   (F)   Removal. No person may remove, obscure or otherwise tamper with any
notice or sign so posted, except as provided herein.
(Prior Code, § 12-5-3) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.04 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following vehicles are exempt from this rule: any two-axle vehicle while
delivering home heating fuel or propane; any vehicle while engaged in highway
maintenance or repair under the direction of the state or town; any emergency
vehicle (such as firefighting apparatus or ambulances) while responding to an
emergency; any school transportation vehicle while transporting students; any
public utility vehicle while providing emergency service or repairs; and any
recreational vehicle as provided herein.
(Prior Code, § 12-5-4)
§ 73.05 PERMITS.
   (A)   General rule. Local traffic may disregard the posted “NO TRUCKS”
restriction unless the posting authority determines that a vehicle or vehicles
being driven to or from a particular destination or destinations are likely to
damage the highway.
   (B)   Vehicles determined likely to damage roadway. If the posting authority
determines that one or more trucks or commercial vehicles are likely to damage
the street, the posting authority will so notify the registrants of the
vehicles or owners of the destination or destinations, or both, and will also
notify the town police.
   (C)   Proof of local traffic status. The following types of documents will
constitute evidence that a vehicle is local traffic:
      (1)   A bill of lading, shipping order or similar document, which shows a
destination on the posted highway; and
      (2)   Certification by the permittee or an official of a permittee
company on the company letterhead describing the local traffic nature of the
activity, which the vehicle is engaged in.
(Prior Code, § 12-5-5)
§ 73.06 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   This chapter shall be administered and may be enforced by the town’s Police
Department or Town Manager or his or her duly authorized designee.
(Prior Code, § 12-5-6)
§ 73.99 PENALTY.
   Civil infractions shall be enforced by sanctions of at least $250 and not to
exceed $2,500, plus any charge for service of process. Each violation shall be
deemed a separate offense. In addition to any fine, the town may seek criminal
restitution or civil damages for the cost of repairs to any damaged roadway or
bridge and reasonable attorney fees and costs.
(Prior Code, § 12-5-7)
CHAPTER 74: TRAFFIC AND PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.   Speed limits
SCHEDULE I. SPEED LIMITS.
   (A)   No person shall drive a vehicle on any street, except state highways,
within the town limits at a speed in excess of 25 mph, except as expressly
hereinafter provided, and any speed in excess of this speed shall be prima
facie evidence that the speed is too great and, therefore, unreasonable and
unlawful.
   (B)   For those specific streets or portions thereof as designated in this
schedule, no person shall drive a vehicle in excess of the speed as
specifically designated for said street or portion thereof and any speed in
excess of this speed shall be prima facie evidence that the speed is too great
and, therefore, unreasonable and unlawful.
 
Street        Location                                              Speed Limit
             Public park streets; streets or portions thereof that 15 mph
              shall extend through and be bounded on both sides
Cholla Road                                                        35 mph
Kofa Drive    Between Quail Trail Street and Tyson Drive            35 mph
Plymouth Road Between Tyson Drive and Mockingbird Lane              35 mph
Tyson Drive   Between Kofa Drive and Plymouth Road                  35 mph
 
   (C)   The maximum lawful speed as provided in this section shall be reduced
to that which is reasonable and prudent under the conditions and having regard
to the actual potential and potential hazards then existing as per A.R.S. § 28-
701(D).
   (D)   No person shall drive a motor vehicle at a speed that is less than
that which is reasonable and prudent under existing conditions.
   (E)   Any violations or failure to perform any act required by this traffic
code constitutes a civil traffic violation. Civil traffic violations are
subject to the provisions of A.R.S. Title 28, Ch. 5, Art. 2, 3 and 4 in
reference thereto.
   (F)   Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this schedule
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,500 or by imprisonment for a period not
to exceed six months, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a
violation continues shall be a separate offense punishable as herein described.
(Prior Code, § 12-2-13) (Ord. 91-01, passed - -1991; Ord. 23-03, passed 6-13-
2023)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMAL CONTROL
      
91.   HEALTH AND SANITATION
      
92.   PUBLIC NUISANCE ABATEMENT
      
93.   FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
      
94.   ABANDONED VEHICLES
      
95.   ABANDONED, LOST OR STOLEN PERSONAL PROPERTY
      
96.   PARKS AND RECREATION; CEMETERIES
CHAPTER 90: ANIMAL CONTROL
Section
General Provisions
   
90.01   Dangerous animals
   
90.02   Killing dangerous animals
   
90.03   Noises
   
90.04   Strays; housing
   
90.05   Maintenance of farm animals
   
90.06   Biting animals
   
90.07   Animal waste
   
90.08   Feeding wildlife
Dogs
   
90.20   Definitions
   
90.21   Powers and duties of the state’s Veterinarian and the Livestock Board
   
90.22   Powers and duties of the state’s Department of Health Services
   
90.23   Powers and duties of enforcement agent
   
90.24   License fees for dogs; tags; records; penalties; classification
   
90.25   Kennel permit; fee; violation; classification
   
90.26   Anti-rabies vaccination; vaccination and license stations
   
90.27   Rabies Control Fund
   
90.28   Dogs at large; violation
   
90.29   Barking dog; violation
   
90.30   Biting animals; responsibility for reporting; authority to destroy
animals
   
90.31   Unlawful interference with enforcement agent
   
90.32   Removing impounded dogs
   
90.33   Unlawful keeping of dogs
   
90.34   Dogs; liability
   
90.35   Proper care, maintenance and destruction of impounded animals
 
   
90.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.01 DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
   It is unlawful to permit any dangerous, vicious animal of any kind to run at
large within the town, and such animals shall be immediately impounded by the
Police Department. Exhibitions or parades of animals, other than domestic pets,
may be conducted only upon securing a permit from the town’s Police Department.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-1) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.02 KILLING DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
   The members of the Police Department are authorized to kill any dangerous
animals of any kind when it is necessary for the protection of any person or
property.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-2) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.03 NOISES.
   It is unlawful to harbor or keep any animals that disturb the peace by loud
noises at any time of the day or night.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-3) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.04 STRAYS; HOUSING.
   Any person who keeps or causes to be kept any horses, mules, cattle, burros,
goats, sheep or other livestock or poultry shall keep such livestock or poultry
in a pen or similar enclosure to prevent their roaming at large within the
corporate limits of the town. Any such livestock or poultry running at large
may be impounded by the Police Department.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-4) (Ord. 21-08, passed 9-14-2021) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.05 MAINTENANCE OF FARM ANIMALS.
   (A)   It is unlawful to cause or allow any stable or place where any farm
animal is kept to become unsanitary. FARM ANIMALS includes, but is not limited
to, pigmy goats, sheep, goats, llamas, pigs, miniature horses, ponies, donkeys,
horses, mules and cattle.
   (B)   The waste of all horses and livestock shall be removed daily down to
mineral soil. Farm animals shall be kept in a manner that does not create or
cause a public nuisance.
   (C)   Violation of divisions (A) or (B) above shall constitute a public
nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-5) (Ord. 21-08, passed 9-14-2021) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.06 BITING ANIMALS.
   Whenever any animal, except a dog, bites a person, the person so bitten and
the owner of the animal shall immediately notify the enforcement agent, who
shall cause an examination of the animal to be made by a duly licensed
physician or a duly license veterinarian, and shall order the animal held on
the owner’s premises or shall have it impounded as long as necessary for a
complete examination. If it is determined that the animal is infected with
rabies or other dangerous, contagious and infectious disease, it shall be the
duty of the enforcement agent to destroy such animal in as humane a manner as
is reasonably possible. If, at the end of the quarantine or impoundment, a
veterinarian is convinced that the animal is free from such disease, the animal
shall be released. If the animal dies during the period of quarantine or
impoundment, its head shall be sent to the laboratory at the Department of
Health Services for examination.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-6) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.07 ANIMAL WASTE.
   The owner of every animal shall be responsible for the removal of excreta
deposited by his or her animals on public walks, streets or recreation areas.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-7) (Ord. 01-17, passed - -2001) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.08 FEEDING WILDLIFE.
   Feeding of wildlife predators is prohibited in the town limits.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-1) Penalty, see §
90.99
DOGS
§ 90.20 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL. Any animal of a species that is susceptible to rabies, except
humans.
   AT LARGE. On or off premises of the owner and not under control of the owner
or other person acting for the owner. Any dog in a suitable enclosure or
confined shall not be considered to be running AT LARGE.
   DEPARTMENT. The state’s Department of Health Services.
   ENFORCEMENT AGENT. The person in each town who is responsible for the
enforcement of this subchapter and the regulations promulgated thereunder or
such other person as designated by the Council.
   IMPOUND. The act of taking or receiving into custody by the enforcement
agent any dog or other animal for the purpose of confinement in an authorized
pound in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter.
   KENNEL. An enclosed, controlled area, inaccessible to other animals, in
which a person keeps, harbors or maintains five or more dogs under controlled
conditions.
   LIVESTOCK. Neat animals, horses, sheep, goats, swine, mules and asses.
   OWNER. Any person keeping an animal other than livestock for more than six
consecutive days.
   POUND. Any establishment authorized for the confinement, maintenance,
safekeeping and control of dogs and other animals that come into the custody of
the enforcement agent in the performance of his or her official duties.
   RABIES QUARANTINE AREA. Any area in which a state of emergency has been
declared to exist due to the occurrence of rabies in animals in or adjacent to
this area.
   STRAY DOG. Any dog four months of age or older running at large that is not
wearing a valid license tag.
   VACCINATION. The administration of an anti-rabies vaccine to animals by a
veterinarian or in authorized pounds by employees trained by a veterinarian.
   VETERINARIAN. Unless otherwise indicated, means any veterinarian licensed to
practice in the state or any veterinarian employed in the state by a
governmental agency.
   VETERINARY HOSPITAL. Any establishment operated by a veterinarian licensed
to practice in the state that provides clinical facilities and houses animals
or birds for dental, medical or surgical treatment. A VETERINARY HOSPITAL may
have adjacent to it or in conjunction with it, or as an integral part of it,
pens, stalls, cages or kennels for quarantine, observation or boarding.
   VICIOUS ANIMAL. Any animal of the order carnivora that has a propensity to
bite human beings without provocation and has been so declared after a hearing
before a justice of the peace or a Town Magistrate.
   WILDLIFE PREDATORS. Coyotes, bobcats, hawks, owls and other similar
predators.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-1) (Ord. 01-07, passed - -2001; Ord. 10-17, passed - -2010)
§ 90.21 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE STATE’S VETERINARIAN AND THE LIVESTOCK BOARD.
   (A)   The state’s Veterinarian shall designate the type or types of anti-
rabies vaccines that may be used for vaccination of animals, the period of time
between vaccination and revaccination and the dosage and method of
administration of the vaccine.
   (B)   The state’s Livestock Board shall regulate the handling and
disposition of animals classed as livestock that have been bitten by a rabid or
suspected rabid animal or are showing symptoms suggestive of rabies.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-2)
§ 90.22 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE STATE’S DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES.
   (A)   The state’s Department of Health Services shall regulate the handling
and disposition of animals other than livestock that have been bitten by a
rabid or suspected rabid animal or are showing symptoms suggestive of rabies.
   (B)   The state’s Department of Health Services may require the enforcement
agent to submit a record of all dog licenses issued and in addition any
information deemed necessary to aid in the control of rabies.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-3)
§ 90.23 POWERS AND DUTIES OF ENFORCEMENT AGENT.
   (A)   The enforcement agent shall:
      (1)   Enforce the provisions of this subchapter and the regulations
promulgated thereunder;
      (2)   Issue citations for the violation of the provisions of this
subchapter and the regulations promulgated thereunder. The procedure for the
issuance of notices to appear shall be as provided for peace officers in A.R.S.
§ 13-3903; except that, the enforcement agent shall not make an arrest before
issuing the notice; and
      (3)   Be responsible for declaring a rabies quarantine area within area
of jurisdiction. When a quarantine area has been declared, the enforcement
agent shall meet with the state’s Veterinarian and representatives from the
Department of Health Services and the Game and Fish Department to implement an
emergency program for the control of rabies within an area. Any regulations
restricting or involving movements of livestock within the area shall be
subject to approval by the state’s Veterinarian.
   (B)   The issuance of citations pursuant to this section shall be subject to
the provisions of A.R.S. § 13-3899.
   (C)   The enforcement agent may designate deputies.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-4)
§ 90.24 LICENSE FEES FOR DOGS; TAGS; RECORDS; PENALTIES; CLASSIFICATION.
   (A)   The enforcement agent shall set an annual license fee which shall be
paid for each dog four months of age or over that is kept, harbored or
maintained within the boundaries of the town for at least 30 consecutive days
of each calendar year. License fees shall become payable at the discretion of
the Council. The licensing period shall not exceed the period of time for
revaccination as designated by the state’s Veterinarian. License fees shall be
paid within 90 days. A penalty not to exceed $4 shall be added to the license
fee in the event that application is made subsequent to the date on which the
dog is required to be licensed under the provisions of this subchapter. This
penalty shall not be assessed against applicants who furnish adequate proof
that the dog to be licensed has been in their possession less than 30
consecutive days.
   (B)   Durable dog tags shall be provided. Each dog licensed under the terms
of this subchapter shall receive, at the time of licensing, such a tag on which
shall be inscribed the name of the town, the number of the license and the date
on which it expires. The tag shall be attached to a collar or harness which
shall be worn by the dog at all times while running at large, except as
otherwise provided in this subchapter. Whenever a dog tag is lost, a duplicate
tag shall be issued upon application by the owner and payment of a fee to the
enforcement agent.
   (C)   Any person who fails within 15 days after written notification from
the enforcement agent to obtain a license for a dog required to be licensed,
counterfeits or attempts to counterfeit an official dog tag, or removes such
tag from any dog for the purpose of willful and malicious mischief or places a
dog tag upon a dog unless the tag was issued for that particular dog is guilty
of a Class 2 misdemeanor.
Types of License/Service Fee/Charge
Types of License/Service                                                       Fee/
                                                                               Charge
Adoption fee                                                                   $20
After hours pick-up                                                            $50
Animal pick-up reference bites                                                 $50
Euthanasia                                                                     $25
Impound daily fee                                                              $8
Licenses (licenses are valid for one calendar year and are to be renewed on a yearly
basis)
   Licenses for winter visitors that have out of state licenses already in  $5
possession
   Licenses for winter visitors and residents that do not already have      $12
possession
   Licenses for dogs that have been spayed or neutered (provided that owner $5
provides legal documentation)
Open hour drop-off                                                             $10
Regular hours pick-up                                                          $25
 
(Prior Code, § 6-2-5) (Ord. 01-05, passed - -2001; Ord 01-07, passed - -2001)
§ 90.25 KENNEL PERMIT; FEE; VIOLATION; CLASSIFICATION.
   (A)   A person operating a kennel shall obtain a permit issued by the Board
of Supervisors of the county where the kennel is located, except if each
individual dog is licensed.
   (B)   The annual fee for the kennel permit is $75.
   (C)   A dog remaining within the kennel is not required to be licensed
individually under A.R.S. § 11-1008. A dog leaving the controlled kennel
conditions shall be licensed under A.R.S. § 11-1008, except if the dog is only
being transported to another kennel which has a permit issued under this
section.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-6) (Ord. 01-07, passed - -2001)
§ 90.26 ANTI-RABIES VACCINATION; VACCINATION AND LICENSE STATIONS.
   (A)   Before a license is issued for any dog, the owner must present a
vaccination certificate signed by a veterinarian stating the owner’s name and
address and giving the dog’s description, date of vaccination and type,
manufacturer and serial number of the vaccine used, and date revaccination is
due. A duplicate of each rabies vaccination certificate issued shall be
transmitted to the enforcement agent on or before the tenth day of the month
following the month during which the dog was vaccinated. No dog shall be
licensed unless it is vaccinated in accordance with the provisions of this
subchapter and the regulations promulgated thereunder.
   (B)   A dog vaccinated in any other state prior to entry into Arizona may be
licensed in Arizona; provided that, at the time of licensing, the owner of such
dog presents a vaccination certificate, signed by a veterinarian licensed to
practice in that state or a veterinarian employed by a governmental agency in
that state, stating the owner’s name and address and giving the dog’s
description, date of vaccination and type, manufacturer and serial number of
the vaccine used. The vaccination must be in conformity with the provisions of
this subchapter and the regulations promulgated thereunder.
   (C)   The enforcement agent shall make provisions for vaccination clinics as
deemed necessary. The vaccination shall be performed by a veterinarian.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-7)
§ 90.27 RABIES CONTROL FUND.
   (A)   The enforcement agent or his or her authorized representative shall
place the moneys collected by him or her under the provisions of this
subchapter in a special fund to be known as the “Rabies Control Fund” to be
used for the enforcement of the provisions of this subchapter and the
regulation promulgated thereunder.
   (B)   Any unencumbered balance remaining in the Rabies Control Fund at the
end of a fiscal year shall be carried over into the following fiscal year.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-8)
§ 90.28 DOGS AT LARGE; VIOLATION.
   (A)   For purposes of this section, AT LARGE means being neither confined by
an enclosure nor physically restrained by a leash.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person having ownership, possession or
control of a dog to allow the dog to run at large within the town.
   (C)   Each day a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
   (D)   Any dog at large shall be apprehended and impounded by an enforcement
agent.
      (1)   Said agent shall have the right to enter upon private property when
it is necessary to do so in order to apprehend any dog that has been running at
large. Such entrance upon private property shall be in reasonable pursuit of
such dog and shall not include entry into a domicile or enclosure which
confines a dog unless it be at the invitation of the occupant.
      (2)   Said agent may issue a citation to the dog owner or person acting
for the owner when the dog is at large. The procedure for the issuance of
notice to appear shall be as provided for peace officers in A.R.S. § 13-3903,
except the enforcement agent shall not make an arrest before issuing the
notice. The issuance of citations pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to
provisions of A.R.S. § 13-3899.
      (3)   In the judgment of the enforcement agent, if any dog at large or
other animal that is dangerous or fierce and a threat to human safety cannot be
safely impounded, it may be slain.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-9) (Ord. 99-07, passed - -1999) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.29 BARKING DOG; VIOLATION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person having ownership, possession or
control of a dog within the town to allow the dog to excessively bark, howl,
yelp, whine or make other unreasonable noise which disturbs the peace or quiet
of any neighborhood, family or person.
   (B)   Each day a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-10) (Ord. 99-07, passed - -1999) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.30 BITING ANIMALS; RESPONSIBILITY FOR REPORTING; AUTHORITY TO DESTROY
ANIMALS.
   (A)   An unlicensed or unvaccinated dog or cat that bites any person shall
be confined and quarantined in an authorized pound or, at the expense of the
owner, at a veterinary hospital for a period of not less than ten days. A dog
properly licensed and vaccinated pursuant to this subchapter that bites any
person may be confined and quarantined at the home of the owner or wherever the
dog is harbored and maintained with the consent of and in a manner prescribed
by the enforcement agent.
   (B)   Any animal other than a dog or cat that bites any person shall be
confined and quarantined in an authorized pound or, at the expense of the
owner, at a veterinary hospital for a period of not less than 14 days; provided
that, livestock shall be confined and quarantined for the 14-day period in a
manner regulated by the state’s Livestock Board. If the animal is a caged
rodent, it may be confined and quarantined at the home of the owner or where it
is harbored or maintained, for the required period of time, with the consent of
an in a manner prescribed by the enforcement agent.
   (C)   Any wild animal which bites any person may be killed and submitted to
the enforcement agent or his or her deputies for transmission to an appropriate
diagnostic laboratory.
   (D)   Whenever an animal bites any person, the incident shall be reported to
the enforcement agent immediately by any person having direct knowledge.
   (E)   The town enforcement agent may destroy any animal confined and
quarantined pursuant to this subchapter prior to the termination of the minimum
confinement period for laboratory examination for rabies if:
      (1)   Such animal shows clear clinical signs of rabies; and/or
      (2)   The owner of such animal consents to its destruction.
   (F)   Any animal subject to licensing under this subchapter found without a
tag identifying its owner shall be deemed unowned.
   (G)   The enforcement agent shall destroy a vicious animal upon an order of
a justice of the peace or a Town Magistrate. A Justice of the Peace or Town
Magistrate may issue such an order after notice to the owner, if any, and a
hearing.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-11) (Ord. 01-07, passed - -2001)
§ 90.31 UNLAWFUL INTERFERENCE WITH ENFORCEMENT AGENT.
   It is unlawful for any person to interfere with the enforcement agent in the
performance of his or her duties.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-12) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.32 REMOVING IMPOUNDED DOGS.
   No person may remove or attempt to remove an animal which has been impounded
or which is in the possession of the enforcement agent, except in accordance
with the provisions of this subchapter and the regulations promulgated
thereunder.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-13) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.33 UNLAWFUL KEEPING OF DOGS.
   It is unlawful for a person to keep, harbor or maintain a dog within the
town, except as provided by the terms of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-14) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.34 DOGS; LIABILITY.
   Injury to any person or damage to any property by a dog while at large shall
be the full responsibility of the dog’s owner or person(s) responsible for the
dog when such damages were inflicted.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-16) (Ord. 99-07, passed - -1999)
§ 90.35 PROPER CARE, MAINTENANCE AND DESTRUCTION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS.
   (A)   Any animal impounded in a county, city or town pound shall be given
proper and humane care and maintenance.
   (B)   Any dog or cat destroyed while impounded in a county, city or town
pound shall be destroyed only by the use of sodium pentobarbital or a
derivative of sodium pentobarbital.
   (C)   If an animal is destroyed by means specified in divisions (B)(1) or
(B)(3) above, it shall be done by a licensed veterinarian or in accordance with
procedures established by the state’s Veterinarian pursuant to A.R.S. § 24-153.
   (D)   The governing body of any county, city or town which operates a pound
shall establish procedures for the humane destruction of impounded animals by
the methods described in divisions (B) and (C) above.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-17)
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Violation of §
90.07 of this chapter is a Class 3 misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-7)
   (C)   Any person who fails to comply with §
90.08 of this chapter, or who violates any of its provisions, is guilty of a
Class 2 misdemeanor and may be subject to imprisonment for a maximum period of
four months or fined a maximum of $750, or both.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-2)
   (D)   Any person who fails to comply with the requirements of §§
90.20 through
90.35  of this chapter, except as explicitly listed below, or violates any of
its provisions, is guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor and may be subject to
imprisonment for a maximum period of four months, or fined a maximum of $750,
or both.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-15)
   (E)   (1)   A person who fails to obtain a kennel permit under §
90.25 of this chapter is subject to a penalty of $25, in addition to the annual
fee.
      (2)   A person who knowingly fails within 30 days after written
notification from the county enforcement agent to obtain a kennel permit is
guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-6)
(Ord. 01-07, passed - -2001; Ord. 01-17, passed - -2001)
CHAPTER 91: HEALTH AND SANITATION
Section
General Provisions
   
91.01   County health permit required
Garbage and Trash Removal
   
91.15   Vehicles and receptacles to be spill-proof
   
91.16   Spilled refuse
   
91.17   Dumping refuse
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.01 COUNTY HEALTH PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person to carry on any trade, calling, profession,
occupation or business, specified in this chapter and
Ch. 92 and
Ch. 93 of this code of ordinances, which is required to obtain a county health
permit to conduct business without first having obtained said permit.
(Prior Code, § 10-4-1) Penalty, see §
10.99
GARBAGE AND TRASH REMOVAL
§ 91.15 VEHICLES AND RECEPTACLES TO BE SPILL-PROOF.
   It is unlawful for any person to haul or cause to be hauled on or along any
public street in the town any garbage, unless such garbage is contained in
strong, water-tight vehicles or vehicles with water-tight receptacles,
constructed to prevent any such garbage from falling, leaking or spilling and
any odor from escaping.
(Prior Code, § 10-1-1) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.16 SPILLED REFUSE.
   Any person hauling any refuse along the streets of the town shall
immediately replace in the conveyance used for such hauling any refuse which
may fall upon any street.
(Prior Code, § 10-1-2) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.17 DUMPING REFUSE.
   It is unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed any refuse upon
any public or private property within the town, except as specifically
permitted in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 10-1-3) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 92: PUBLIC NUISANCE ABATEMENT
Section
   
92.01   Definitions
   
92.02   Litter on private property
   
92.03   Owner to maintain premises
   
92.04   Placement of debris
   
92.05   Administration and enforcement
   
92.06   Abatement of public nuisances
   
92.07   Appeals
 
   
92.99   Penalty
§ 92.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ATTRACTIVE NUISANCE. A condition that may reasonably be expected to attract
children and that is dangerous to children because of their inability to
appreciate the hazard.
   EXCAVATION. Any well, shaft, basement, pit, tunnel, trench, hole or other
like or similar removal of earth material.
   EXCESSIVE CLUTTER. Any material (not including litter) such as toys, tools,
papers of every description, auto parts, furniture, appliances, discarded sand,
broken tree limbs, discarded gravel, ashes, tin cans, aluminum cans, empty
glass containers, old firewood not neatly stacked, lumber, upholstered indoor
furniture, boxes, mattresses, building materials, yard maintenance items, items
for sale, object of value, usable items left in the yard or porches for days at
a time, discarded materials of every kind, all of which is left in front, back
or side yards, or porches, more than one week as debris, which are scattered
and/or disorderly which impedes movement.
   IMMINENT HAZARD. A condition that places a person’s life, health or property
in immediate, impending peril or could cause serious or life-threatening injury
or death at any time.
   LITTER. Any rubbish, trash, weeds, filth and debris which shall constitute a
hazard to public health and safety and shall include all putrescible and non-
putrescible solid wastes including garbage, trash, ashes, street cleaning, dead
animals, abandoned automobiles and solid market and industrial waste. LITTER
may include deposits, accumulations, piles or heaps of brush, grass, debris,
weeds, cans, cloth, paper, wood, rubbish, animal waste or other similar matter
that present a hazard to the health or safety of any person or public; and any
growth of weeds, brush, grass or other vegetable growth to a height of over 12
inches, except for properly cultivated plant materials used for food.
   PRIVATE PREMISES. Any dwelling, house, building or other structure, designed
or used either wholly or in part for residential, commercial or industrial
purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or
vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps or
vestibules belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other
structures.
   PUBLIC NUISANCE. A condition of litter, excessive clutter, attractive
nuisance or other condition that is or may be injurious to the public health,
safety and general welfare, which interfere with the comfortable and reasonable
use and enjoyment of property by any persons, or which unlawfully obstructs the
free passage or use of any public property are hereby declared to be public
nuisances.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other
public ways, and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and
buildings.
   RESPONSIBLE PARTY. An occupant, lessor, lessee, manager, licensee or person
having control over a structure or parcel of land; and, in any case where the
demolition of a structure is proposed as a means of abatement, any lienholder
whose lien is recorded in the official records of the County Recorder’s office.
(Ord. 20-05, passed 1-28-2020)
§ 92.02 LITTER ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit litter in or upon any
street, alley, private grounds, public grounds, school grounds or church
grounds.
(Ord. 20-05, passed 1-28-2020) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.03 OWNER TO MAINTAIN PREMISES.
   The owner or responsible party of any private premises shall at all times
maintain the premises free of litter and conditions which are public nuisances;
provided that, this section shall not prohibit the storage of excessive clutter
and litter in authorized private receptacles for collection.
(Ord. 20-05, passed 1-28-2020) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.04 PLACEMENT OF DEBRIS.
   Any person, firm or corporation who shall place any rubbish, trash, filth or
debris upon any private or public property not owned or under the control of
said person, firm or corporation shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, in
addition to any fine which may be imposed for violation of any provision of
this section, shall be liable for all costs which may be assessed pursuant to
this chapter for the removal of said rubbish, trash, filth or debris.
(Ord. 20-05, passed 1-28-2020) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.05 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Authority to enforce.
      (1)   The code official shall enforce the provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   No person shall obstruct, impede or interfere with any officer,
employee, contractor or authorized representative of the town who is lawfully
engaged in the enforcement or execution of the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Authority and inspections; re-inspection fees; appeal.
      (1)   The code official is authorized to make inspections of property to
determine compliance with this chapter. Interior inspections will be done with
approval of the owner, occupant or responsible party, or by a court order or as
otherwise authorized by law.
      (2)   No fee shall be charged for an initial inspection to determine the
existence of a violation of this chapter. Any person who neglects, fails or
refuses to correct the violations contained in a notice of violation issued
pursuant to division (D) below may be assessed a re-inspection fee for
inspections that occur after the compliance date set forth in the notice if the
violation has not been corrected. The fee for re-inspections shall be adopted
by resolution of the Council. Failure to pay re-inspection fees within 14 days
of the re-inspection is a violation of this section.
   (C)   Enforcement independent of other provisions. The authority of the code
official to enforce the provisions of this chapter is independent of and in
addition to the authority of town officials to enforce the provisions of any
other chapter of the town code or other laws, ordinances or statutes.
   (D)   Cooperation of other departments. The Police Department and any other
department of the town has authority to assist and cooperate with the code
official in the performance of duties under this chapter. This cooperation may
include assistance in enforcement or abatement actions. This section is not
intended to create or expand the authority of any department to perform acts
that are otherwise prohibited bylaw.
   (E)   Notice of violation.
      (1)   If the code official finds a violation of §§
94.02,
130.12,
130.16,
150.02,
150.20 and
150.21 of this code of ordinances, the code official may notify the owner or
responsible party through the issuance of a notice of violation.
      (2)   A notice of violation shall include:
         (a)   The identification of the property in violation; a street
address or legal description of the property is sufficient identification of
the property;
         (b)   A statement of the violations in sufficient detail to allow an
owner or responsible party to identify and correct the problem;
         (c)   An estimate of the cost of abatement if the town proceeds to
abate the public nuisance due to the owner or responsible party’s failure to do
so;
         (d)   A statement of the actions required to correct and abate the
violations. The statement of required action shall direct the owner or
responsible party to perform whatever action is reasonably necessary to correct
the violations, including clean-up, extermination, repair, rehabilitation,
vacation of the building or structure and/or demolition.
            1.   If the action required is a repair, any required permits shall
be obtained prior to making the repair. The repair work shall be commenced and
completed within such time as the code official determines is reasonable under
the circumstances, not to exceed 60 days.
            2.   If the action required includes the vacation of a building or
structure, the notice shall direct that the building or structure be vacated
within a time certain as the code official determines is reasonable under the
circumstances.
            3.   If the action required includes demolition and removal of a
building or structure, the notice shall direct that the building or structure
be vacated within a time certain as the code official determines is reasonable
under the circumstances; that all permits required for the demolition be
secured within 60 days from the date of the notice; and that the demolition and
removal be completed within a time certain as the code official determines is
reasonable under the circumstances.
            4.   If the action required is the abatement of a hazardous
excavation, the notice shall direct any or all of the following actions be
completed within a time certain as determined to be reasonable by the code
official:
               a.   Securing the excavation by completely surrounding either
the excavation or the properly with a fence or other enclosure that is at least
five feet in height at all points;
               b.   Securing the excavation by completely covering the
excavation in a manner that prevents any access to the excavation and
eliminates any hazard or attractive nuisance; and
               c.   Completely filling the excavation with clean fill.
         (e)   The address and telephone number of a town representative to
contact;
         (f)   A statement describing the town’s authority to abate should the
owner or responsible party not correct the violation within the time specified
in the notice, and to assess a lien against the property for the costs of
abatement; and
         (g)   A statement advising that the owner or responsible party may
file an appeal of the notice in the manner specified in this chapter, and that
failure to appeal will constitute a waiver of all rights to an administrative
determination and hearing of the matter.
      (3)   The notice shall be given not less than 30 days before the day set
for compliance.
      (4)   The notice shall be served upon the owner of record and/or the
responsible party in the manner described in division (E)(5) below. In
addition, the notice shall be served on the holder of any legal interest in the
property, if known to the code official, and in cases involving an order to
vacate, upon any lawful tenant. Any failure to serve any person holding legal
interest in the property shall not invalidate any proceedings as to any other
person duly served and shall not relieve any such person from any obligation
imposed by this chapter.
      (5)   Any notice given for any purpose under this chapter, except any
notice that includes an order to vacate or an order to abate by demolition,
shall be deemed effective on the date when written notice is hand-delivered; or
on the date when written notice is mailed by first class mail, addressed to the
property owner or responsible party. Any notice given under this chapter that
includes an order to vacate or an order to abate by demolition shall be deemed
effective on the date when written notice is hand delivered or mailed by
certified mail return receipt requested, addressed to the property owner or
responsible party. Any notice served by first class mail shall be mailed to the
last known address of the owner, the owner’s authorized agent or the owner’s
statutory agent and to the address to which the tax bill for the property was
last mailed. For any notice given under this chapter, including any notice that
includes an order to vacate or an order to abate by demolition, if personal
service or mailed service is not practicable, service of notice shall also be
deemed effective upon notification through one time public notice published in
a newspaper of general circulation and by posting the property for a period of
30 days. Nothing herein shall preclude the town from giving additional verbal,
written or posted notice at its discretion. If the town does elect to give any
additional notice in any instance, it shall not thereby become obligated to
give such additional notice thereafter in the same or other situations.
      (6)   Unless otherwise specifically provided, nothing in this section
shall require the issuance of a notice of violation prior to the commencement
of civil or criminal violation proceedings.
      (7)   Any person who fails to comply with a notice of violation issued
pursuant to this section shall be subject to the penalties set forth in
division (F) below.
   (F)   Transfer of property after notice.
      (1)   Responsibility upon transfer of property. The transfer of any and
all property interests in any manner of any real property against which a
notice of violation has been issued shall not relieve the party(s) served with
a notice unless the legal entity assuming an ownership interest in such
property, in writing, assumes responsibility for compliance with the notice of
violation and a copy of such writing is presented to the code official.
      (2)   Fraudulent transfer as a misdemeanor. Any person who has been
served with a notice of violation and who then transfers an ownership interest
in the real property against which the notice has been served is guilty of a
misdemeanor if the transfer is made without first obtaining a written
acceptance of liability from the new owner for the items listed in the notice.
   (G)   Recording a violation. If there is not compliance with a notice of
violation within the time specified in the notice, and no appeal has been
properly and timely filed, the code official may record a notice of violation
with the County Recorder. A recorded notice of violation shall describe the
property and the violations and shall certify that the owner has been notified.
Whenever the corrections ordered thereafter have been completed or the building
demolished so that the violations described in the notice have been abated, the
code official shall file a new certificate with the County Recorder certifying
that all required corrections have been made and that the property is no longer
in violation of this chapter. Failure to record a notice of violation shall not
affect the validity of the notice as to persons who receive the notice.
   (H)   Jurisdiction of court.
      (1)   Jurisdiction of all proceedings to enforce the provisions of this
chapter shall be in the Town Court.
      (2)   The Town Court shall have jurisdiction to issue orders pursuant to
this chapter permitting the town to abate conditions that constitute a
violation of the provisions of this chapter.
   (I)   Appeal of court decision. Any party may appeal the judgment of the
Court to the Superior Court. Appeals from civil infraction proceedings shall be
in accordance with the Superior Court Rules of Appellate Procedure-Civil.
Appeals from criminal proceedings shall be in accordance with the Superior
Court Rules of Appellate Procedure-Criminal.
(Ord. 20-05, passed 1-28-2020)
§ 92.06 ABATEMENT OF PUBLIC NUISANCES.
   (A)   Court ordered abatement.
      (1)   Upon finding a person guilty of a violation of any provision of
this chapter, the court shall order such person to perform whatever action is
reasonably necessary to correct and abate the violations, including clean-up,
board-up, extermination, repair, rehabilitation, vacation of the building or
structure, permanently securing or filling the excavation, and/or demolition.
An abatement order shall be effective for one year unless stayed on appeal. If
stayed on appeal, the order shall be effective for one year from the end of the
appeal if the judgment and sentence are upheld. If more than one person is
guilty of a violation, such persons shall be jointly and severally responsible
for completing the abatement.
      (2)   For violations of §
94.02 of this code of ordinances, upon a finding of responsibility, the court
shall order the abatement of the offending vehicle within 30 days of judgment,
unless additional time is requested by the defendant and granted by the court.
Upon expiration of the time for abatement, and upon request by the town, the
court shall order the town to abate a violation by towing and impounding the
vehicle; and the town shall dispose of the vehicle pursuant to the procedures
for such disposal as set forth in §
94.03 of this code of ordinances.
      (3)   When the court orders abatement pursuant to this section, the court
shall advise a violator that additional fines will be imposed for failure to
abate a violation, and that the town may bring criminal charges for failure to
obey an order to abate a violation.
   (B)   Abatement by the town.
      (1)   In addition to ordering abatement of a violation as provided in
division (A) above, upon finding a person guilty of a violation of any
provision of this chapter, the court may issue an order authorizing the town to
perform whatever action is reasonably necessary to correct and abate the
violation, including clean-up, board-up, extermination, repair, rehabilitation,
vacation of the building or structure, disconnection of utilities, permanently
securing or filling the excavation and/or demolition.
      (2)   The reasonable costs of any such abatement shall be the
responsibility of the person found guilty of the violation. If more than one
person is guilty or responsible for a violation, such persons shall be jointly
and severally responsible for the costs of the abatement. The town shall pay
the cost and expense of such abatement from any appropriation made available
for that purpose and shall certify a statement of account to the Finance
Director, who shall collect the amount due, together with interest at the rate
established by law.
      (3)   Costs incurred by town arising from the town taking action to abate
a violation pursuant to a court order shall be a lien filed against the real
property that is the subject of the violation, not to exceed the estimate set
forth in the notice.
      (4)   Upon commencement of action on the property or after mailing the
statement of account to the owner or responsible party, the town shall place a
lien on the property in the amount of the cost of work performed, including
actual costs of any additional inspection and other incidental connected costs,
and for associated legal costs for abatement or injunction, but not exceeding
the estimated cost set forth in the notice, and may pursue any or all means for
recovery of cost if the lien is not paid. If the lien is paid, the town shall
remove the lien. In the event it is necessary to enforce the lien by sale, the
sale shall be made from a judgment of foreclosure and order of sale. The town
shall have the right to enforce the lien in the Superior Court of the county at
any time after recording, but failure to enforce the lien shall not affect its
validity. The recorded lien shall be prima facie evidence of the truth of all
matters recited therein, and of the regularity of all proceedings prior to the
recording. Prior lien or liens for the purposes provided for in this chapter
shall not be a bar to a subsequent lien or liens and any number of liens on the
same parcel may be enforced in the same action.
      (5)   A lien made pursuant to this section is prior and superior to all
other liens, obligations, mortgages or other encumbrances, except liens for
general taxes.
      (6)   Any liens filed with the County Recorder pursuant to previous
provisions of this chapter or any similar chapter shall remain in effect under
the same terms and conditions that existed at the time of recording.
      (7)   The purpose of charging costs to a utility services account is to
provide a means of billing and collecting costs, rather than to create a means
of discontinuing utility services.
   (C)   Temporary abatement. If it is determined that a public nuisance as
provided in §
150.20 of this code of ordinances is a hazard to the public safety and health,
the code official may declare such structure a hazard. After notice is
communicated to any owner of record to secure the structure and the owner does
not secure the structure to town specifications, the hazard may be summarily
abated by the town through boarding. The town may also post both the structure
and the exterior premises with signs to provide reasonable notice prohibiting
entry (i.e., “No Trespassing” signs). Any and all charges and costs arising
from the town taking action to secure the structure shall be a lien filed
against the real property containing such a structure.
   (D)   Emergency abatement.
      (1)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter if, in the
opinion of the code official, the conditions at a property constitute an
imminent hazard, the code official may order immediate abatement of the hazard
without notice. Such abatement of an imminent hazard shall be limited to the
minimum work necessary to remove the hazard and may include disconnection of
utilities.
      (2)   The town shall pay the cost and expense of such abatement from any
appropriation made available for that purpose.
      (3)   A lien shall be recorded with the County Recorder’s office and
shall address the same costs and procedures identified in division (B) above.
      (4)   Whenever the code official finds that any structure contains an
imminent hazard or health hazard, the code official may declare such structure
unfit for human occupancy and order it to be vacated or to remain vacant. A
structure declared unfit for occupancy and ordered vacated or to remain vacant
under the provisions of this section shall not be leased, rented or occupied,
and the utilities cannot be reconnected, until it has been inspected and deemed
fit for occupancy by the town. The town shall reinspect, for the purpose of
reoccupancy, within three business days of the receipt of a written request by
the owner.
      (5)   Fire department suppression forces are responsible for emergency
operations related to fire conditions. In any case involving fire conditions at
a building or structure, fire suppression forces shall be responsible for fire
suppression and structure control until such time as the fire is fully
extinguished. After fire conditions are fully extinguished, and after any
necessary fire cause investigation, fire suppression forces shall transfer
control and responsibility for the building or structure to the Building
Official or other appropriate code official. After this transfer, all
subsequent enforcement actions, such as securing the structure, restoring
utilities or ordering demolition, as well as all follow up actions such as cost
recovery, shall be the responsibility of the Building Official or code
official. After the transfer of responsibility, fire cause investigators shall
retain authority over and responsibility for investigation of fire causation.
   (E)   Structures posted as hazardous.
      (1)   Whenever the code official has determined that a structure is unfit
for occupancy and orders the structure to be vacated, the code official shall
post a written notice at or upon each exit of the structure. The notice shall
be in substantially the following form:
 
DO NOT ENTER UNSAFE TO OCCUPY
It is unlawful to occupy this structure or to remove or deface this notice.
 
      (2)   No person shall remain in or enter any structure that has been so
posted, except to make repairs, demolish or remove such structure under permit.
No person shall remove or deface such notice after it is posted until the
required repairs, demolition or removal of the structure is completed and the
property is reinspected and found to be in compliance.
      (3)   Whenever a notice is posted pursuant to division (E)(2) above, the
code official shall provide notice of such posting to the property owner using
the procedures and provisions set forth in §
92.05(F) of this chapter. This notice shall recite the emergency and describe
the hazardous condition(s) that necessitate the posting.
   (F)   Abatement by demolition. Abatement by demolition shall be ordered only
where repair of the structure is unreasonable or impracticable, and demolition
and removal of a structure or building is necessary to correct and abate a
violation. Any action involving the demolition of a building or structure shall
be commenced by issuing a notice of violation to the owner and any responsible
parties in accordance with the provisions of §
92.05(F) of this chapter.
(Ord. 20-05, passed 1-28-2020)
§ 92.07 ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS.
   (A)   Availability of administrative appeal. The provisions of this chapter,
which permit administrative review of a notice of violation, only apply to:
      (1)   Violations of §§
150.01,
150.02,
150.20 and
150.21 of this code of ordinances;
      (2)   Violations of this chapter wherein the town seeks the recovery of
costs through the imposition of a lien as provided in §
92.06(B) of this chapter; and
      (3)   No administrative appeal is available in a case involving a pending
or adjudicated court proceeding.
   (B)   Administrative conference.
      (1)   Any notice of violation described in division (A) above may be
appealed to the code official for an administrative conference for review. An
appeal shall be made to the code official in the following manner.
         (a)   The applicant shall file a written appeal on the forms provided
by the code official and accompanied by a non-refundable fee, as determined by
resolution of the Council, within ten days after the date of service of the
notice.
         (b)   The appeal will be heard by the code official within ten days at
a regular, specified time.
         (c)   The code official may use a hearing committee consisting of such
staff as the code official deems appropriate or other technical persons to
advise the code official on a particular appeal.
         (d)   The applicant shall provide adequate information to fully
describe the conditions in question.
         (e)   The applicant may, but is not required to, meet personally with
the code official.
      (2)   If the code official denies an appeal made under this section, the
applicant must comply with the decision of the code official or may appeal to
the Council pursuant to division (D) below.
      (3)   Failure to file an appeal in accordance with the provisions of this
section constitutes a waiver of the right to an administrative conference.
Additionally, any person who appeals directly to the Council pursuant to
division (D) below waives the right to an administrative conference.
   (C)   Modifications. The code official may grant a minor variance to the
provisions specified in §
92.05(E) of this chapter when there exists an unusual or unreasonable hardship
resulting from a literal interpretation of this chapter. The code official
shall first find that a special individual hardship makes the strict
application of this chapter impractical, and the variance is in conformity with
the intent and purpose of this chapter, and that the variance does not lessen
health, life safety and fire safety requirements or any degree of structural
integrity. The details of actions granting variances shall be recorded and
maintained by the code official.
   (D)   Appeals to the Council.
      (1)   An owner or responsible party who is not or was not a party to a
pending or adjudicated court proceeding involving a request for court ordered
abatement of the violation (hereinafter, the appellant) may appeal a notice of
violation, to the Council, when it is claimed that:
         (a)   Substantive errors exist in the notice of violation; and
         (b)   The method or schedule for correcting the violation as set forth
in the notice of violation is unreasonable or arbitrary.
      (2)   An owner or responsible party whose relationship with the property
existed at the time of the recording of a lien, and who is not or was not a
party to a court proceeding which has established or may establish the amount
of a lien, may appeal the amount of the lien for abatement to the Council.
      (3)   In cases involving an order to vacate or suspend occupancy of a
group dwelling public nuisance, the property owner or a lawful tenant of the
property that is the subject of the order to vacate may appeal that order to
the Council on the grounds that the order to vacate is unreasonable or
arbitrary.
      (4)   The appellant shall prepare the appeal in a written application as
follows:
         (a)   The appellant shall file a written appeal on the forms provided
by the code official and accompanied by a non-refundable fee, as determined by
separate ordinance;
         (b)   The appellant shall provide adequate information to fully
describe the conditions in question;
         (c)   The application for appeal shall contain each appellant’s
signature and mailing address to which the decision of the Council may be
mailed;
         (d)   The appellant shall provide a brief statement describing the
legal interest of each of the appellants in the property involved in the
proceeding;
         (e)   The appellant shall verify by declaration under penalty of
perjury the truth of the matters stated in the application;
         (f)   The appeal shall be filed within 30 days from the date of the
service of the notice of violation; provided, however, that, if the building or
structure is in such condition as to make it an imminent hazard and is posted
and vacated in accordance with §
92.06(C) of this chapter, an appeal shall be filed within ten days from the
date of the service of such notice.
      (5)   Except for vacation orders made pursuant to §
92.06(D) and (E) of this chapter, the timely filing of an appeal shall act as
an automatic stay of enforcement of the notice of violation until the appeal is
finally determined by the Council. The filing of an appeal does not stay
enforcement of any notice or order, or any provision thereof, where the notice
or order includes an order to vacate.
      (6)   As soon as practicable after receiving the written appeal, the
Council shall fix a date, time and place for the hearing of the appeal. Such
date shall not be less than ten days, nor more than 60 days, from the date the
appeal was filed. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be
given at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing to each appellant by
the Town Clerk, either by causing a copy of the notice to be delivered
personally or by mailing a copy thereof, postage prepaid, addressed to the
appellant at the address shown on the appeal.
      (7)   Failure of any person to file an appeal in accordance with the
provisions of this section shall constitute a waiver of the right to an
administrative hearing of the appeal and adjudication of the notice of
violation, and such person shall be stopped to deny the validity of any order
or action of the town which could have been timely appealed.
      (8)   The Council shall decide any appeal immediately after the hearing,
or within a reasonable time thereafter, but in no event shall the Council keep
an appeal under consideration for more than five days after the hearing. The
Council shall render its decision in writing, and the decision of the Council
shall be filed with the Town Clerk, with a copy to the appellant or applicant.
The decision of the Council is final. No further appeal is available to town or
county boards or officials. In all other cases, persons aggrieved by decisions
of the Council may apply to Superior Court for relief in accordance with the
state’s Rules of Procedure for Special Actions. In the absence of a court
order, the filing of an appeal or special action will not stay enforcement.
(Ord. 20-05, passed 1-28-2020)
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Unless a penalty, remedy or sanction is otherwise specified in
this chapter, the penalty for a violation of this chapter shall be as follows.
         (a)   The remedies herein are cumulative and the town may proceed
under one or more such remedies.
         (b)   Any owner or responsible party who commits, causes, permits,
facilitates or aids or abets any violation of any provision of this chapter or
who fails to perform any act or duty required by this chapter is guilty of a
Class 1 misdemeanor.
         (c)   Each day any violation of any provision of this chapter or the
failure to perform any act or duty required by this chapter exists shall
constitute a separate violation or offense.
      (2)   Any person who fails to obey an order issued by a magistrate
directing abatement of a violation of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor.
A violation of §
92.06 of this chapter is punishable by a minimum mandatory 24 hours in jail, up
to a maximum six months in jail; by a minimum mandatory fine of $250, up to a
maximum $2,500; and by probation up to three years. Minimum jail and minimum
fines cannot be suspended.
   (B)   Any violation of §
92.02 of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of no more than $500 or no
more than 30 days in jail or both.
   (C)   Any violation of §
92.03 of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of no more than $500 or no
more than 30 days in jail or both.
   (D)   Any violation of §
92.04 of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of no more than $500 or no
more than 30 days in jail or both.
(Ord. 20-05, passed 1-28-2020)
CHAPTER 93: FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Section
Open Burning
   
93.01   General prohibition
   
93.02   Conditional exemptions
   
93.03   Other exemptions
   
93.04   Regulatory exemptions
   
93.05   Definitions
   
93.06   Permitted burns
   
93.07   Permit conditions
   
93.08   Emergency
   
93.09   Compliance
   
93.10   Violations
   
93.11   Limited scope of rule
OPEN BURNING
§ 93.01 GENERAL PROHIBITION.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of any other rule in this subchapter, and
subject to the exemptions set forth herein, it is unlawful for any person to
ignite, cause to be ignited, permit to be ignited or suffer, allow or maintain
any open outdoor fire.
(Prior Code, § 10-3-1) (Ord. 07-02, passed - -2007) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.02 CONDITIONAL EXEMPTIONS.
   A public officer, as defined herein, gives permission in writing for a fire,
and immediately transmits a copy of such written permission to the Director of
the Department of Environmental Quality and to the delegated authority; and,
further provided that, the setting of any such fire shall be conducted in a
manner and at such time as approved by the delegated authority, unless doing so
would defeat the purpose of the exemption, the following fires are exempt from
this subchapter:
   (A)   Any fire set or permitted by any public officer in the performance of
official duty, if such fire is set or permission given for the purpose of weed
abatement, the prevention of a fire hazard or instruction in the methods of
fighting fires;
   (B)   Fires set by or permitted by the state entomologist, county
agricultural agents or state/county health officials of the county for the
purpose of disease and pest prevention; and
   (C)   Fires set by or permitted by the state or any of its agencies,
departments or political subdivisions, for the purpose of watershed
rehabilitation or control through vegetative manipulation.
(Prior Code, § 10-3-1) (Ord. 07-02, passed - -2007)
§ 93.03 OTHER EXEMPTIONS.
   The following fires are exempt from regulation under this subchapter:
   (A)   Fires used only for cooking of food or for providing warmth for human
beings or for recreational purposes or the branding of animals. For purposes of
this exemption, a RECREATIONAL PURPOSE fire is an outdoor fire, which burns
material other than household waste or prohibited materials, and has a total
fuel area of three feet or less in diameter and two feet or less in height; and
   (B)   Fires set by or permitted by the federal government or any of its
departments, agencies or agents.
(Prior Code, § 10-3-1) (Ord. 07-02, passed - -2007)
§ 93.04 REGULATORY EXEMPTIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following shall neither be regarded
as, nor deemed, open burning; however, they need to be permitted by the
delegated authority:
   (A)   The subterranean detonation of explosives;
   (B)   The display of fireworks for recreational purposes or pyrotechnics for
musical or cinematic/ theatrical functions; provided, any person detonating
such fireworks or pyrotechnics has a permit approved by the Town Council;
   (C)   Fires for the ceremonial destruction of flags; and
   (D)   Fires used for special events (i.e., high school bonfires and the
like).
(Prior Code, § 10-3-1) (Ord. 07-02, passed - -2007)
§ 93.05 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGRICULTURAL BURNING. Burning of vegetative materials related to the
production and harvesting of crops and raising of animals for the purpose of
marketing for a profit, or providing a livelihood, but not including the
burning of household waste or prohibited materials. Burning may be conducted in
fields, piles, ditch banks, fence rows or canal laterals for purposes such as
weed control, disease and pest prevention or site preparation.
   APPROVED WASTE BURNER. An incinerator constructed of fire-resistant material
with a top cover or screen, which is closed when in use having opening in the
sides or top no greater than one inch in diameter.
   DATE OF ISSUANCE. The actual date that the open burning application is
signed by the control officer or his or her representative.
   DANGEROUS MATERIAL. Any substance or combination of substances that is
capable of causing bodily harm or property loss unless neutralized, consumed or
otherwise disposed of in a safe and controlled manner.
   DELEGATED AUTHORITY. Any of the following:
      (1)   A county, city, town, air pollution control district or fire
district that has been delegated authority to issue open burning permits by the
Director under A.R.S. § 49-501(E); or
      (2)   A private fire protection service provider that has been assigned
authority to issue open burning permits by one of the authorities listed in
division (1) above of this definition.
   EFFECTIVE DATE OF PERMIT. The actual date that open burning operations may
commence and are to be completed. If said burning continues then an additional
permit is required.
   EMISSION REDUCTION TECHNIQUES. Techniques for controlling emissions from
open outdoor fires to minimize the amount of emissions output per unit of area
burned.
   HOUSEHOLD WASTE. Any solid waste including garbage, rubbish and sanitary
waste from septic tanks/holding tanks that is generated from households,
including single- and multiple-family residences, bunkhouses, ranger stations,
crew quarters, RVs, campgrounds, picnic grounds and day use recreational areas,
not including construction debris, landscaping rubble or demolition debris.
   OPEN OUTDOOR FIRE. Any combustion of combustible material of any type
outdoors, in the open where the products of combustion are not directed through
a flue. “Flue”, as used in this subchapter, means any duct or passage for air,
gases or the like, such as a stack or chimney. OPEN OUTDOOR FIRES can include
agricultural, residential, commercial and prescribed burning. Purposes for
fires can include prevention of a fire hazard, instruction in the methods of
fighting fires, watershed rehabilitation, disease and pest prevention.
   PRESCRIBED BURNING. The burning of vegetative material in predominantly
undeveloped land to improve forested, open range or watershed condition.
   PROHIBITED MATERIALS. Non-paper garbage from the processing, storage,
service or consumption of food; chemically treated wood; tires; explosives or
ammunition; oleanders; asphalt shingles; tar paper; plastic and rubber
products, including bottles for household chemicals; plastic grocery and retail
bags; waste petroleum products; such as waste crankcase oil, transmission oil
and oil filters; transformer oils; asbestos; batteries; anti-freeze; aerosol
spray cans; electrical wire insulation; thermal insulation; polyester products;
hazardous waste products such as paints, pesticides, cleaners and solvents,
stains and varnishes and other flammable liquids; plastic pesticide bags and
containers; and hazardous material containers including those that contained
lead, cadmium, mercury or arsenic compounds.
(Prior Code, § 10-3-1) (Ord. 07-02, passed - -2007)
§ 93.06 PERMITTED BURNS.
   (A)   Commercial land clearing permit. Open burning activities, which
include one-time land-clearing operations that involve non-compacted vegetative
materials.
      (1)   Land-clearing burns may be authorized by written permission from
the delegated authority if the burning will not adversely affect public health
or safety, and will not cause or contribute to a nuisance, traffic hazard or to
a violation of any air quality standard.
      (2)   Authorization for the land-clearing burn may be revoked by the
control officer if the burning causes nuisance conditions, is not conducted in
accordance with the specified conditions, violates any provision of an
applicable permit or causes a violation of any air quality standard.
   (B)   Disposal of buildings, building materials. Fires set for the disposal
of abandoned buildings or building materials for training purposes by town’s
Fire District; provided that, no such permit shall be issued until after an on-
site inspection by the district. Building demolition burns may be authorized by
written permission from the delegated authority if there is no practical
alternative, and if the burning will not adversely affect public health or
safety, and will not cause or contribute to a nuisance, traffic hazard or to a
violation of any air quality standard.
   (C)   Permitted fires for the destruction of dangerous materials. Fires set
for the destruction of dangerous or hazardous materials are allowed when the
materials are too dangerous to store and transport; provided that, no such
permit shall be issued until after an on-site inspection by the district. Fires
set for the destruction of dangerous materials shall only be allowed where
there is no safe alternative method of disposal, and when the burning of such
materials does not result in the emission of hazardous or toxic substances
either directly or as a product of combustion in amounts that will endanger
health or safety.
   (D)   Bonfire permits. No prohibited materials or household wastes, as
defined in §
93.05 of this chapter, are burned. A city, town, county statutory districts or
other political subdivision established by statute may obtain a no-cost bonfire
permit for a community or civic event:
      (1)   A written request from the public entity is required; and
      (2)   The quantity of material that may be burned during the permit term
shall not exceed 20 cubic yards of non-compacted material.
(Prior Code, § 10-3-1) (Ord. 07-02, passed - -2007)
§ 93.07 PERMIT CONDITIONS.
   All permits shall include the following:
   (A)   Contact information. A means of contacting the permittee;
   (B)   Permit term. The term of the temporary open burning permit, which:
      (1)   For a demolition permit or a destruction of hazardous materials
permit, is the actual date that open burning operations may commence and are to
be completed. If said burning is not complete, then an additional permit is
required;
      (2)   Not, regardless of term, authorize any violation of any burning ban
that a local fire department/district may impose for purposes of public safety
or other purposes;
      (3)   For a training exercise permit, not exceed a permit specified
seven-day period from the effective date;
      (4)   For a commercial land clearing burn permit, not exceed 60 days from
the effective date; provided that, the permittee may, upon application but
without cost, be allowed one 60-day extension of such a land clearing permit;
and
      (5)   For a bonfire, not exceed a three-day period, which dates shall be
specified in the permit.
   (C)   Permits subject to suspension orders. All permits shall note that all
burning be extinguished at the discretion of the delegated authority or his or
her authorized representative during periods of inadequate atmospheric smoke
dispersion, including:
      (1)   When an air stagnation advisory is issued by the Director of ADEQ
or the National Weather Service;
      (2)   When an air pollution emergency episode alert, warning or emergency
is declared;
      (3)   During periods of excessive visibility impairment; or
      (4)   During periods of extreme fire danger, or during periods when smoke
is blown into populated areas so as to create or threaten to create a public
nuisance.
   (D)   Burn management provisions.
      (1)   The fire must be constantly attended, with reasonable control tools
(water or dirt) on hand at all times, and the person conducting the burn must
have a copy of the burn permit on-site during open burning.
      (2)   When the burn is completed, the fire must be completely
extinguished.
      (3)   A requirement that each open burn be started using items that do
not cause the production of black smoke.
      (4)   A requirement that the burning pit, burning pile or approved waste
burner be at least 50 feet from the nearest other dwelling unit.
      (5)   The person conducting the open burning must notify the local
firefighting agency, fire district or municipal fire department, prior to
commencement of open burning.
      (6)   Open burning shall be conducted only during atmospheric conditions
which:
         (a)   Prevent dispersion of smoke into populated areas;
         (b)   Prevent visibility impairment on traveled roads or at airports
that result in a safety hazard;
         (c)   Do not create a public nuisance or adversely affect public
safety;
         (d)   Do not cause any adverse impact to visibility; and
         (e)   Do not cause uncontrollable spreading of the fire.
      (7)   The permittee shall not conduct open burning when:
         (a)   The National Weather Service has issued an air stagnation
advisory for the affected area; and
         (b)   When any stage air pollution episode is declared.
(Prior Code, § 10-3-1) (Ord. 07-02, passed - -2007)
§ 93.08 EMERGENCY.
   (A)   Whenever the Mayor and Town Council determine that an emergency exists
due to the threat or danger of fire within the town, the Mayor may, by
proclamation, make such orders and regulations as are deemed appropriate, up to
and including the prohibition of any and all types of fires and burning
including smoking. The proclamation shall be posted in at least three public
places within 24 hours after the Mayor signs such proclamation. Any person
violating the terms of the proclamation shall be guilty of a Class 1
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   This is the reason permits are only good for the day of issuance.
(Prior Code, § 10-3-1) (Ord. 07-02, passed - -2007)
§ 93.09 COMPLIANCE.
   Any person to whom an open burning permit is issued, must comply with the
provisions of this subchapter and the provisions of the burning permit. Any
person in violation of this section or the burning permit issued to them shall
be guilty of a civil violation punishable as set forth in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 10-3-1) (Ord. 07-02, passed - -2007)
§ 93.10 VIOLATIONS.
   Failure to obtain a permit, or failure to comply with the conditions of a
permit, shall be subject to civil and/or criminal penalties in any of the
following statutes: A.R.S. §§ 13-1706, 49-502, 49-511, 49-512, 49-513 or 49-
514, including, but not exclusive of, application of §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 10-3-1) (Ord. 07-02, passed - -2007)
§ 93.11 LIMITED SCOPE OF RULE.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall authorize or permit any practice, which is
a violation of any statute, ordinance, rule or regulation.
(Prior Code, § 10-3-1) (Ord. 07-02, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 94: ABANDONED VEHICLES
Section
   
94.01   Definitions
   
94.02   Abandoned vehicles
   
94.03   Abatement of nuisance
   
94.04   Enforcement deferred for certain owners
   
94.05   Exemption
 
   
94.99   Penalty
§ 94.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED. Worn out, unused, stripped, unclaimed, scrapped, junked or
discarded.
   PRIVATE PROPERTY. Land owned in the town by any person, firm, partnership or
corporation other than the United States or the state.
   STORAGE. The presence or locating of abandoned motor vehicles.
   VEHICLE. An automobile, truck or tractor, including trailers and farm
equipment.
(Prior Code, § 12-4-1)
§ 94.02 ABANDONED VEHICLES.
   All abandoned vehicles being repaired or restored shall be kept in an
enclosed area by the owner or occupant of the property upon which such vehicle
is located, in such a manner as to not be visible from any point outside the
property.
(Prior Code, § 12-4-2)
§ 94.03 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE.
   (A)   The owner, tenant, lessee or occupant of any private property within
the corporate limits of the town upon which storage of an abandoned vehicle is
made and the owner of such abandoned motor vehicle involved in such storage
shall jointly and severally be responsible for abating said nuisance.
   (B)   Any owner, tenant, lessee, occupant or other person who fails,
neglects or refuses to abate such nuisance shall be notified in writing by
certified mail, return receipt requested by the Town Manager or his or her
representative to abate said nuisance within 30 days from the date appearing on
such written notice and that such person may appeal in writing to the Council
within 30 days from the date the notice is received by him or her and prior to
the date of compliance. An extension of the 30-day notice may be issued by the
Manager in hardship cases not to exceed two weeks from the date of compliance.
   (C)   (1)   When any such owner, tenant, lessee, occupant or other person to
whom notice as provided in this section has been mailed fails, neglects or
refuses for more than 30 days from the date appearing on said notice to abate
said nuisance, the Town Manager or his or her representative is hereby
authorized and directed to remove said abandoned motor vehicle from said
premises, and dispose of the vehicle according to the provisions of the Arizona
Revised Statutes relating to abandoned vehicles, including a report to the
Motor Vehicle Division of the state’s Department of Transportation. The owner
or person controlling such property shall have 30 days from the date of service
upon him or her to appeal in writing to the Council from the amount of the
assessment as contained in the verified statement.
      (2)   If an appeal is not filed with the Manager within such 30-day
period, then the amount of the assessment as determined by the Manager shall
become final and binding. If an appeal is taken, the Council shall, at its next
meeting, hear and determine the appeal and may affirm the amount of the
assessment, modify the amount thereof or determine that no assessment at all
shall be made.
      (3)   The decision of the Council shall be final and binding on all
persons.
(Prior Code, § 12-4-3)
§ 94.04 ENFORCEMENT DEFERRED FOR CERTAIN OWNERS.
   (A)   If the owner of such abandoned motor vehicle is a member of and on
active duty with the Armed Forces of the United States at the time of the
notice provided for in this chapter, enforcement of this chapter shall be
deferred until after his or her separation from the Armed Services.
   (B)   If the owner of such abandoned motor vehicle is confined to a hospital
or other medical facility at the time of the notice provided for in this
chapter, enforcement of this chapter shall be deferred until after his or her
discharge from the hospital or other medical facility.
(Prior Code, § 12-4-4)
§ 94.05 EXEMPTION.
   Any motor vehicle which is being repaired by or on behalf of the owner
thereof, or upon which restorative work is being performed by or on behalf of
the owner thereof, shall not be subject to the terms of this chapter. Only
vehicles being currently repaired or worked on are exempt.
(Prior Code, § 12-4-5)
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   It is unlawful for any owner, tenant, lessee, occupant or other person to
fail, neglect or refuse to abate the nuisance as provided in this chapter. The
imposition of any sentence shall not exempt the offender from compliance with
the requirements of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 12-4-6)
CHAPTER 95: ABANDONED, LOST OR STOLEN PERSONAL PROPERTY
Section
   
95.01   Definitions
   
95.02   Disposal of weapons
   
95.03   Disposal of spirituous liquor
   
95.04   Disposal of property used in the commission of a crime
   
95.05   Disposal of other property
   
95.06   Disposal of money
   
95.07   Conversion to town use
   
95.08   Certificate of ownership, sale
   
95.09   Town employees or elected officials excluded
   
95.10   Notices
   
95.11   Money and property not claimed and taken away
   
95.12   Records
§ 95.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED PROPERTY. Personal property to which the owner has relinquished
all right, title, claim and possession, with the intention of not reclaiming it
or resuming its ownership, possession or enjoyment.
   DANGEROUS INSTRUMENT. Any other object which is capable of inflicting pain
or bodily injury.
   EXPLOSIVE. Any dynamite, nitroglycerine, black powder or other similar
explosive material including plastic explosives, but does not mean or include
ammunition or ammunition components such as primers, percussion caps, smokeless
powder, black powder and black powder substitutes used for hand loading
purposes.
   FINDER. A person, not an owner, who accidentally and lawfully comes into
possession of personal property. A FINDER shall not be an employee or elected
official of the town.
   LOST PROPERTY. Personal property with which the owner has casually and
involuntarily parted with and does not know where to find or recover it. LOST
PROPERTY shall not include property which has been intentionally concealed or
deposited in a secret place for safe keeping.
   OWNER. The person in whom is vested the legal right, ownership, dominion or
title of personal property. OWNER may also include a person in whose favor
there is a security interest or who is the beneficiary of a perfected lien or
an encumbrance pertaining to an interest in personal property, but such person
shall not have right superior to the owner who is not a secured party.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. The kind of property which usually consists of things
tangible and movable which is not real property. As used in this chapter,
PERSONAL PROPERTY shall not include motor vehicles or animals.
   SPIRITUOUS LIQUOR. Includes, but is not limited to, alcohol, brandy,
whiskey, rum, tequila, mescal, gin, wine, porter, ale, beer, any malt liquor,
malt beverage, absinthe or compound or any mixture of any alcohol, bitters,
bitters containing alcohol, and any liquid mixture or preparation, whether
patented or otherwise, which produces intoxication, fruits or other edibles
preserved in ardent spirits, and beverages containing more than 0.5% of alcohol
by volume.
   STOLEN PROPERTY. The personal property which has been unlawfully taken and
carried away without right or pretense of title, and without leave or consent
of the owner.
   WEAPON. Any firearm, including, but not limited to, deadly or non-deadly,
spring gun, air gun or gas operated gun or any other like device capable of
discharging a dangerous or deadly missile or any other thing designed for
lethal use or which is capable of inflicting serious bodily injury. WEAPON
shall not include a firearm in permanently inoperable condition.
(Prior Code, § 11-4-1)
§ 95.02 DISPOSAL OF WEAPONS.
   (A)   All weapons, explosive or other dangerous instruments which are seized
by police officers in the line of duty and forfeited in accordance with A.R.S.
Title 13 or any other applicable state or federal law.
   (B)   All weapons, explosives or other dangerous instruments which are
seized, confiscated or impounded as a result of an arrest pertaining to the
commission of a crime may be returned to a person when permitted by law after
such person is adjudged not guilty or where all criminal charges are dismissed.
   (C)   If the owner of a lost, abandoned or stolen weapon cannot be located
within 90 days from the date such a weapon comes into police custody, the
weapon shall be returned to the finder where permitted by law. In the event the
finder does not want the weapon or the finder fails to respond to notices, the
weapon shall become the property of the town’s Police Department to be disposed
of pursuant to the discretion of the town’s Police Department.
(Prior Code, § 11-4-2)
§ 95.03 DISPOSAL OF SPIRITUOUS LIQUOR.
   (A)   Spirituous liquor seized by a police officer in the line of duty
pursuant to a violation of any federal, state or local law shall be destroyed
by the town’s Police Department 60 days following the conviction of the owner
or possessor of such spirituous liquor.
   (B)   In the event that such person is found not guilty or in the event that
ail criminal charges against such person are dismissed, the spirituous liquor
may be returned to the owner where permitted by law.
   (C)   Lost, abandoned or stolen spirituous liquor that is in the possession
of the Police Department may be returned to the owner where permitted by law if
claimed by the owner within 90 days after coming into possession of the town’s
Police Department.
(Prior Code, § 11-4-3)
§ 95.04 DISPOSAL OF PROPERTY USED IN THE COMMISSION OF A CRIME.
   Upon the conviction of any person for the violation of a criminal offense as
defined in A.R.S. Title 13 or other applicable federal, state or local laws,
personal property which was seized, confiscated or otherwise impounded by
police officers in the line of duty shall be destroyed or otherwise disposed of
in accordance with Arizona Revised Statutes or other applicable federal, state
or local laws.
(Prior Code, § 11-4-4)
§ 95.05 DISPOSAL OF OTHER PROPERTY.
   (A)   Lost, abandoned or stolen personal property received or in the custody
of the town’s Police Department shall be retained for a period of 90 days.
During this 90-day period, the town’s Police Department shall make reasonable
attempts to identify the owner of such personal property and to notify the
owner that the personal property is in the custody of the town’s Police
Department. Personal property shall be returned to the owner upon satisfactory
proof of ownership.
   (B)   In the event that an owner does not respond to notices concerning
personal property, or in the event that an owner disclaims interest or
otherwise declines to reclaim the personal property, the personal property
shall be offered to the finder if identified.
   (C)   In the event that personal property is offered to a finder, a finder
shall be entitled to written notice pursuant to §
95.10 of this chapter.
   (D)   If a finder or owner fails to respond within the specified time, the
personal property shall be considered forfeited and may be sold at public
auction, may become the property of the town, or may be destroyed at the
discretion of the town’s Police Department.
(Prior Code, § 11-4-5)
§ 95.06 DISPOSAL OF MONEY.
   (A)   Money or currency, excepting rare coins or coins or currency with
numismatic value, as determined by the town’s Police Department, which is
received or in the custody of the town’s Police Department shall be retained
for a period of 90 days and then shall be deposited in the General Fund of the
Town Finance Director in the event an owner or finder, after written notice as
set forth in §
95.10 of this chapter, does not claim or reclaim possession of such money or
currency.
   (B)   Rare coins or coins and currency with numismatic value shall be
disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 11-4-6)
§ 95.07 CONVERSION TO TOWN USE.
   Personal property that has not been reclaimed by an owner or claimed by a
finder in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, may be converted to
town ownership and used at the discretion of the town’s Police Department.
(Prior Code, § 11-4-7)
§ 95.08 CERTIFICATE OF OWNERSHIP, SALE.
   (A)   On delivery of personal property to a finder in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, the Police Chief or his or her designee shall
execute a certificate of ownership of the personal property to the finder which
certificate shall pass title of the personal property to the finder.
   (B)   On delivery of personal property to a purchaser of any personal
property sold under the provisions of this chapter, a certificate of ownership
shall be issued by the Police Chief or his or her designee which certificate
shall pass title of the personal property to the purchaser.
   (C)   On the delivery of personal property or other forfeiture of personal
property to the town, a certificate of ownership shall be issued by the Police
Chief or his or her designee to the town which certificate shall pass title of
the personal property to the town.
(Prior Code, § 11-4-8)
§ 95.09 TOWN EMPLOYEES OR ELECTED OFFICIALS EXCLUDED.
   Employees or elected officials of the town who find or otherwise come into
possession of lost, abandoned or stolen property shall not claim any right
title or interest in the personal property. Any and all lost, abandoned or
stolen personal property found or otherwise coming into possession of a town
employee or elected official shall be relinquished to custody of the town’s
Police Department.
(Prior Code, § 11-4-9)
§ 95.10 NOTICES.
   (A)   Written notice shall be given to owners and finders (if applicable) of
personal property before such property may be sold or otherwise disposed of in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Such written notices shall
provide at least the following information:
      (1)   A description of the property;
      (2)   The approximate date the property was seized, received or put in
the custody of the town’s Police Department; and
      (3)   The date on which the personal property will be sold or otherwise
disposed of if not claimed.
   (B)   Written notices shall be sent to owners and finders (if applicable)
by:
      (1)   Personal service;
      (2)   Mailing a copy of the notice by first class mail to the last known
address; and
      (3)   In the event that an address is not known, by posting a notice in a
public place within the town office for a period of 14 days.
   (C)   A maximum of two notices shall be mailed to an owner of personal
property. The first notice shall be mailed within 14 days after the personal
property comes into custody of the town’s Police Department. The second notice
shall be mailed not more than 14 days after the first notice.
   (D)   Only one notice shall be mailed to the finder of personal property
within 14 days after the personal property comes into custody of the town’s
Police Department.
   (E)   Owners and finders of personal property shall claim or make
arrangements to claim personal property no later than the date specified in the
notice or within 15 days of the date of written notice, or posting of a written
notice.
(Prior Code, § 11-4-10)
§ 95.11 MONEY AND PROPERTY NOT CLAIMED AND TAKEN AWAY.
   If money and property as described above is not claimed and taken away after
90 days, it will be handled in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 11-4-11)
§ 95.12 RECORDS.
   (A)   The town’s Police Department shall keep property invoice records
concerning all property seized, received or otherwise in the possession of the
town’s Police Department. Such records shall contain the following:
      (1)   A description of all personal property seized, received or
otherwise in the possession of the town’s Police Department pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter;
      (2)   A description of notices sent to owners and finders (if applicable)
pursuant to this chapter; and
      (3)   Information concerning the destruction or other disposal of the
personal property.
   (B)   Records maintained pursuant to this section shall be maintained for a
period of one year after the destruction or other disposal of the personal
property.
(Prior Code, § 11-4-12)
CHAPTER 96: PARKS AND RECREATION; CEMETERIES
Section
General Provisions
   
96.01   Definitions
   
96.02   Reservation permits
   
96.03   Interference with reserved use
   
96.04   Special events
   
96.05   Cemetery; columbarium niche wall
Park, Recreation Facilities and Cemetery Rules
   
96.20   Hours
   
96.21   Closed areas
   
96.22   Alcoholic beverages
   
96.23   Trespass
   
96.24   Unreasonable noise
   
96.25   Riding vehicles on grounds
   
96.26   Damaging facilities
   
96.27   Glass containers
   
96.28   Sale of goods; concessions
   
96.29   Prohibited activities
   
96.30   Enforcement
 
   
96.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 96.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   TOWN CEMETERY. The Hi Jolly Cemetery.
   TOWN PARK. The Quartzsite Town Park.
   TOWN RECREATION FACILITY. Any lands, areas, buildings and facilities that
are owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the town for recreation purposes
open to the public including, but not limited to, parks, athletic fields,
tennis courts, swimming pools, playgrounds, ramadas, recreation trails and
centers, libraries, dog parks and skate parks.
   VEHICLE. Any wheeled conveyance, whether motor-powered, animal-drawn or
self-propelled. The term shall include any trailer in tow of any size, kind or
description. This definition does not include baby carriages and vehicles in
the service of the town park, recreation facilities and cemetery.
(Prior Code, § 21-1-1)
§ 96.02 RESERVATION PERMITS.
   (A)   In general. Town facilities are available on a first come, first serve
basis, except:
      (1)   Scheduled events. During scheduled events, a portion of facilities
may be unavailable; and
      (2)   Reservable ramadas. There are six small and one large ramada in the
town park and one ramada in the town cemetery. A maximum number of seven
ramadas may be reserved per day. A reservation must be made in person or by
mail to the town office, located at 465 N. Plymouth Avenue between 8:00 a.m.
and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday (except holidays), and paid for at that
time. The Town Council shall, by resolution, establish a fee schedule for
reservation of park ramadas. There is no fee for reservation of the cemetery
ramada.
   (B)   Use of park facilities; time limits. No person shall use any
facilities in the town park, including park tables, shade structures other than
ramadas, and parking areas, more than seven hours per day. Any park use longer
than seven hours per day and any use of a ramada for more than four hours
requires a reservation issued by the Town Manager.
(Prior Code, § 21-1-2) (Ord. 18-10, passed 9-25-2018) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.03 INTERFERENCE WITH RESERVED USE.
   (A)   Reservation permit. The reservation permit shall describe the ramada
reserved and related amenities that are reserved for the exclusive use of the
permittee.
   (B)   Interference prohibited. It shall be unlawful to interfere with a
reserved use, except with the consent of the permittee. For purposes of this
section, the term INTERFERE includes, but is not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Using the reserved area or amenities;
      (2)   Playing ball or frisbee within 50 feet from the reserved area
boundary; or
      (3)   Congregating a group of ten or more persons within 50 feet from the
reserved area boundary for a cumulative period of 15 minutes or longer.
(Prior Code, § 21-1-3) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.04 SPECIAL EVENTS.
   (A)   Permit required. No person may conduct a special event in a town park
or recreation facility without having first obtained a special event permit
from the town. For the purposes of this section, a SPECIAL EVENT includes, but
is not limited to, a fair, carnival, festival, musical concert, sporting event
or exhibition of items, vehicles, agricultural products, homemade items or arts
and crafts, whether for sale or not.
   (B)   Applications. Applications for special events shall be submitted to
the town at least 30 days prior to the scheduled start of the special event.
The application shall be on a form provided by the town and shall include a
site plan depicting existing facilities and proposed temporary facilities and
activities, and any other required information.
   (C)   Fee; deposit. A non-refundable fee shall be required for each special
event permit application, which fee shall be paid at the time of submittal of
the application. A deposit shall also be required prior to each special event.
The deposit shall be refundable to the applicant after the town determines that
all conditions and requirements associated with the approved application and
this chapter have been met. At a minimum, the special event site and all
streets and other property used by or affected by the special event shall be
restored to their original condition including, but not limited to, removal of
debris and waste. The Town Council shall set the amount of fees and deposits by
resolution. The Town Manager may require a greater deposit if he or she
determines that the size or nature of the special event warrants a greater
deposit.
   (D)   Denial. The Town Manager may deny an application for a special event
permit if:
      (1)   The application contains a misrepresentation, false or misleading
statement, evasion or suppression of a material fact;
      (2)   Another special event has been approved to occur on the same day in
the same area or traffic circulation would be impeded or public safety would be
compromised by having two or more special events in the same area;
      (3)   The application does not comply with this chapter and all other
applicable codes, ordinances or other laws; and
      (4)   The proposed special event is unlawful or constitutes a public
nuisance.
   (E)   Appeal. A decision of the Town Manager to deny an application under
this division (E) may be appealed by written request to the Town Council.
Appeals shall be filed within ten days after notice of the denial is received
and shall state the reasons thereof. An appeal hearing shall be held by the
Town Council within 30 days after receipt of an appeal. The applicant shall be
provided written notice of the appeal hearing at least five days prior to the
hearing. At the hearing, all parties shall have the right to be represented by
counsel, to present testimony and evidence and to cross-examine witnesses. The
proceedings shall be recorded and transcribed at the expense of the party so
requesting. The Town Council shall, by majority vote of members present, render
a written decision based on findings of fact and the application of the
standards herein which shall be mailed to the applicant. The decision of the
Council shall be final.
   (F)   Duration of event; extension. The special event permit shall include
the approved duration of the special event. The Town Manager may grant an
extension of the permit provided the applicant submits, in writing, a request
for such an extension prior to the end of the special event.
   (G)   Display of permit. The special event permit shall be displayed at the
special event site in a conspicuous location for the duration of the special
event.
   (H)   Additional conditions; insurance. The town may impose reasonable
conditions on any special event permit necessary to protect the safety of
persons and property and the control of traffic and may require insurance for
any special event held on town property with policy limits established by the
town’s Risk Manager.
   (I)   Revocation of permit; appeal. A special event permit may be revoked by
the Town Manager for the failure to comply with the approved plans, any
requirements of this chapter or violation of any applicable town ordinances and
county, state and federal laws and regulations. A notice of revocation shall be
delivered or mailed by first class mail to the permittee. All activities
associated with the special event shall immediately cease as of the date of the
notice. If a special event permit is revoked, an appeal to the Town Council may
be filed following the same procedures set forth in division (E) above. The
decision of the Town Council on appeal of revocation shall be final.
(Prior Code, § 21-1-4) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.05 CEMETERY; COLUMBARIUM NICHE WALL.
   (A)   Fees. By resolution, from time to time, the Town Council shall
establish fee schedules for the cemetery columbarium niche wall. For the
purposes of this section, NICHE means space used, or intended to be used, for
inurnment of cremated human remains. Only human remains shall be allowed in the
cemetery columbarium niche wall.
   (B)   Cremation containers. All cremation containers shall be approved by
the Town Manager.
   (C)   Additional urn. If a second urn is subsequently added and the existing
faceplate has insufficient room for engraving, a new faceplate shall be made at
an additional charge, such fee to be established by resolution of the Town
Council.
(Prior Code, § 21-1-5) (Ord. 18-04, passed 5-8-2018)
PARK, RECREATION FACILITIES AND CEMETERY RULES
§ 96.20 HOURS.
   The town park and town cemetery shall be open to the public sunrise to
sunset and closed at all other times. Town recreation facility hours shall be
set by the town. Hours of operation shall be posted at each facility. It shall
be unlawful for any person, other than town personnel conducting town business
therein, to occupy or be present in any town park, recreation facility or
cemetery during any hours in which the facilities are not open to the public.
Functions may extend beyond the hours set forth in this section during a
scheduled town activity or event or by permit.
(Prior Code, § 21-2-1) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.21 CLOSED AREAS.
   (A)   Temporary closures.
      (1)   The town may temporarily close any part of a town park, recreation
facility or cemetery for performance of routine maintenance or preparation for
a reserved use, or when deemed necessary to protect public safety, property or
wildlife.
      (2)   Notice shall be posted when an area has been closed.
      (3)   The notice shall reasonably describe the time and period of closure
and area closed.
   (B)   Prohibited entry. It shall be unlawful to enter or stay in any area
where a sign has been posted stating that the area is “Closed To The Public” or
“Closed For Maintenance” or “Reserved - Do Not Enter”.
   (C)   Removal of signs. It shall be unlawful to remove or tamper with any
sign or notice posted designating areas as “Closed To The Public”, “Closed For
Maintenance” or “Reserved - Do Not Enter”.
   (D)   Exception. The provisions of divisions (B) and (C) shall not apply to
any town employee, contractor or other person performing work authorized by the
town.
(Prior Code, § 21-2-2) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.22 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
   (A)   In general. It is unlawful for any person, while on the premises of
any town park, recreation facility or cemetery, to sell or drink any alcoholic
beverage, except with a special event permit as provided in division (B) below.
   (B)   Permit. A special event permit is required to allow alcoholic
beverages to be sold or consumed in any town park, recreation facility or
cemetery. Notwithstanding the above, no alcoholic beverages may be consumed
south of Senter Street, except within 100 feet of the baseball park concession
stand.
   (C)   Denial; revocation. The town reserves the right to refuse or revoke
any permits issued or to be issued.
(Prior Code, § 21-2-3) (Ord. 18-08, passed 7-24-2018) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.23 TRESPASS.
   It shall be unlawful for a person to remain in or return to a town park,
recreation facility or cemetery after a reasonable request to leave by an
authorized town employee.
(Prior Code, § 21-2-4) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.24 UNREASONABLE NOISE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person without justification to make or
continue, or cause or permit to be made or continued, any unnecessary,
excessive or offensive noise, which disturbs the peace or quiet of any town
park, recreation facility or cemetery, or which causes discomfort or annoyance
to any reasonable person of normal sensitivities in the area after a reasonable
request by an authorized town employee to stop making the unnecessary,
excessive or offensive noise, except with a special event permit issued
pursuant to §
96.04 of this chapter authorizing a special event that permits an activity
involving noise. Such as, but not limited to, a music performance.
   (B)   If the permittee fails or refuses to cease the noise, the special
event permit deposit may not be refunded by the town.
(Prior Code, § 21-2-5) (Ord. 18-08, passed 7-24-2018) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.25 RIDING VEHICLES ON GROUNDS.
   (A)   In general. No person shall drive or ride at any time any vehicle or
animal upon the grounds of any town park, recreation facility or cemetery,
except in public streets running through such premises or within designated
parking areas located upon the premises, without the express permission of the
town.
   (B)   Off-road vehicles. ATVs and other off-road vehicles are not allowed in
the parking lots and streets unless such vehicle is licensed by the Department
of Motor Vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 21-2-6) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.26 DAMAGING FACILITIES.
   No person shall damage or wastefully or improperly use any temporary or
permanent fixture in any town park, recreation facility or cemetery, or cause
the lighting facilities or electrical appliances to be turned on or used
without the express permission of the town or an authorized representative of
the town.
(Prior Code, § 21-2-7) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.27 GLASS CONTAINERS.
   (A)   Prohibited possession. It shall be unlawful for any person to have a
glass container in his or her possession in any town park, recreation facility
or cemetery, unless specifically authorized by the town.
   (B)   Prohibited conduct. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, toss
or otherwise propel or either willfully and maliciously or carelessly and
negligently break any glass object in a town park, recreation facility or
cemetery.
(Prior Code, § 21-2-8) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.28 SALE OF GOODS; CONCESSIONS.
   It is unlawful to sell food, beverages or other items in a town park,
recreation facility, or cemetery, and all adjacent sidewalks, except pursuant
to a special event permit issued pursuant to §
96.04 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 21-2-9) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.29 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
   Except where such use is conducted by the town or by others pursuant to a
program organized by the town or a permit issued by the town, the following
activities are prohibited in a town park, recreation facility or cemetery.
   (A)   Dangerous act. No person shall commit any act so as to endanger the
health and safety of themselves or others.
   (B)   Speeding. Unless a different special limit is posted, a maximum speed
of 15 mph shall be in effect at all times in the parking lots and streets
running through the town park. The maximum speed limit in effect at all times
in the cemetery parking lots and streets shall be five mph.
   (C)   Littering. No person shall dispose of trash, flyers or other unwanted
items in any manner other than depositing them in a designated waste container.
   (D)   Urban camping. No person shall camp, set up living accommodations,
store personal belongings or park recreation vehicles overnight, except in
areas specifically for such use or specifically authorized by permit.
   (E)   Fires. No person shall start or sustain a fire, except for the
combustion of charcoal in fire pits, grills or other areas as designated and
approved for such use by the town. No person shall set fire to the contents of
a trash container, or place or burn garbage in park grills. Park users shall
abide by all current fire rules and restrictions.
   (F)   Weapons. No person shall use archery, sling shots, rockets, darts,
rocks or other projectile producing devices, unless specifically authorized by
permit. A minor not accompanied by a parent, grandparent, guardian or certified
hunter safety instructor or certified firearms safety instructor acting with
the consent of the minor’s parent or guardian shall not possess a firearm in a
park, except as permitted by A.R.S. § 13-3108(g)(2). No person shall discharge
a firearm in a town park, except as permitted by A.R.S. § 13-3108(g)(5).
   (G)   Model rocketry. No person shall launch model rockets using propellants
and motors, unless specifically authorized by permit.
   (H)   Fireworks. No person shall use fireworks, unless specifically
authorized by permit.
   (I)   Animal control. All animals shall be under the custody and control of
a responsible adult and must be on a leash not to exceed six feet at all times,
except dogs are not required to be on a leash inside a town dog park. Owners or
other persons in control of the animal shall remove waste created by the
animal. Animals are subject to the town’s animal control ordinance.
   (J)   Animal capture; cruelty. Hunting, trapping, catching, wounding or
killing, or treating cruelly, attempting to catch, wound or kill, any bird or
animal, molest or rob any nest of any kind or any lair or burrow of any animal
within the park is strictly prohibited.
   (K)   Disfiguration or removal of natural resources. No person shall
disfigure, displace, remove or excavate, as applicable, any soil, rock, stone,
sand, tree, shrub, cactus, plant material or other natural resource of any
description.
   (L)   For-profit or personal gain. The town park shall not be used for
profit or personal gain. Events for non-profit organizations, where an
admission fee or a donation is charged, may only be held in the park with the
permission of the town. A use fee may be charged.
   (M)   Supervision of children. Children, age eight and under, must be
supervised by an adult while playing on the playground equipment.
(Prior Code, § 21-2-10) (Ord. 18-08, passed 7-24-2018) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.30 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Removal from premises. The town shall have authority to eject from a
town park, recreation facility or cemetery any person acting in violation of
this chapter.
   (B)   Seizure of property. The town shall have the authority to seize and
confiscate any property, thing or device used in violation of this chapter.
   (C)   Violations. Except where otherwise provided, the penalties set forth
in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances shall apply to violations of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 21-2-11)
§ 96.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Upon conviction for violation of §
96.22 of this chapter, the sentence to be imposed shall be a fine of not more
than $500 or imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or both.
(Prior Code, § 21-2-3) (Ord. 18-08, passed 7-24-2018)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   BUSINESS LICENSE CODE
      
111.   SEASONAL BUSINESS LICENSE
      
112.   AUTOMATED KIOSKS
      
113.   SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS
      
114.   SHORT-TERM RENTALS
      
115.   CABLE COMMUNICATIONS
      
116.   TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES
      
117.   VIDEO SERVICES
      118.   SPECIAL EVENTS
CHAPTER 110: BUSINESS LICENSE CODE
Section
   
110.01   Definitions
   
110.02   License required
   
110.03   Separate licenses required
   
110.04   Issuance of license
   
110.05   Timeframes for issuance of license
   
110.06   Swap meets
   
110.07   Payment
   
110.08   Posting of license
   
110.09   Exhibition of license required
   
110.10   License not transferable
   
110.11   Exemptions
   
110.12   License required; term of license; termination of license; fee
   
110.13   Information required; licensing eligibility
   
110.14   Denial and revocation of license; hearing
   
110.15   Appeal
 
   
110.99   Penalty
§ 110.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. The below
words and phrases, wherever used in this chapter shall be construed as defined
in this section unless, clearly from the context, a different meaning is
intended. Words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in
the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number
include the plural number.
   BUSINESS ACTIVITY. Transactions or orders for goods and services with a
financial exchange, and shall include any trade, event, amusement, profession,
occupation, or performance of services whether engaged in for profit or not for
profit. BUSINESS ACTIVITY includes, but is not limited to, special events
authorized by
Ch. 118 and mobile merchants authorized by
Ch. 111 of this code of ordinances.
   BUSINESS LICENSE or LICENSE. A license issued pursuant to this chapter and
includes both full year licenses and seasonal business licenses.
   CASUAL ACTIVITY OR SALES. A transaction of an isolated nature made by a
person who neither represents themselves to be nor is engaged in a business for
which a license is required. The sale, rental, license for use, or lease
transaction concerning real property shall not be treated, or be exempt, as
casual. Examples of CASUAL ACTIVITIES OR SALES include but are not limited to:
      (1)   Individuals engaging in private sales activities, such as the sale
of a personal automobile or a yard sale;
      (2)   Persons under the age of 18 years engaged in part-time or seasonal
employment while still attending school full-time;
      (3)   Musicians, musical groups and other performers and entertainment
activity performed at a local venue or special event; and/or
      (4)   Crafters selling goods created by them where such activity is
conducted at a craft sale.
   CONDUCT. To commence, manage, own, solicit, canvass, practice, transact,
engage in or carry on.
   CRAFT SALE. A gathering of crafters for the sale of handmade or hand-
assembled items or artworks organized and held by a bona fide local club or
non-profit organization.
   CRAFTER. A hobbiest making or hand-assembling items or artworks for sale on
an occasional basis at a local craft sale.
   LICENSEE. A person who has obtained a business license pursuant to this
chapter.
   MOBILE FOOD VENDOR. Defined as set forth in
Ch. 111 this code of ordinances.
   PERSON. Includes all individuals and legal entities which may, under
applicable law, conduct business.
   SEASONAL VENDOR. A vendor who conducts a business activity in the town on a
temporary basis not to exceed 180 consecutive days unless extended pursuant to
Ch. 111 of this code of ordinances.
   SPECIAL EVENT. Defined as set forth by
Ch. 118 of this code or ordinances.
   SWAP MEET. Activity carried on in a building, structure, enclosure, lot or
other area where seasonal vendors display, exchange, barter, buy, sell or
bargain for new or used merchandise, goods, food or services.
   SWAP MEET OPERATOR. The person who controls the admission of persons to a
swap meet.
   SWAP MEET VENDING STRUCTURE. A structure set up at a swap meet by a seasonal
vendor for the display, exchange, barter or sale of merchandise, goods, food,
or services. A mobile sales unit is a SWAP MEET VENDING STRUCTURE if located in
a swap meet.
   YARD SALE. An occasional sale of personal property that lasts no longer than
72 hours at a time and occurs no more frequently than one time every 30 days.
(Ord. 23-07, passed 10-10-2023)
§ 110.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person to carry on any trade, calling, profession,
occupation or business, specified in this chapter, without first having
procured a license from the town to do so either pursuant hereto and without
complying with any and all regulations of such trade, calling, profession,
occupation or business as specified in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 8-2-1) (Ord. 23-07, passed 10-10-2023) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.03 SEPARATE LICENSES REQUIRED.
   A separate license must be obtained for each branch establishment or
separate place of business in which any trade, calling, profession, occupation
or business is practiced, transacted or carried on, and for each trade,
calling, profession, occupation or business practice, transacted or carried on
at the same place. Each license issued shall authorize the person obtaining it
to practice, transact, carry on, pursue or conduct only that trade, calling,
profession, occupation or business described in such license, and only at the
location or place of business therein described.
(Prior Code, § 8-2-2) (Ord. 23-07, passed 10-10-2023)
§ 110.04 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk to prepare and issue a license
under this chapter for every person, firm, company or corporation liable to pay
a license fee hereunder, and to state in each license the amount charged, the
period of time covered, the name of the person, firm or corporation for whom
issued, the trade, calling, profession, occupation or business licensed and the
location or place of business where the trade, calling, profession, occupation
or business is to be carried on.
   (B)   In no case shall any mistake of the Town Clerk, in stating the amount
of a license, prevent or prejudice the collection by the town of what shall be
actually due from anyone carrying on a trade, calling, profession, occupation
or business, subject to license under this chapter.
   (C)   The business license application shall be submitted to the Planning
and Zoning Department for a zoning review prior to issuance of any business
license.
   (D)   The license holder shall be entitled to commence business subject to
the restrictions that the license holder shall comply with all ordinances,
statutes and regulations required by federal authorities, state agencies, the
county and the town.
(Prior Code, § 8-2-3) (Ord. 23-07, passed 10-10-2023)
§ 110.05 TIMEFRAMES FOR ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Administrative timeframe. Unless the license has already been issued,
within 15 days after receiving a license application under this chapter, the
Town Clerk or designee will determine whether the application is
administratively complete and notify the applicant as set forth in this
section.
   (B)   Substantive timeframe. Within 45 days after the Town Clerk notifies
the applicant that the application is administratively complete, the town will
complete its substantive review of the license application.
   (C)   Overall timeframe. Within 60 days after receiving an application under
this chapter, the Town Clerk will grant or deny a license.
   (D)   An application is deemed withdrawn if, within 30 days after the date
of a request for additional information during the substantive timeframe, the
applicant does not supply the requested information or provide justification
for delay. On receipt of justification, the Town Clerk shall allow the
applicant 30 additional days to provide the requested information before
deeming the application withdrawn.
   (E)   Except as otherwise provided, the timeframes in this section shall be
extended and suspended as provided by state law.
(Ord. 23-07, passed 10-10-2023)
§ 110.06 SWAP MEETS.
   In addition to the other requirements of this chapter, the following
requirements apply to swap meets and swap meet operators.
   (A)   A licensee with a permanent place of business who is not a seasonal
vendor may sell at a swap meet the same merchandise, goods, foods, or services
as he or she sells at his or her permanent place of business without obtaining
a separate license for sales at the swap meet. The licensee shall notify the
town of the location of the swap meet and maintain a copy of his or her license
at his or her location at the swap meet.
   (B)   A seasonal vendor operating at a swap meet who moves to a different
swap meet is not required to obtain a separate license but shall notify the
town of the new location.
   (C)   A swap meet operator shall not permit a seasonal vendor or other
person to commence, transact or carry on any trade, calling, profession or
occupation within the swap meet without a license. The swap meet operator shall
notify the town of the presence of any seasonal vendor or other person required
to have a license at its swap meet who does not have a license.
   (D)   The Town Code Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to enforce
the Sign Code of the town at the swap meets.
   (E)   A swap meet vending structure shall be removed no later than ten days
after the seasonal vendor has ceased operating. All personal property located
at the swap meet vending structure shall be removed and all trash and debris
shall be removed and disposed of in an appropriate trash receptacle.
(Ord. 23-07, passed 10-10-2023) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.07 PAYMENT.
   (A)   All business license fees shall be paid at the office of the Town
Clerk in such manner as may be specified by the Clerk. Such license fees shall
be paid in the amounts and be due on the dates set forth in §
110.12 of this chapter.
   (B)   A separate license must be obtained for each branch establishment or
separate place of business in which any trade, calling, profession, occupation
or business is carried on. Each license shall authorize the person obtaining
such license to carry on, pursue or conduct, only that trade, calling,
profession, occupation or business described in such license and only at the
location or place of business which is indicated.
(Prior Code, § 8-2-4) (Ord. 23-07, passed 10-10-2023)
§ 110.08 POSTING OF LICENSE.
   Every person, firm, company or corporation having a license under the
provisions of this chapter, and carrying on a trade, calling, profession,
occupation or business at a fixed place of business shall keep such license
posted and exhibited, while in force, in some conspicuous part of the place of
business. Every person having such a license, and not having a fixed place of
business, shall carry such license with him or her at all times while carrying
on that trade, calling, profession, occupation or business for which the same
was granted. Every person, firm, company or corporation having a license under
the provisions of this chapter shall produce and exhibit the same, when
applying for a renewal thereof, and whenever requested to do so by any police
officer or by any other authorized to issue, inspect or collect licenses.
(Prior Code, § 8-2-5) (Ord. 23-07, passed 10-10-2023) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.09 EXHIBITION OF LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   The Police Chief shall have and exercise the power to make arrests and
to cause complaints to be filed against all persons violating the provisions of
this chapter.
   (B)   The Police Chief or any duly authorized official shall have the power
to enter free of charge, at any time, any place of business for which a license
is required by this chapter, and to demand the exhibition of such license for
the current term, from any person engaged or employed in the transaction of any
such business. It is unlawful for such person to fail to exhibit such license
when requested to do so.
(Prior Code, § 8-2-6) (Ord. 23-07, passed 10-10-2023) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.10 LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE.
   No license granted or issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be
in any manner assignable or transferable to any other person, firm, company or
corporation other than is therein mentioned or named without first obtaining
permission from the Council.
(Prior Code, § 8-2-7) (Ord. 23-07, passed 10-10-2023)
§ 110.11 EXEMPTIONS.
   Any person who has obtained a license pursuant to
Ch. 111 of this code of ordinances shall be exempted from having to obtain any
license or pay any license tax imposed pursuant to this chapter.
   (A)   A license shall not be required when:
      (1)   The general law of the state precludes requiring a license for the
business;
      (2)   The person conducting the business activity is an employee of a
business either possessing a license or exempt from having to possess a
license;
      (3)   Newspaper carriers delivering and selling newspapers from house to
house or business to business, students on school class projects, members of
youth clubs selling items to raise funds on an annual or semi-annual basis,
such as girl scouts selling cookies, nor to acts of merchants or their
employees in delivering goods in the regular course of business;
      (4)   The business activity is the sale of food products by an owner,
proprietor or tenant of agricultural lands, orchards, farms, and gardens on
which such food products are grown, raised, or prepared for market;
      (5)   Religious institutions engaged solely as a place of worship; or
      (6)   The activity is a casual activity, including the activity of
crafters at craft sales.
   (B)   Before receiving the exemption, an affidavit of the facts entitling
the seller to an exemption must be filed with the Town Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 8-2-8) (Ord. 23-07, passed 10-10-2023)
§ 110.12 LICENSE REQUIRED; TERM OF LICENSE; TERMINATION OF LICENSE; FEE.
   (A)   All businesses, occupations, professions, trades, or callings, not
having first obtained a license pursuant hereto shall obtain a business license
pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   Business licenses shall be valid for one year commencing January 1 of
the year issued. If an initial business license is issued for an effective date
after January 1 of any year, the business license shall be valid from the date
of issuance until the following December 31.
   (C)   The fee for the license shall be established by resolution of the Town
Council (schedule of fees). For an initial license issued after January 1 of
any year, the license fee shall be prorated on a monthly basis from the first
day on the month in which the license is issued through the following December
31.
   (D)   A business license may be renewed for an additional year by filing the
license fee prior to the expiration date. No license shall be renewed unless
the licensee or permittee conforms to the provisions of the town code,
including payment of transaction privilege taxes as required hereby. All
renewals of licenses shall be subject to zoning review.
   (E)   Licensee shall notify the Town Clerk in writing of the termination of
his or her business either before the termination date or within ten days
thereafter.
   (F)   Any person who is required to obtain a business license and fails to
do so prior to conducting any activity for which a license is required shall be
subject to a penalty of 50% of the annual license fee which would have been
imposed on the date on which such activities commenced in addition to payment
of the applicable license fee. All license fees and penalties owed by a person
pursuant to this division (F) must be paid before a new business license is
issued to such person.
   (G)   Licenses or permits issued under this code shall not be transferable.
(Prior Code, § 8-2-9) (Ord. 00-10, passed - -2000; Ord. 16-01, passed 1-12-
2016; Ord. 20-08, passed 6-9-2020; Ord. 23-07, passed 10-10-2023)
§ 110.13 INFORMATION REQUIRED; LICENSING ELIGIBILITY.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Town Manager or such representative of the
town as may be designated by the Town Manager to require and obtain from every
applicant for a license or permit under this code the following information:
      (1)   Name;
      (2)   Business site address and phone number;
      (3)   Business mailing address;
      (4)   A brief description of the nature of business conducted and goods
being sold;
      (5)   Arizona transaction privileged tax license number, unless exempted
by the state and the town as a service-oriented business;
      (6)   Proof of compliance with the town’s Tax Code;
      (7)   Driver’s license number and state where issued;
      (8)   Date of birth;
      (9)   Name of all individuals working with applicant; and
      (10)   Signature of applicant.
   (B)   Licensing eligibility requirements. As set forth in A.R.S. § 41-1080:
      (1)   Arizona driver’s license issued after 1996 or an Arizona non-
operating identification license;
      (2)   Driver’s license issued by any state that verifies lawful presence
in the United States;
      (3)   Birth certificate or delayed birth certificate issued in any state,
territory, or possession of the United States;
      (4)   United States certificate of birth abroad;
      (5)   United States passport;
      (6)   Foreign passport with a United States visa;
      (7)   Federal Form I-9 with a photograph;
      (8)   United States citizenship and immigration services employment
authorization document or refugee travel document;
      (9)   United States Certificate of Naturalization;
      (10)   United States Certificate of Citizenship;
      (11)   Tribal Certificate of Indian blood; or
      (12)   Tribal or Bureau of Indian Affairs affidavit of birth.
(Prior Code, § 8-2-10) (Ord. 23-07, passed 10-10-2023)
§ 110.14 DENIAL AND REVOCATION OF LICENSE; HEARING.
   (A)   Licenses required under this chapter may be denied, modified,
suspended, or revoked by the Town Clerk after notice and hearing before the
Town Manager for any of the following causes:
      (1)   The permittee is delinquent in payment to the town, county or state
for any tax or fees;
      (2)   The permittee knowingly or intentionally gave false or misleading
information in the application materials;
      (3)   The permittee, knowingly or intentionally permitted the possession,
use or sale of controlled substances on the premises;
      (4)   The business license is not operated in full compliance with the
conditions of approval; and/or
      (5)   Any business found to be out of compliance as stated in §
110.04(C) of this chapter with state agencies, federal authorities, the county
and the town.
   (B)   Any notice sent by the town related to denial, modification,
suspension, or revocation of a license shall be in writing, and shall be sent
by certified mail, postage prepaid, to such person at their last known address
as identified in the application or license on file in town records.
   (C)   Notice of a hearing shall be mailed to the licensee by the Town
Manager or designee, setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint
and the time and place of hearing. The Town Manager shall issue a written
decision and mail notice thereof within ten days after the hearing, setting
forth the findings and grounds for the decision, to the applicant/licensee.
(Prior Code, § 8-2-11) (Ord. 23-07, passed 10-10-2023)
§ 110.15 APPEAL.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by the denial, modification, suspension, or
revocation of a license under this chapter shall have the right to appeal to
the Town Council. The appeal shall be filed with the Town Clerk no later than
14 days after the Town Manager’s decision has been mailed to the person and
shall consist of a written statement fully describing the grounds for the
appeal.
   (B)   The Town Clerk shall set a time and place for a hearing before the
Town Council on such an appeal, to be held within 30 days from the filing date
of the appeal. Notice of such a hearing shall be mailed by the Town Clerk to
the appellant setting forth specifically the time and place of the hearing.
During the pendency of the appeal to the Town Council, an interim license shall
be issued to the applicant.
   (C)   The decision of the Town Council on appeal shall be final, except any
person aggrieved may appeal the decision to Superior Court.
   (D)   Any non-renewed or revoked license shall be surrendered to the Town
Clerk on demand at the expiration of the appeals process.
(Ord. 23-07, passed 10-10-2023)
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   Any person or organization conducting business in the town without
possessing a valid business license shall immediately cease and desist the
business activity and shall not carry on the business activity until the
following fees and penalties are paid in full:
   (A)   First offense. Immediately obtain a business license. In addition to
payment of the fee established pursuant to this code, pay a penalty of $100.
   (B)   Second offense. In addition to the fees and penalties set forth in
division (A) of this section, a criminal citation may be issued to the person
or organization for a second violation of this chapter. Such violation shall be
a Class 2 misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed $750 or by
imprisonment not to exceed five days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
   (C)   Third and further offenses. Any person found guilty of violating any
provision of this chapter a third time or more shall be guilty of a Class 1
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine not to
exceed $2,500 or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both
such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall be a
separate offense punishable as herein described.
(Ord. 16-01, passed 1-12-2016; Ord. 20-08, passed 6-9-2020; Ord. 23-07, passed
10-10-2023)
CHAPTER 111: SEASONAL BUSINESS LICENSE
Section
Park and Swap Meets
   
111.01   Definitions
   
111.02   Registration required
   
111.03   Seasonal business license
   
111.04   Non-assignability of license
   
111.05   Information required
   
111.06   Fee
   
111.07   Permit required
   
111.08   Regulations
   
111.09   Removal of temporary structures
   
111.10   Revocability
Mobile Food Vendors
   
111.25   Purpose
   
111.26   Definitions
   
111.27   Compliance with state licensing requirements
   
111.28   License requirements
   
111.29   Exempt mobile food units
   
111.30   Operational requirements
   
111.31   Fees
   
111.32   Violations; suspension or revocation
   
111.33   Appeals
 
   
111.99   Penalty
PARK AND SWAP MEETS
§ 111.01 DEFINITIONS.
    For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DISCONTINUED USE/CESSATION OF USE. Commercial land use shall be considered
to be discontinued, or to have ceased operation, when use is not open to the
public for retail or wholesale sales a minimum of three days per week for a
minimum of four continuous hours per day.
   PARK AND SWAP LOT. A building, structure, enclosure, lot or other area into
which persons are admitted to display, exchange, barter, buy, sell or bargain
for new or used merchandise, goods, food, wares or services. A PARK AND SWAP
LOT shall be zoned C2 (commercial) or by permission of a conditional use permit
as approved by the Town Council.
   PARK AND SWAP MEET. Activity carried on at the park and swap lot and
consists of the admitting of any persons into a park and swap lot for the
purpose of displaying, exchanging, bartering, buying, selling or bargaining for
new and used merchandise, goods, food, wares or services.
   PARK AND SWAP MEET OWNER or PARK AND SWAP MEET OPERATOR. The person who
controls the admission directly, or through agents, of persons and merchandise
into the trading area.
   PARK AND SWAP MEET PARTICIPANT OR VENDOR. Interchangeable. Any person who is
in the business of providing services or who brings goods, wares, food or
merchandise, both new and secondhand, to a park and swap meet for the purpose
of displaying, exchanging, bartering, buying, selling or bargaining said goods,
wares, food, merchandise or services.
   TEMPORARY VENDING STRUCTURE. A constructed or erected structure set up by
any person holding a seasonal business license, which structure is intended for
use for a period not to exceed 180 days and which is readily movable.
(Prior Code, § 8-1-1) (Ord. 23-08, passed 10-10-2023)
§ 111.02 REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
    Any person operating as a park and swap meet participant or vendor in the
town shall register with the town and obtain either a seasonal business license
or a special event seasonal business license.
   (A)   A seasonal business license shall be effective for 180 days.
   (B)   A licensee with a permanent place of business in the Town of
Quartzsite who is not a seasonal vendor may sell at a swap meet the same
merchandise, goods, foods, or services as they sell at their permanent place of
business without obtaining a separate license for sales at the swap meet. The
licensee shall notify the town of the location of the swap meet and maintain a
copy of their license at the location of the swap meet.
   (C)   A special event seasonal business license shall be valid for a period
not to exceed three consecutive days and shall be issued only in connection
with a town-approved event.
(Prior Code, § 8-1-2) (Ord. 23-08, passed 10-10-2023)
§ 111.03 SEASONAL BUSINESS LICENSE.
   (A)   A seasonal business license issued under the provisions of this
subchapter shall be displayed in a conspicuous place. This issued permit shall
be effective for 180 days. The person obtaining the license shall designate the
180 days and said term may be extended on written application to the town for
one additional period of up to 30 days for an additional fee. Said request for
extension must be submitted within ten days prior to the expiration of the
original license. The license holder shall be entitled to place a temporary
vending structure on the location given in the seasonal business license,
subject to the restriction that all temporary vending structures shall be
subject to applicable zoning regulations and such other regulations as are then
in force and effect within the town.
   (B)   A special event seasonal business license issued under the provision
of this subchapter shall be displayed in a conspicuous place. The issued
license shall be effective for three consecutive days for a specific location.
There shall be no extension or relocation permitted.
   (C)   The license holder shall be entitled to commence business subject to
the restriction that the license holder shall comply with all ordinances,
statutes and regulations required by federal authorities, state agencies, the
county and the town.
   (D)   In the event that a person or organization is doing business under a
seasonal business license and wishes to move to a new location, they shall pay
only the original license fee. This one license fee entitles the holder to move
to any park and swap lot within the town, but requires notification to the town
of the new location.
(Prior Code, § 8-1-3) (Res. 03-13, passed - -2003) (Ord. 23-08, passed 10-10-
2023)
§ 111.04 NON-ASSIGNABILITY OF LICENSE.
    A seasonal business license or a special event seasonal business license
granted or issued under any of the provisions of this subchapter shall not be
assignable or transferable to any other business, organization, or person.
(Prior Code, § 8-1-4) (Ord. 23-08, passed 10-10-2023)
§ 111.05 INFORMATION REQUIRED.
    It shall be the duty of the Town Manager, or such representative of the
town as may be designated by the Town Manager, to require and obtain from every
applicant purchasing a seasonal business license the following information:
   (A)   Name of business;
   (B)   Owner’s name;
   (C)   Permanent mailing address;
   (D)   Vehicle description and license plate number;
   (E)   Description of business activity and merchandise sold;
   (F)   Verification of Arizona resale tax number;
   (G)   Specific location in the town where business is to be conducted;
   (H)   Valid driver’s license or valid identification number; and
   (I)   RV sale must have MVD off-site sales permit.
(Prior Code, § 8-1-5) (Ord. 07-18, passed - -2007) (Ord. 23-08, passed 10-10-
2023)
§ 111.06 FEE.
   (A)   (1)   A fee shall be charged for each seasonal business license. The
Council may change these fees and adopt regulations affecting this chapter by
resolution. Fees collected by the town for seasonal business license shall be
designated a separate fund accounting code.
      (2)   A fee shall be charged for a 30-day extension period on a seasonal
business license.
      (3)   A fee shall be charged for each special event license.
      (4)   Council may change these fees and adopt regulations affecting this
chapter by resolution. Fees collected by the town for seasonal business license
extensions and special event seasonal business license shall be designated a
separate fund accounting code.
   (B)   (1)   If a vendor is found to be doing business without a valid town
license, it is within the discretion of the town’s Code Enforcement Official to
offer an alternative to the immediate issuance of a criminal citation as
outlined in §
111.99(B) of this chapter. The fee schedule shall be the following in these
circumstances:
         (a)   First offense. Immediate purchase as applicable of a seasonal
business license at the current fee of $50, plus a penalty of $50 for a total
amount of $100; purchase of an extension seasonal business license at the
current fee of $15, plus a penalty of $15 for a total amount of $30; purchase
of a special event license at the current fee of $15, plus a penalty of $15 for
a total amount of $30;
         (b)   Second offense. Immediate purchase of a seasonal business
license at the escalated permit fee and penalty of $200; purchase of an
extension seasonal business license fee at the escalated permit and penalty of
$60; purchase of a special event license fee at the escalated permit and
penalty of $60; and
         (c)   Further offenses. Each additional violation thereafter shall
result in a doubling escalation of the license fee and penalty.
      (2)   At any time such permit and penalty is not immediately paid or at
the discretion of the town’s Code Enforcement Official, the vendor shall be
criminally cited for vending without a license pursuant to §
111.99(B)(1) of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 8-1-6) (Res. 99-01, passed - -1999; Res. 03-13, passed - -2003;
Res. 07-20, passed - -2007) (Ord. 23-08, passed 10-10-2023)
§ 111.07 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   (1)    It shall be unlawful for any vendor to commence, transact or
carry on any trade, calling, profession or occupation, as set forth in this
subchapter, without first having obtained a seasonal business license or
special event license from the town.
      (2)   Furthermore, the vendor shall comply with any and all licensing and
regulation of such trade, business, calling, profession or occupation as may be
required by the federal authorities, state agencies, the county and the town.
   (B)   The practicing, transaction or carrying on of any trade, business,
calling, profession or occupation specified in this subchapter without
complying with any and all regulations, statutes or ordinances of the
government entities as stated above, shall constitute a violation of this
subchapter.
   (C)   The granting of a seasonal business license or a special event license
is not deemed as evidence of proof that the vendor has complied with all
provisions of this subchapter, nor shall it stop the town in seeking remedy for
any violation of this subchapter.
   (D)   The fact that a person or organization is engaged in any business
which, pursuant to this subchapter requires a seasonal business license, or
that such person or organization has exhibited a sign indicating such business
is being pursued shall be prima facie evidence of the responsibility of such
person or organization to pay a seasonal business license or a special event
license fee.
   (E)   In any criminal or action brought for the violation of any of the
provisions of this subchapter, in the absence of evidence by the defendant
otherwise, it shall be presumed that no seasonal business license or a special
event license has been issued and the burden of proof as to the issuance of the
license shall be upon the defendant.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any park and swap meet owner or park and swap
meet operator to permit a park and swap meet participant or vendor to commence,
transact or carry on any trade, calling, profession or occupation within his,
her or their park and swap lot without the appropriate license.
(Prior Code, § 8-1-7) (Ord. 23-08, passed 10-10-2023) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.08 REGULATIONS.
   (A)    Park and swap lots shall be zoned C2 (Commercial) unless approved as
outlined in the conditional use permit process in the planning and zoning
ordinance.
   (B)   The park and swap lot owner or park and swap lot operator shall notify
the town of the presence of any vendor on his or her lot that does not have a
current and valid seasonal business license or special event license.
   (C)   The Fire Department shall have the authority to enforce the
International Fire Code as it concerns code violations on any park and swap
lot, including vendor’s tents, canopies and temporary structures.
(Prior Code, § 8-1-8) (Ord. 23-08, passed 10-10-2023)
§ 111.09 REMOVAL OF TEMPORARY STRUCTURES.
    Vendor’s tents, tent frames, canopies, canopy frames and all temporary
structures in any park and swap lot must be removed no later than ten days
after the vendor has closed his or her business or discontinued use (as defined
within §
111.01 of this chapter). It shall be the property owner’s responsibility to
remove such temporary facility/structure.
(Prior Code, § 8-1-10) (Ord. 01-12, passed - -2001; Ord. 04-06, passed - -2004;
Ord. 23-08, passed 10-10-2023) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.10 REVOCABILITY.
    The Town Clerk shall issue a notice of order of revocation, revoking a
seasonal business license or special event license issued pursuant to this
subchapter if any of the following occur:
   (A)   The permittee is delinquent in payment to the town, county or state
for any tax or fees;
   (B)   The vendor or permittee knowingly or intentionally gave false or
misleading information in the application materials;
   (C)   The vendor or permittee knowingly or intentionally permitted the
possession, use or sale of controlled substances on the premises;
   (D)   The vendor’s permit is not operated in full compliance with the
conditions of approval; or
   (E)   Any vendor is found to be out of compliance as stated with state
agencies, federal authorities, the county and the town.
(Prior Code, § 8-1-11) (Ord. 23-08, passed 10-10-2023)
MOBILE FOOD VENDORS
§ 111.25 PURPOSE.
    This subchapter is adopted to protect the health, safety and welfare of the
town and its residents by enacting reasonable regulations for mobile food
vendors, their employees, agents, lessees or independent contractors by
requiring compliance with minimum standards for safety and security.
(Ord. 20-04, passed 1-28-2020; Ord. 23-08, passed 10-10-2023)
§ 111.26 DEFINITIONS.
    In addition to the definitions set forth in §
111.01 of this chapter, the following definitions apply to mobile food vendors.
The below words and phrases, wherever used in this subchapter shall be
construed as defined in this section unless, clearly from the context, a
different meaning is intended. Words used in the present tense include the
future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number and words
in the singular number include the plural number. For the purpose of this
subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPLICANT. The person who applies for a business license as a mobile food
vendor pursuant to this subchapter.
   CONTROLLING PERSON. A natural person who either:
      (1)   Has a 10% or greater interest in the ownership or earnings of the
business; or
      (2)   Is any of the following:
         (a)   An officer, director or any stockholder who owns 10% or more, of
a corporation applicant;
         (b)   A general partner of a limited partnership applicant or partner
of a non-limited partnership applicant;
         (c)   An officer, president or secretary of a limited liability
company/corporation applicant; or
         (d)   The sole proprietor of a sole proprietorship applicant.
   DESIGNATED AGENT. The person designated by the licensee to receive notices
from the town pursuant to this subchapter.
   EXEMPT MOBILE FOOD UNIT. A mobile food unit operated by a seasonal vendor at
a swap meet pursuant to §
111.07 of this chapter, where the swap meet is operated on private property.
   LEGAL PARKING SPACE. An area designated for vehicle parking in the town
right-of-way that may be paved or unpaved and may be delineated by road surface
markings. LEGAL PARKING SPACE does not include a parking space in a parking lot
on property owned by the town.
   LICENSE. A business license issued pursuant to
Ch. 110 of this code of ordinances.
   MOBILE FOOD UNIT. A food establishment that is licensed by the state, that
is readily movable and that dispenses food or beverages for immediate service
and consumption and other incidental retail items from any vehicle as defined
in A.R.S. § 28-101.
   MOBILE FOOD VENDOR. Any person who owns, controls, manages or leases a
mobile food unit or contracts with a person to prepare foods and vend from,
drive or operate a mobile food unit.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. An area of land owned by the town and is used for street or
highway purposes.
   SEMI-PERMANENT STRUCTURE. Equipment, or any dining area, including, but not
limited to, tables, chairs, booths, bar stools, benches and standup counters.
(Ord. 20-04, passed 1-28-2020; Ord. 23-08, 10-10-2023)
§ 111.27 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LICENSING REQUIREMENTS.
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a mobile food unit or act as
a mobile food vendor without having first obtained a valid license from the
state’s Department of Health Services, pursuant to A.R.S. § 36-1761, and a food
handler card from the county’s Health Department.
(Ord. 20-04, passed 1-28-2020; Ord. 23-08, 10-10-2023) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.28 LICENSE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a person to operate a mobile food unit at any
location within the town without obtaining either a business license or
seasonal vendor business license from the town in accordance with
Ch. 110 of this code of ordinances and any other licenses required for the
lawful operation of business.
   (B)   In addition to the requirements of
Ch. 110 of this code of ordinances and unless exempted pursuant to §
111.29 of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for a person to operate a mobile
food unit at any location within the town without complying with the
requirements of this subchapter.
   (C)   Any person desiring to obtain a new or renewal license shall apply to
the town by presenting a complete application, the applicable fee and
fingerprint records to the Town Clerk. In addition:
      (1)   The application shall include the following information:
         (a)   The names, addresses, and contact information for the applicant,
including all controlling persons and designated agents;
         (b)   A description, license plate number and photograph of the mobile
food unit;
         (c)   A valid driver’s license; and
         (d)   Copies of required license from the state’s Department of Health
Services and the food handler card from the county’s Health Department.
      (2)   Fingerprint records are required:
         (a)   On all new applications, for all applicants and controlling
persons; and
         (b)   On all renewal applications, for any new controlling persons and
for the permittee.
   (D)   A new or renewal license shall be issued to an applicant pursuant to
this subchapter unless:
      (1)   The applicant fails to comply with the requirements of
Ch. 110 of this code of ordinances;
      (2)   The applicant fails to provide the fingerprint records;
      (3)   The applicant or a controlling person is currently in violation of
this subchapter;
      (4)   The application contains false or misleading information;
      (5)   The applicant has a current debt related to any open or closed
account maintained or formerly maintained with the town; or
      (6)   The applicant or controlling person failed to comply with any
federal and state laws, regulations promulgated by the state’s Department of
Health Services or the county or the town code.
(Ord. 20-04, passed 1-28-2020) (Ord. 23-08, passed 10-10-2023)
§ 111.29 EXEMPT MOBILE FOOD UNITS.
   (A)    Except as provided in division (B) below, all requirements of this
subchapter apply to both mobile food units and exempt mobile food units.
   (B)   Exempt mobile food units are exempt from the requirements set forth in
the following sections of this subchapter:
      (1)   Section
111.28(B) through (D); and
      (2)   Section
111.30(D), (E), (F), (G), and (I).
(Ord. 20-04, passed 1-28-2020; Ord. 23-08, passed 10-10-2023)
§ 111.30 OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Generally. It is unlawful for any person to operate a mobile food unit
that does not meet the requirements in this section.
   (B)   Fire Code compliance. A mobile food vendor shall ensure that all
mobile food units comply with the version of the International Fire Code in
effect at the time when the license is issued, state law and the town code
relating to fire and explosion safety standards.
   (C)   Fire safety and inspection. A mobile food unit(s) shall be inspected
by the town’s Fire Department, or the mobile food vendor shall provide evidence
that the mobile food unit passed a fire inspection by another city or town fire
department in the state within the preceding 12 months.
   (D)   Refuse, trash and litter maintenance. A mobile food unit shall:
      (1)   Provide a minimum of one 15-gallon trash receptacle within 15 feet
of each individual mobile food unit for customers and employees;
      (2)   Maintain an area around the mobile unit clear of litter, garbage,
rubble and debris; and
      (3)   Transport the trash from the area of operation to an authorized
waste disposal location.
   (E)   Noise restrictions. The restrictions and requirements of §
130.06 of this code of ordinances shall apply to mobile food units.
   (F)   Security.
      (1)   The mobile food unit and the surrounding vending area shall be
maintained in a safe and clean manner at all times.
      (2)   A mobile food unit shall have adequate lighting to ensure customer
safety in the vending area. Lighting shall be directed downwards and away from
rights-of-way and adjacent properties.
      (3)   The mobile food unit and its customers shall not obstruct the
movement of pedestrians or other vehicles using the sidewalk, street, alley or
other public right-of-way.
   (G)   Insurance.
      (1)   If the mobile food unit operates an event sponsored by the town or
operates on public property, including rights-of-way or property owned by the
town, the mobile food vendor shall obtain insurance naming the town as an
additional insured in amounts as required by the town and in accordance with
the requirements of A.R.S. Title 9, Ch. 4, Art. 7.2.
      (2)   The insurance company issuing the policy shall be authorized to
issue commercial liability policies in the state by the state’s Department of
Insurance.
      (3)   The policy shall designate by manufacturer’s serial or
identification number all mobile food units for which coverage is granted.
      (4)   The policy shall insure the person named in the policy and any
other person using the mobile food vendor with the express or implied
permission of the named insured against any liability arising out of the
ownership, maintenance or use of the mobile food unit in the state.
   (H)   Location. Except as provided in division (H)(1) below, a mobile food
vendor shall operate a mobile food unit only in commercial and industrial
zoning districts in accordance with the town’s zoning provisions and subject to
the following limitations and conditions.
      (1)   Residential area. A mobile food vendor shall not operate in an area
zoned for residential use or within 250 feet of an area zoned for residential
use, except:
         (a)   A mobile food vendor selling only ice cream may operate on
public rights-of-way in areas zoned for residential use; or
         (b)   Subject to applicable laws and the town code, a mobile food
vendor may operate on private property in a residential area if the mobile food
vendor obtains a separate agreement with the property owner to operate a mobile
food unit for a maximum of six hours within a 24-hour period on the private
property.
      (2)   Town-owned property. A mobile food vendor shall only operate in a
legal parking space. If the mobile food vendor desires to operate on town
property other than a legal parking space in a right-of-way, the mobile food
vendor shall obtain from the town a separate agreement for use, services
contract or similar agreement, which will be entered into at the town’s sole
discretion and applicable law.
      (3)   Private property. A mobile food vendor shall obtain written
permission to use any private property where a mobile food unit is operating
and shall provide proof of such written permission on demand by the town.
   (I)   Parking. A mobile food unit shall comply with this division (I) and
applicable law as it pertains to parking, unless parking is governed by a
separate section in this subchapter.
      (1)   A mobile food unit shall only operate in a legal parking space.
      (2)   A mobile food unit, including any semi-permanent structure used or
associated with the mobile food unit, may use no more than one legal parking
space, unless the mobile food vendor has a separate agreement with the town to
use additional legal parking spaces or parking spaces on town property other
than right-of-way.
      (3)   No mobile food unit exceeding 24 feet may park diagonally in a
diagonal parking space or park in any manner that occupies more than one
diagonal parking space.
      (4)   No mobile food unit shall operate with the serving window facing
street traffic unless the serving window is 20 feet from the right-of-way.
      (5)   A mobile food unit shall abide by all parking regulations,
including posted time limits. If there are no other time restrictions on the
use of a legal parking space, a mobile food unit shall not occupy a legal
parking space for more than six hours in a 24-hour period. OCCUPY, within this
division (I)(5) means within 100 feet of the place in which the mobile food
unit was initially parked.
      (6)   A mobile food unit shall not occupy a legal parking space with
insufficient parking capacity as prescribed by town zoning provisions and
applicable law, and includes occupying a legal parking space that reduces the
number of available parking spaces surrounding the area which is required for
the principal use or uses of the property associated with the parking spaces as
set forth in A.R.S. Title 9, Ch. 4, Art. 7.2.
      (7)   A mobile food vendor shall not claim or attempt to establish any
exclusive right to park at a particular street location, unless the parking
space is part of a permitted event.
   (J)   Signs. A mobile food vendor shall comply with the town’s Sign Code.
(Ord. 20-04, passed 1-28-2020; Ord. 23-08, passed 10-10-2023) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.31 FEES.
    The fee for the license shall be established by resolution of the Town
Council.
(Ord. 20-04, passed 1-28-2020; Ord. 23-08, 10-10-2023)
§ 111.32 VIOLATIONS; SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   (A)    It is a violation of this subchapter for any person to provide false
information on any license application.
   (B)   It is a violation of this subchapter for a person to operate a mobile
food unit that fails to meet all the requirements of
Ch. 110 of this code of ordinances. Mobile food vendors operating, exempt
mobile food units, shall comply with applicable requirements of this
subchapter.
   (C)   It is a violation of this subchapter for a mobile food vendor to fail
to display the license, food handler card or other required documents,
including proof of insurance and fire inspection, to a peace officer or town
inspector on demand.
   (D)   The town shall give written notice of a violation to the licensee or
designated agent that may result in the suspension or revocation of the
license. The notice shall include a description of the violation, the statutory
or code reference, how the licensee can comply with the requirements, a
description of the process whereby a hearing may be requested, the time limit
for requesting a hearing and a warning that failure to timely request a hearing
may result in suspension or revocation of the license. The notice shall be
served on the licensee or designated agent by either personal service or
registered/certified mail. Service of the notice shall be deemed complete upon
mailing to, or personal service on, the licensee or designated agent.
   (E)   The licensee or designated agent receiving a notice under this section
may request a hearing pursuant hereto. If the licensee fails to comply with the
requirements of this subchapter by the date provided in the notice, the town
may suspend or revoke the license as provided in this section.
   (F)   In addition to any penalties set forth in
Ch. 110 of this code of ordinances or this subchapter, a licensee shall be
suspended if, during the term of the license, the licensee or a controlling
person has violated any of the provisions of this subchapter. During the
suspension period, the licensee shall not operate any mobile food unit
associated with the suspended license. If a fine is associated with the
violation that is the basis for suspension, the suspension may continue beyond
the period set forth in this division (F) until such time as the licensee pays
the fine.
(Ord. 20-04, passed 1-28-2020; Ord. 23-08, passed 10-10-2023)
§ 111.33 APPEALS.
    Appeals shall be heard and decided in compliance with
Ch. 110 of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. 20-04, passed 1-28-2020; Ord. 23-08, passed 10-10-2023)
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   (A)    Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Any person or organization vending in the town without
possessing a valid seasonal business license, special event license or business
license shall immediately cease and desist and be subject to:
         (a)   First offense. Immediate purchase as possible of a seasonal
business license at the current fee of $50, plus a penalty of $50, for a total
amount of $100; purchase of an extension seasonal business license at the
current fee of $15, plus a penalty of $15, for a total amount of $30; purchase
of a special event license at the current fee of $15, plus a penalty of $15,
for a total amount of $30;
         (b)   Second offense. Immediate purchase as applicable of a seasonal
business license at the escalated permit and penalty fee of $200; purchase of
an extension seasonal business license;
         (c)   Escalated. License at the escalated permit and penalty fee of
$60; purchase of a special event license at the escalated license and penalty
fee of $60; and
         (d)   Further offenses. Each additional violation thereafter shall
result in a doubling escalation of the license and penalty.
      (2)   At the discretion of the town’s Code Enforcement Official, a vendor
who fails to immediately purchase a seasonal business license and pay the
applicable license fee and penalty as set for in division (B)(1) of this
section shall be subject to:
         (a)   The vendor shall immediately cease and desist all vending and
business transactions; and
         (b)   A criminal citation shall be issued. Such violation shall be a
Class 2 misdemeanor punishable by a fine not exceeding $750 or by imprisonment
not to exceed five days, or by both such fine and imprisonment in the decision
of the court.
      (3)   If a vendor is found to be doing business without a valid town
seasonal business license or a special event license, the park and swap lot
owner or park and swap lot operator is subject to the following:
         (a)   First offense. Notice of violation;
         (b)   Second offense. Immediate penalty of $50; and
         (c)   Third and further offenses. Immediate penalty of $100.
(Prior Code, § 8-1-9) (Ord. 07-18, passed - -2007; Ord. 07-20, passed - -2007;
Ord. 23-08, passed 10-10-2023)
CHAPTER 112: AUTOMATED KIOSKS
Section
   
112.01   Definitions
   
112.02   Licensing and operation
   
112.03   Reports to law enforcement
   
112.04   Storage, retention and retrieval
   
112.05   Fees
   
112.06   Appeals
 
   
112.99   Penalty
§ 112.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPLICANT. The person who applies for a license pursuant to this chapter.
   AUTOMATED KIOSK. An interactive device that is installed within a retail
space at which used consumer electronic devices are sold, traded, recycled or
otherwise received by a person.
   AUTOMATED KIOSK LICENSE. A license issued pursuant to this chapter
authorizing a person to operate one or more automated kiosk(s) within the
boundaries of the town.
   CONSUMER ELECTRONIC DEVICE. Any portable electronic or digital device
designed to be purchased and used by end users or consumers for daily, non-
commercial purposes; examples of CONSUMER ELECTRONIC DEVICES include, but are
not limited to, cellular telephones, touch screen tablets, laptop computers,
smart watches and digital media players.
   CONTROLLING PERSON. A person who either:
      (1)   Has a 10% or greater interest in the ownership or earnings of the
business; or
      (2)   Is any of the following:
         (a)   An officer, director or any stockholder who owns 10% or more, of
a corporation licensee/applicant;
         (b)   A general partner of a limited partnership licensee/applicant or
partner of a non-limited partnership licensee/applicant;
         (c)   An officer, president or secretary of a limited liability
company/corporation licensee/ applicant; or
         (d)   The sole proprietor of a sole proprietorship licensee/applicant.
   DESIGNATED AGENT. The person designated by the applicant or licensee to
receive notices from the town pursuant to this chapter.
   ESN. A unique number assigned by the manufacturer to identify a mobile phone
or device. Commonly referred to as an ELECTRONIC SERIAL NUMBER.
   IMEF. A unique number used by wireless carriers and cell phone manufacturers
to identify mobile phones and devices. Commonly referred to as an INTERNATIONAL
MOBILE EQUIPMENT IDENTITY.
   LICENSEE. The person who applied for a license pursuant to this chapter and
in whose name such license was issued by the town pursuant to this chapter.
   MEID. A unique identifier used by wireless carriers and cell phone
manufacturers to identify a mobile phone. Commonly referred to as a MOBILE
EQUIPMENT IDENTIFIER.
   PERSON. An individual, partnership, corporation, association or any other
entity of whatever kind or nature.
(Ord. 18-07, passed 7-10-2018)
§ 112.02 LICENSING AND OPERATION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a person to operate an automated kiosk at any
location within the town without obtaining a license pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   A license issued pursuant to this chapter is valid for a period of one
year from the date of issuance.
   (C)   The kiosk(s) shall operate only at the location(s) designated on the
license. The license shall designate all locations where property belonging to
the licensee is processed and stored. Property of the licensee may be processed
and stored at locations not designated on the license only with the written and
signed consent of the town.
   (D)   Any person desiring to obtain a new or renewal license must apply to
the town by presenting a complete application, the applicable fee and
fingerprint records to the Town Clerk.
      (1)   The application shall include, but not be limited to, the following
information:
         (a)   The names, addresses and contact information for all controlling
persons and designated agents of the applicant;
         (b)   All locations within the town at which the applicant intends to
operate a kiosk and the number of kiosks that will be at each such location;
and
         (c)   The location(s) where property obtained at the kiosk may be
processed and stored.
      (2)   Fingerprint records are required:
         (a)   On all new applications, for all applicants and controlling
persons; and
         (b)   For renewal applicants, for any new controlling person(s) for
the licensee.
      (3)   Fingerprints shall be submitted in a form approved by the town. The
fingerprints shall be submitted to the state’s Department of Public Safety to
be used to obtain a state and federal criminal records check in accordance with
A.R.S. § 41-1750 and Pub. Law No. 92-544. The state’s Department of Public
Safety is authorized to exchange this fingerprint data with the United States
Federal Bureau of Investigation.
   (E)   (1)   Following receipt of the required documents and fees, all new
applications shall be submitted to the town’s Police Department for
investigation and criminal record review in accordance with this chapter.
      (2)   The Police Department, on behalf of the Town Clerk, shall receive
and review the criminal history record information resulting from the criminal
records check set forth above, including conviction and non-conviction data, of
license applicants and controlling persons for the purpose of evaluating the
fitness of licensees and controlling persons in connection with the issuance,
renewal, suspension or revocation of a license. Such information shall be used
only for the purpose of such evaluation or for the purpose of supporting and
defending a denial, non-renewal, suspension or revocation of a license.
   (F)   Complete renewal applications must be submitted to the Town Clerk no
later than 30 calendar days prior to the expiration of a license, otherwise the
license shall be deemed expired and non- renewable. If the renewal application
is not received as stated above, the licensee shall submit an application for a
new license and provide all information and fees required for a new license
application.
   (G)   A new or renewal license shall be issued to an applicant pursuant to
this chapter unless:
      (1)   The applicant failed to provide a completed application, the
required fee or the fingerprint records;
      (2)   The applicant or a controlling person has been convicted during the
ten-year period prior to submission of the application of a felony involving
trafficking in stolen property, fraud, forgery, theft, burglary, robbery,
extortion, conspiracy to defraud, any preparatory offenses of the
aforementioned crimes, a felony involving fraudulent or dishonest act or a
misdemeanor involving moral turpitude;
      (3)   The applicant fails to pay the applicable license and reporting fee
for a new license when the license is submitted for approval;
      (4)   The applicant or a controlling person is currently in violation of
this chapter, or other provisions of the town code, including, but not limited
to, transaction privilege taxes and zoning codes;
      (5)   The application contains false or misleading information; or
      (6)   The applicant has a current debt related to any open or closed
account maintained or formerly maintained with the town.
   (H)   A licensee may operate an automated kiosk in the town if the automated
kiosk performs all of the functions set forth in this division (H):
      (1)   Uses a live representative to remotely monitor the automated kiosk
during all hours of operation;
      (2)   Verifies a seller’s identity via a valid motor vehicle operator’s
license, valid motor vehicle non-operating identification license, valid armed
forces identification card or other valid photo identification, including the
serial or identification number of such valid document sufficient to verify the
information required to be reported in §
112.03(A) of this chapter;
      (3)   Secures storage of consumer electronic devices accepted by the
automated kiosk and adheres to the storage and retention requirements pursuant
to §
112.04 of this chapter;
      (4)   Captures and stores images during each transaction of:
         (a)   The seller;
         (b)   The identification required in division (H)(2) above; and
         (c)   The consumer electronic device.
      (5)   Electronically reports all transactions to law enforcement pursuant
to §
112.03 of this chapter;
      (6)   Reads and records ESN, IMEI or MEID, subject to §
112.03(B)(7) of this chapter; and
      (7)   Only buys consumer electronic devices.
   (I)   The town shall give written notice of a violation to the licensee or
designated agent that may result in the suspension or revocation of the
license. The notice shall include a description of the violation, the statutory
or code reference, how the licensee can comply with the requirements, a
description of the process whereby a hearing may be requested, the time limit
for requesting a hearing and a warning that failure to timely request a hearing
may result in suspension or revocation of the license. The notice shall be
personally served on the licensee or mailed to the licensee’s last known
address. Service of the notice shall be deemed complete upon mailing or
personal service on the licensee.
   (J)   The licensee or designated agent receiving a notice under this section
may request a hearing pursuant to §
112.06 of this chapter. If the licensee fails to comply with the requirements
of this chapter by the date provided in the notice, the town may suspend or
revoke the license as provided in this section.
   (K)   The Town Clerk may suspend a license for a period of time not to
exceed 30 calendar days if the town determines that the licensee or the
designated agent or a controlling person of the licensee has violated or is not
in compliance with any provision of this chapter. During the suspension period,
the licensee shall not transact any business through the automated kiosk(s)
associated with the suspended licenses. If a fine is associated with the
violation that is the basis for the suspension, the suspension may continue
beyond the period set forth in this division (K) until such time as the
licensee pays the fine.
   (L)   The Town Clerk may revoke a license issued pursuant to this chapter if
the town determines that:
      (1)   A licensee or designated agent operated the business during a
period of time when the license was suspended;
      (2)   A licensee, designated agent or controlling person is convicted of
a felony involving trafficking in stolen property, fraud, forgery, theft,
burglary, robbery, extortion, conspiracy to defraud, any preparatory offenses
of the aforementioned crimes, a felony involving fraudulent or dishonest act or
a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude;
      (3)   The licensee or designated agent has operated, or has attempted to
operate an automated kiosk at a location that is unlicensed;
      (4)   The town previously issued three or more notices of suspension
within a six-month period;
      (5)   The licensee or designated agent has not complied with a provision
of this chapter or has failed to provide information as required by this
chapter;
      (6)   The application fee, license fee, reporting fee or any transaction
privilege tax has not been paid; or
      (7)   The licensee fails to pay outstanding fines or resolve any
violations.
   (M)   It is a violation of this chapter for any person to provide false
information on any license application.
   (N)   It is a violation of this chapter for a person to operate an automated
kiosk that either fails to meet all of the requirements in this chapter or when
the person does not have a license issued pursuant to this chapter.
   (O)   If a license is revoked pursuant to this section, the licensee and its
controlling person(s) may not apply for a license under this chapter for a
period of one year from the date of revocation.
(Ord. 18-07, passed 7-10-2018) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.03 REPORTS TO LAW ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   At the time of each transaction whereby a consumer electronic device
is received at a kiosk, a licensee shall prepare a true, complete, legible and
accurate report of the transaction including a description of the consumer
electronic device received. The report shall be submitted to the town within 24
hours after receipt of the consumer electronic device. The report shall be in a
form designated by the town’s Police Department. Submission of the report to
the town is deemed accepted when the report is delivered in person to the
address designated by the town’s Police Department, or when the report is sent
electronically to the Police Department utilizing software approved by the
town’s Police Department. The reporting party shall retain a copy of the report
for a minimum of two years from the date of the transaction.
   (B)   Each report shall, at a minimum, contain for each consumer electronic
device received the following information:
      (1)   The name, current address and date of birth of the seller as shown
on the identification requirements pursuant to §
112.02(H)(2) of this chapter;
      (2)   A legible color copy of the photo identification used to verify the
seller’s identity in §
112.02(H)(2) of this chapter;
      (3)   A digital color photograph of the consumer electronic device
purchased by the licensee;
      (4)   A digital color photograph of the seller;
      (5)   An electronic signature and fingerprint of the seller;
      (6)   An accurate and legible description of each consumer electronic
device item purchased or received, including, as applicable, the manufacturer’s
name, model number and serial number;
      (7)   The ESN, IMEI or the MEID of the consumer electronic device
purchased. If the ESN, IMEI or MEID is not available at the time of purchase or
receipt, the report filed pursuant to this subsection must be updated with the
ESN, IMEI or MEID as soon as known by the licensee, but no later than 15
calendar days after the transaction. The hold requirement outlined in §
112.04(A) of this chapter shall not begin until all required contents of me
report are complete and submitted to the town’s Police Department;
      (8)   The amount paid for the consumer electronic device;
      (9)   The date and time when the consumer electronic device was received;
and
      (10)   The location of the automated kiosk where the consumer electronic
device was sold or collected.
   (C)   It is a violation for of this chapter any person to provide false
information on reports required by this section.
(Ord. 18-07, passed 7-10-2018)
§ 112.04 STORAGE, RETENTION AND RETRIEVAL.
   (A)   A licensee shall retain consumer electronic devices received at an
automated kiosk at a secure location designated on the license for at least 30
calendar days after submitting the complete report to the town required under §
112.03 of this chapter. Any consumer electronic device held in custody pursuant
to this section shall not be altered or transformed in any way, but shall be
held in the same condition in which it was received by the automated kiosk.
   (B)   Consumer electronic devices retained at a designated location(s) under
this section are subject to return and inspection by the town during regular
business hours of the location or, at a minimum, during the hours of 9:00 a.m.
to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday.
   (C)   Within 24 hours of a request by the town’s Police Department or law
enforcement agency, the licensee shall comply with a request to open the
automated kiosk to allow the law enforcement agency the opportunity to inspect
the accessory bin and review any data that records transactions.
   (D)   Upon being advised by a representative of the town’s Police Department
that there is probable cause to believe a consumer electronic device in the
possession of the licensee is stolen or was used in the perpetration of a
crime, the licensee operating the automated kiosk shall, upon request by the
town’s Police Department or other law enforcement agency:
      (1)   Within three calendar days, surrender such consumer electronic
device to the law enforcement agency and the law enforcement agency shall
provide a seized property receipt for the consumer electronic device; or
      (2)   At the sole discretion of the requesting law enforcement agency,
the consumer electronic device may be retained within the place of business on
an investigative hold for a period not to exceed 90 calendar days; during that
time period, law enforcement may seize the consumer electronic device upon
providing the licensee appropriate notification of the seizure and making
arrangements to take physical custody of the consumer electronic device. The
licensee shall produce the consumer electronic device at reasonable times and
places, or may deliver the consumer electronic device to a representative of
the law enforcement agency.
   (E)   The investigative hold shall be effective immediately upon oral or
written notice to the licensee. If the hold is placed orally, it shall be
followed by a written notice mailed to the licensee operating the automated
kiosk within five calendar days.
   (F)   A licensee shall not sell, transfer, exchange or otherwise dispose of
any consumer electronic devices in violation of this section.
(Ord. 18-07, passed 7-10-2018)
§ 112.05 FEES.
   Licensing and reporting fees adopted by the Town Council by separate
resolution shall be paid for each automated kiosk that is designated on the
license.
(Ord. 18-07, passed 7-10-2018)
§ 112.06 APPEALS.
   (A)   (1)   Any person aggrieved by the denial, modification, suspension or
revocation of a license shall have the right to appeal to the Council.
      (2)   The appeal must be filed with the Town Clerk no later than 14 days
after the Town Manager’s decision has been mailed to the person, and must
consist of a written statement fully describing the grounds for appeal.
   (B)   The Town Clerk shall set a time and place for a hearing before the
Council on such appeal, to be held within 30 days from the filing date of the
appeal. Notice of such hearing shall be mailed by the Town Clerk to the
appellant setting forth specifically the date, time and place of the hearing.
   (C)   The decision of the Town Council on appeal shall be final, except any
person aggrieved may appeal the decision to Superior Court.
   (D)   Any non-renewed or revoked license shall be surrendered to the Town
Clerk on demand at the expiration of the appeals process.
(Ord. 18-07, passed 7-10-2018)
§ 112.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Each day any violation of any provision of this chapter continues
shall constitute a separate offense, except when the violation is from a bona
fide error that occurred; provided that, the licensee maintains procedures
reasonable adopted to avoid the occurrence of bona fide errors.
   (B)   A violation of this chapter that is not a bona fide error, whether or
not specifically designated as being unlawful, shall be a Class 1 misdemeanor
and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (C)   For the purposes of this section, BONA FIDE ERROR includes clerical,
calculation, computer malfunction, programming and printing errors and other
similar errors.
   (D)   A licensee or designated agent who does not comply with a request by a
law enforcement agency to inspect an automated kiosk pursuant to §
112.04(C) of this chapter, or who refuses to return to law enforcement a
consumer electronic device that is identified as stolen or involved in the
perpetration of a crime pursuant to §
112.04(D) of this chapter shall be issued a notice stating that the licensee or
designated agent shall comply with the request by the law enforcement agency
within five calendar days of receipt of the notice.
   (E)   The notice shall include a description of the violation, the statutory
or code reference, how the licensee can comply with the requirements, a
description of how a hearing may be requested, the time limit for requesting a
hearing and a warning that failure to timely request a hearing may result in
revocation of the license.
   (F)   (1)   A licensee or designated agent receiving a notice under this
section may request a hearing pursuant to §
112.06 of this chapter. If the licensee fails to comply with the requirements
under division (A) above by the date provided in the notice, the town’s Police
Department may:
         (a)   Disable the automated kiosks by removing the automated kiosks
from the power source and placing a notice on the machines that the kiosk is
not operational; and
         (b)   Revoke the license pursuant to §
112.02(L) of this chapter.
      (2)   The licensee is responsible for the cost incurred by law
enforcement to disable the automated kiosks in accordance with this division
(F) and any fines or fees assessed by the court.
   (G)   Once an automated kiosk is disabled, the town shall issue a notice to
the licensee or its designated agent by certified mail that describes the
action taken pursuant to this section. The notice shall include a description
of the violation, the statutory or code reference, a description of how a
hearing may be requested and the time limit for requesting a hearing. A person
receiving the notice under this division (G) may request a hearing pursuant to
§
112.06 of this chapter. If a licensee or designated agent fails to request a
hearing, the automated kiosks shall remain disabled.
   (H)   The town’s Police Department shall take every reasonable precaution in
the event the town finds it necessary to disable the automated kiosks and the
town shall incur no liability by such action.
(Ord. 18-07, passed 7-10-2018)
CHAPTER 113: SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS
Section
General Provisions
   
113.01   Purpose
   
113.02   Definitions
   
113.03   Classification
   
113.04   Applicability to existing businesses
   
113.05   Violations and abatement
Licensing Requirements; Administration
   
113.20   License required; non-transferability; exceptions
   
113.21   License application
   
113.22   Issuance of license; denial; annual renewal required
   
113.23   Fees
   
113.24   Inspection
   
113.25   Expiration of license
   
113.26   Suspension
   
113.27   Revocation
   
113.28   Administrative appeal
   
113.29   Judicial review
   
113.30   Change of employment
   
113.31   Sale, transfer or expansion
   
113.32   Notices
Specific Conditions and Businesses
   
113.45   Escort agencies
   
113.46   Nude model studios
   
113.47   Solicitation of gratuity prohibited
   
113.48   Exhibition of sexually-explicit films and videos
   
113.49   Exterior portions of sexually-oriented businesses
   
113.50   Signage
   
113.51   Sale, use or consumption of alcoholic beverages prohibited
   
113.52   Persons younger than 18 prohibited from entry; attendant required
   
113.53   Hours of operation
 
   
113.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 113.01 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually-oriented businesses
and related activities, to promote the health, safety, morals and general
welfare of the citizens of the town and to establish reasonable and uniform
regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration of sexually-
oriented businesses within the town. The provisions of this chapter have
neither the purpose, nor effect, of imposing a limitation or restriction on the
content of any communicative materials, including sexually- oriented materials.
Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny
access by adults to sexually-oriented materials protected by the First
Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually-
oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent, nor
effect, of this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene
materials.
(Prior Code, § 8-3-1)
§ 113.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADULT ARCADE. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein
coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically
controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-
producing devices are maintained to regularly show images to five or fewer
persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are
distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
   ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE. A commercial
establishment that, regardless of any other purposes it may have, and as one of
its principal business purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of
consideration any one or more of the following:
      (1)   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions,
slides or other visual representation that depict or describe specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas; or
      (2)   Instruments, devices or paraphernalia that are designed for use in
connection with specified sexual activities.
   ADULT CABARET. A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial
establishment that regularly features:
      (1)   Persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nudity;
      (2)   Live performances that are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; and
      (3)   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
   ADULT MOTEL. A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that:
      (1)   Offers accommodation to the public for any form of consideration
and provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films,
motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions
that depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas;
      (2)   Offers a sleeping room for a period of time that is less than ten
hours; or
      (3)   Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room
for a period of time that is less than ten hours.
   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A commercial establishment where, for any form
of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar
photographic reproductions are regularly shown that are characterized by the
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
   ADULT THEATER. A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial
establishment that regularly features persons who appear, in person, in a state
of nudity and/or semi-nudity, and/or live performances that are characterized
by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual
activities.
   ADULT VENDING MACHINE. Any mechanical device that, regardless of any other
purposes it may have, regularly publicly dispenses, for any form or
consideration, any books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions,
slides or other visual representations that are characterized by the depiction
or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
   EMPLOYEE. A person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually-
oriented business on a full-time, part-time, contract basis or independent
basis, whether or not the person is denominated an employee, independent
contractor, agent or otherwise, and whether or not the said person is paid a
salary, wage, commission or other compensation by the operator of said
business. A person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the
premises or equipment on the premises, or for the delivery of goods to the
premises, as well as a person exclusively on the premises as a patron or
customer is not an EMPLOYEE within the meaning of this chapter.
   ESCORT. A person who, for pecuniary or other consideration, agrees or offers
to act as a companion, guide or date for another person, or who agrees or
offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for
another person.
   ESCORT AGENCY. A person or business association who furnishes, offers to
furnish or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business
purposes for a fee, tip or other consideration.
   ESTABLISHMENT. Any of the following:
      (1)   The opening or commencement of any sexually-oriented business as a
new business;
      (2)   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually-
oriented business, to any sexually-oriented business;
      (3)   The addition of any sexually-oriented business to any other
existing sexually-oriented business;
      (4)   The relocation of any sexually-oriented business; or
      (5)   A sexually-oriented business or premises on which the sexually-
oriented business is located.
   FAMILY-ORIENTED ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS.
      (1)   In assessing whether a particular business is a FAMILY-ORIENTED
ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS, the Town Clerk shall consider the following factors
related to the business:
         (a)   Whether a primary business purpose is related to the sale of
food or food services;
         (b)   Whether a primary business purpose relates to the sale or use of
entertainment of educational products, services, facilities or activities;
         (c)   The age of patrons for or by which the services, facilities or
activities of the business are primarily appropriate and utilized; and
         (d)   Whether the business is primarily a retail establishment.
      (2)   A business determined to be primarily a retail or a food service
establishment is presumed to not qualify as a FAMILY-ORIENTED ENTERTAINMENT
BUSINESS unless articulable reasons to the contrary are established by the Town
Clerk.
   LICENSEE. A person in whose name a license has been issued, as well as the
individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license.
   NUDE MODEL STUDIO. Any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity
or displays specified anatomical areas is regularly provided to be observed,
sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by
other persons for consideration.
   NUDITY or a STATE OF NUDITY. The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus,
anal cleft or cleavage, pubic area, male genitals, female genitals or vulva,
with less than a fully opaque covering; or a female breast with less than a
fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple; or human male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state even if completely and opaquely covered.
   PERSON. An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association
or other legal entity.
   PREMISES. The real property upon which the sexually-oriented business is
located, and all appurtenances thereto and buildings thereon, including, but
not limited to, the sexually-oriented business, the grounds, private walkways
and parking lots and/or parking garages adjacent thereto, under the ownership,
control or supervision of the licensee, as described in the application for a
business license pursuant to this chapter.
   REGULARLY, REGULARLY FEATURES or REGULARLY SHOWN. Construed to apply the
provisions of this chapter only activities that take place outside the context
of some larger form of expression.
   SCHOOL. A child care facility licensed pursuant to the A.R.S. Title 36, Ch.
7.1, or any public or private institution established for the purposes of
offering instruction to pupils in programs for preschool children with
disabilities, kindergarten programs or any combination of grades one through
twelve, including, but not limited to, child day care facilities, nursery
schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, intermediate schools,
junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational schools,
secondary schools, continuation schools, special education schools; SCHOOLS
includes the school ground, but does not include the facilities used primarily
for another purpose and only incidentally as a SCHOOL.
   SEMI-NUDE or SEMI-NUDITY. The appearance of the female breast below a
horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point. This
definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human female breasts,
but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breasts
exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit or other wearing
apparel; provided, the areola is not exposed in whole or in part.
   SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER. A business or commercial enterprise that, as one of
its principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration for:
      (1)   Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between any
two persons of the opposite sex when one or more of the persons is in a state
of nudity or semi-nudity; or
      (2)   Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the
same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-
nudity.
   SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS. An adult arcade, adult vending machine, adult
bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult
motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model
studio, adult novelty store and sexual encounter center.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREA.
      (1)   The human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if
fully and opaquely covered; or
      (2)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of
the areola.
   SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY. Any of the following offenses:
      (1)   Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; dissemination of
obscenity; sale, distribution, or display of harmful material to a minor;
sexual performance by a child; possession or distribution of child pornography;
public lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency with a child; sexual assault;
molestation of a child; or any sex-related offenses similar to those described
under the Criminal Code of Arizona, other states or other countries;
      (2)   For which:
         (a)   Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or
the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is
the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense;
         (b)   Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction
or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever
is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or
         (c)   Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last
conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the last
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more
misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within
any 24-month period.
      (3)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect
on the disqualification of the applicant or a person residing with the
applicant.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Any of the following:
      (1)   The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus or female breasts, whether covered or uncovered;
      (2)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy;
      (3)   Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
      (4)   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in divisions (1) through (3) of this definition above.
   SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT OF A SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS. The increase in
floor area occupied by the business by more than 25%, as the floor areas exist
on 4-26-2001.
   TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS. Any of the
following:
      (1)   The sale, lease or sublease of the business;
      (2)   The transfer of securities that form a controlling interest in the
business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or
      (3)   The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device
that transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by
bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the
ownership or control.
(Prior Code, § 8-3-2)
§ 113.03 CLASSIFICATION.
   Sexually-oriented businesses are classified as follows:
   (A)   Adult arcades;
   (B)   Adult bookstores, adult novelty shops or adult video stores;
   (C)   Adult cabarets;
   (D)   Adult motels;
   (E)   Adult motion picture theaters;
   (F)   Adult theaters;
   (G)   Adult vending machines;
   (H)   Escort agencies;
   (I)   Nude model studios; and
   (J)   Sexual encounter centers.
(Prior Code, § 8-3-3)
§ 113.04 APPLICABILITY TO EXISTING BUSINESSES.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the activities of all persons
and sexually-oriented businesses described herein, whether such business or
activities were established or commenced before, on or after the effective date
of this section; except that, the requirements that sexually-oriented
businesses be separated from certain types of land uses shall not apply to
businesses existing on the date of passage of this chapter. For purposes of
this section, a use shall be considered existing or established if it is in
existence as of 4-26-2001.
(Prior Code, § 8-3-27)
§ 113.05 VIOLATIONS AND ABATEMENT.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a person having a duty under this chapter to
knowingly fail to fulfill that duty.
   (B)   A person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a
class one misdemeanor.
   (C)   In addition to prosecution for a criminal violation of this chapter,
the operation of a sexually- oriented business without a valid license shall
constitute a nuisance and the Town Attorney may file an action in a court of
competent jurisdiction against a person or entity operating or causing to be
operated such business for injunctive relief or to abate the nuisance arising
out of violation of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 8-3-28) Penalty, see §
113.99
LICENSING REQUIREMENTS; ADMINISTRATION
§ 113.20 LICENSE REQUIRED; NON-TRANSFERABILITY; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a sexually-oriented
business without first obtaining and maintaining a valid sexually-oriented
business license issued pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person who operates a sexually-oriented
business to employ a person to work and/or perform services on the premises of
the sexually-oriented business, if such employee is not in possession of a
valid sexually-oriented business employee license issued to such employee
pursuant to this chapter.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to obtain employment with a
sexually-oriented business if such person is not in possession of a valid
sexually-oriented business employee license issued to such person pursuant to
this chapter.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person, association, firm or corporation
licensed as provided in this chapter to operate under any name or conduct
business under any designation not specified in such license.
   (E)   All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be non-transferable
except as provided in this chapter.
   (F)   The license required by this section shall be in addition to any other
licenses or permits required in order to engage in the business or occupation,
as applicable, by either the town, the county or the state and persons engaging
in activities described by this chapter shall comply with all other ordinances
and laws, including the town’s zoning ordinance, as may be required to engage
in a business or profession.
   (G)   It shall be a defense to divisions (B) and (C) above if the employment
is of limited duration and for the sole purpose of repair and/or maintenance of
machinery, equipment or the premises.
(Prior Code, § 8-3-4) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.21 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (A)   An application for a sexually-oriented business license, including a
renewal application, must be made on a form provided by the town. The
application must be accompanied by a sketch or a diagram showing the
configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space
occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally
prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked
dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six
inches. The Town Clerk may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications
if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certified
that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was
prepared.
   (B)   Prior to applying for an original sexually-oriented business license,
all applicants for such a license must have the premises inspected and approved
by the Health Department, Fire Department, Building Department and Zoning
Department. Written certification of such inspections and approvals by each
inspecting agency must be submitted with each sexually-oriented business
license application. A licensee who has not submitted such certifications
within the five previous years or a licensee for an establishment which
expanded since the time of the previous license application must also have the
respective premises inspected and submit written certification of such
inspections and approvals by each inspecting agency with the licensee’s next
application for the renewal of a sexually-oriented business license. Agencies
responsible for inspecting the premises of an existing or anticipated sexually-
oriented business must complete the requested inspections within 30 days of
applicant’s request; in the event one or more agencies fails to timely inspect
the requested premises, the requirements of this division (B) as they relate to
that one or more inspection are waived by the town.
   (C)   The application may request, and the applicant shall provide, such
information (including fingerprints) as the town may require to enable the town
to determine whether the applicant meets the qualifications established under
this chapter. The applicant has an affirmative duty to supplement a pending
application with new information received subsequent to the date the
application was deemed completed.
   (D)   All applications to own or operate a sexually-oriented business must
be submitted by a natural person who must sign the application. If a legal
entity wishes to own or operate a sexually-oriented business, each natural
person who owns or controls a 20% or greater interest in the business must sign
the application for a business license as an applicant. If a corporation is
listed as owner of a sexually- oriented business or as the entity that wishes
to operate such a business, each individual having a 20% or greater interest in
the corporation must sign the application for a business license as an
applicant, in all cases, any person involved in the day-to-day operation of the
business or has the capacity to significantly influence the operation of the
business must sign the application as an applicant.
   (E)   Each application for a sexually-oriented business license shall be
accompanied by the following:
      (1)   Payment of the application fee in full;
      (2)   The name of the applicant or organization applying for the license
and the name under which the sexually-oriented business will operate;
      (3)   If the establishment is a state corporation, a copy of the articles
of incorporation, together with all amendments thereto and a signed statement
that the corporation is in good standing in the state;
      (4)   If the establishment is a foreign corporation, a copy of the
certificate of authority to transact business in the state, together with all
amendments thereto and a signed statement that the corporation is in good
standing in the state of incorporation;
      (5)   If the establishment is a limited partnership formed under the laws
of the state, a copy of the certificate of limited partnership, together with
all amendments thereto and a signed statement that the corporation is in good
standing in the state;
      (6)   If the establishment is a foreign limited partnership, a copy of
the certificate of limited partnership and the qualification documents,
together with all amendments thereto and a signed statement that the
corporation is in good standing in the state of incorporation;
      (7)   Proof of the current fee ownership of the tract of land on which
the establishment is to be situated in the form of a copy of the recorded deed;
      (8)   If the persons identified as the fee owner(s) of the tract of land
in division (E)(6) above are not also the owners of the establishment, then the
lease, purchase contract, purchase option contract, lease option contract or
other document(s) evidencing the legally enforceable right of the applicants to
have or obtain the use and possession of the tract or portion thereof that is
to be used for the establishment for the purpose of the operation of the
establishment;
      (9)   A current certificate and straight-line drawing prepared within 30
days prior to application by a registered land surveyor depicting the property
lines and the structures containing any existing sexually-oriented businesses
with 1,500 feet of the property to be certified; the property lines of any
established religious institution/synagogue, public park or recreation area or
family-oriented entertainment business within 1,500 feet of the property to be
certified; the property lines of any school established with 1,500 feet of the
property to be certified. For purposes of this section, a use shall be
considered existing or established if it is in existence at the time an
application is submitted;
      (10)   Any of divisions (E)(2) through (E)(8) above shall not be required
for a renewal application or for an application for a secondary classification
of sexually-oriented business operated within the same establishment as the
primary application or license if the applicant states that the documents
previously furnished the Town Clerk with the original application or previous
renewals thereof remain correct and current.
   (F)   Applications for an employee license to work and/or perform services
in a sexually-oriented business, whether original or renewal, must be made to
the Town Clerk by the person to whom the employee license shall issue. Each
application for an employee license shall be accompanied by payment of the
application fee in full. Application forms shall be supplied by the Town Clerk.
Applications must be submitted to the office of the Town Clerk or the Town
Clerk’s designee during regular working hours and contain the following
information:
      (1)   The applicant’s given name, and any other names by which the
applicant is or has been known, including “stage” names and/or aliases;
      (2)   Age, date and place of birth;
      (3)   Height, weight, hair color and eye color;
      (4)   Present residence address and telephone number;
      (5)   Present business address and telephone number;
      (6)   Date, issuing state and number of photo driver’s license, or other
state issued identification card information;
      (7)   Social Security number; and
      (8)   Proof that the individual is at least 18 years old.
   (G)   All information submitted to the town pursuant to this paragraph is
confidential and will not be released, except as pursuant to a valid law
enforcement investigation, court order or as otherwise may be required by law.
   (H)   Each person signing an application as an applicant shall attach to the
application form the following:
      (1)   Two identical, passport-quality color photographs of the applicant
clearly showing the applicant’s face and taken within the preceding month and
two sets of the applicant’s complete fingerprints on a form provided by the
Marshal’s office. Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid
by the applicant;
      (2)   A statement detailing the sexually-oriented business license
history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of
the filing of the application, including whether such applicant, in this or any
other town, city, county, state or country, has ever had any sexually-oriented
business license, permit or authorization to do business denied, revoked or
suspended, or had any professional or vocation license or permit denied,
revoked or suspended. In the event of any such denial, revocation or
suspension, state the name(s) under which the license was sought and/or issued,
the name(s) of the issuing or denying jurisdiction, and describe in full the
reason(s) for the denial, revocation or suspension. A copy of any order of
denial, revocation or suspension shall be attached to the application;
      (3)   A statement whether the applicant or any person over the age of 18
years with whom the applicant resides has been convicted, or is awaiting trial
on pending charges, of a specified criminal activity and, if so, the nature of
the specified criminal activity involved, the date, place and jurisdiction of
each; and
      (4)   A statement made under oath that the applicant has personal
knowledge of the information contained in the application, that the information
contained therein and furnished therewith is true and correct and that the
applicant has read the provisions of this chapter.
   (I)   A separate application and sexually-oriented business license shall be
required for each sexually- oriented business classification operating within
the same establishment.
   (J)   The fact that a person possesses other types of permits and/or
licenses does not exempt such person from the requirement of obtaining a
sexually-oriented business or employee license.
(Prior Code, § 8-3-5)
§ 113.22 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE; DENIAL; ANNUAL RENEWAL REQUIRED.
   (A)   Upon the filing of an application for a sexually-oriented business
employee license, the Town Clerk shall issue a temporary license to said
applicant. The application shall then be referred to the appropriate town
departments for investigation to be made on the information contained in the
application. Any inspection requirement of a particular town agency shall be
waived if the respective town agency fails to complete its inspection within 20
days of the date it received an inspection request. The application review
process shall be completed with 30 days from the date of the completed
application. After the investigation, the Town Clerk shall issue an employee
license, unless it is determined by a preponderance of the evidence that one or
more of the following findings is true:
      (1)   The applicant has failed to provide the information required by
this chapter for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or
request for information on the application form;
      (2)   The applicant is under the age of 18 years;
      (3)   The applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity;
      (4)   The sexually-oriented business employee license is to be used for
employment in a business prohibited by local or state law, statute, rule or
regulation, or prohibited by a particular provision of this chapter; or
      (5)   The applicant has had a sexually-oriented business employee license
revoked by any jurisdiction within two years of the date of the current
application.
   (B)   If an application for a sexually-oriented business employee license is
denied, the temporary license previously issued is immediately deemed null and
void.
   (C)   Denial, suspension or revocation of a license issued pursuant to this
section shall be subject to appeal as set forth in this chapter.
   (D)   A license issued pursuant to division (A) above, if granted, shall
state on its face the name of the person to whom it is granted, the expiration
date and the address of the sexually-oriented business. The employee shall keep
the license on the employee’s person at all time while engaged in employment or
performing services on the sexually-oriented business premises so that said
license may be available for inspection upon lawful request. If application is
made for a sexually-oriented business license, the Town Clerk shall approve or
deny issuance of the license within 45 days of receipt of the completed
application. The failure of the town or a particular town official or agency to
timely act shall result in the waiver by the town of any requirement under this
chapter as applied to that particular town official or agency.
   (E)   The Town Clerk shall issue a license to an applicant unless it is
determined that one or more of the following findings is true:
      (1)   An applicant has failed to provide the information reasonably
necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or
request for information on the application form;
      (2)   An applicant is under the age of 18 years;
      (3)   An applicant has been denied a license by the town to operate a
sexually-oriented business with the preceding 12 months, or applicant’s license
to operate a sexually-oriented business has been revoked within the preceding
12 months;
      (4)   An applicant is overdue in payment to the town in taxes, fees,
fines or penalties assessed against or imposed upon him or her in relation to
any business;
      (5)   An applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity;
      (6)   The premises to be used for the sexually-oriented business have not
been approved by the Health Department, Fire Department and the Building
Department as being in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances;
      (7)   The premises to be used for the sexually-oriented business is
located within 1,500 feet of any residential zone, single- or multiple-family
dwelling, family-oriented entertainment business, church, park or school;
      (8)   The premises to be used for the sexually-oriented business is
located within 1,500 feet of either any other sexually-oriented business
licensed under this chapter or any other sexually-oriented business that would
be licensed under this chapter if it were located within the town limits;
      (9)   The license fee required under this chapter has not been paid; or
      (10)   An applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation of or
is not in compliance with one or more of the provisions of this chapter.
   (F)   A license issued pursuant to division (E) above, if granted, shall
state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the
expiration date, the address of the sexually-oriented business, and the §
113.03 of this chapter classification for which the license is issued. The
license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the
sexually-oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time.
   (G)   A sexually-oriented business license shall issue for only one
classification, as set forth in §
113.03 of this chapter. Each classification operating with the same
establishment and wholly owned by that establishment requires a separate
license.
   (H)   In the event that the Town Clerk determines that an applicant is not
eligible for a sexually- oriented business license, the applicant shall be
given notice in writing of the reasons for the denial within 45 days of the
receipt of the completed application by the Town Clerk; provided that, the
applicant may request, in writing at any time before the notice is issued, that
such period be extended for an additional period of not more than ten days in
order to make modifications necessary to comply with this chapter.
   (I)   Each license issued pursuant to this section shall be subject to
annual renewal upon the written application of the applicant and a finding by
the Town Clerk that the applicant has not been convicted of any specified
criminal activity, or committed and act during the existence of the previous
license which would be grounds to deny the initial license application. The
decision whether to renew a license shall be made within 30 days of receiving
the completed application. The renewal of a license shall be subject to the fee
as set forth in §
113.23 of this chapter. Non-renewal of a license shall be subject to appeal as
set forth in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 8-3-6)
§ 113.23 FEES.
   The annual fee for a new sexually-oriented business license is $500, whether
new or renewal, except as noted herein. The annual fee of $50 is required for a
sexually-oriented business employee license, whether new or renewal. The annual
fee of $50 is required for a renewal sexually-oriented business license or for
a license for a second classification of a sexually-oriented business operated
within the same establishment as the primary application or license where no
modifications to the premises or the primary application are required. These
fees are to be used to pay for the cost of the administration and enforcement
of this chapter. The fees are non-refundable and may not be prorated for a
license period of less than one year. The fee requirements under this chapter
shall not result in the suspension, non-renewal or revocation of a license
pursuant to this chapter if the applicant or licensee makes full payments
within 15 days of being notified of the fee requirements.
(Prior Code, § 8-3-7)
§ 113.24 INSPECTION.
   (A)   An applicant or licensee shall permit representative of the Police
Department, Health Department, Fire Department, Building Department or other
town, state or federal departments or agencies to inspect the premises of a
sexually-oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law,
at any time it is occupied or open for business. Such inspection shall be
limited to visual assessment of the activities conducted in areas in accord
with the provisions of this chapter: areas to which patrons have access or are
allowed access; to request for inspection of the licenses required under this
chapter; and to request for identification of those individuals who reasonably
appear to be under the age of 18.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for an applicant, licensee or employee of a
sexually-oriented business to refuse to permit law enforcement officers or any
other agent allowed by this section to inspect the premises at any time the
premises is occupied or open for business.
   (C)   The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of an adult motel
that are currently being rented for use as temporary or permanent habitation.
(Prior Code, § 8-3-8)
§ 113.25 EXPIRATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may
be renewed only by submitting a renewal application to the town. Application
for renewal shall be made at least 30 days before the expiration date.
   (B)   If the Town Clerk denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not
be issued a license for one year from the date of denial. Notwithstanding the
provisions of this section, in the event a licensee appeals the non-renewal of
a license, the status quo immediately prior to the non-renewal shall be
maintained throughout the pendency of the appeal.
(Prior Code, § 8-3-9)
§ 113.26 SUSPENSION.
   (A)   The Town Clerk shall issue a notice and order of suspension,
suspending a license for a period not to exceed 30 days, if the Town Clerk
determines that the licensee or an employee of the licensee has:
      (1)   Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this chapter;
      (2)   Operated or performed services in a sexually-oriented business
while intoxicated by the use of alcoholic beverages or controlled substances;
      (3)   Refused to allow prompt inspection of the sexually-oriented
business premises as authorized by this chapter; or
      (4)   Knowingly or intentionally permitted gambling by any person on the
sexually-oriented business premises.
   (B)   The notice and order of suspension shall become effective within ten
days after issuance unless the licensee appeals the suspension of a license.
(Prior Code, § 8-3-10)
§ 113.27 REVOCATION.
   (A)   The Town Clerk shall issue a notice and order or revocation, revoking
a license issued pursuant to this chapter if any of the following occur:
      (1)   A cause of license suspension occurs and the license has been
suspended within the proceeding 12 months;
      (2)   A licensee knowingly or intentionally gave false or misleading
information in the material submitted during the application process;
      (3)   A licensee, or a person with whom the licensee resides, is
convicted of a specified criminal activity on a charge that was pending prior
to the issuance of the license;
      (4)   A licensee, subsequent to licensing, is convicted of a specified
criminal activity;
      (5)   A licensee knowingly or intentionally permitted the possession, use
or sale of controlled substances on the premises;
      (6)   A licensee knowingly or intentionally permitted the sale, use or
consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises;
      (7)   A licensee knowingly or intentionally permitted prostitution on the
premises;
      (8)   A licensee knowingly or intentionally operated the sexually-
oriented business during a period of time when the licensee’s license was
suspended;
      (9)   A licensee knowingly or intentionally permitted any act of sexual
intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or other sexual conduct to
occur in or on the licensed premises;
      (10)   A licensee knowingly or intentionally is delinquent in payment to
the town, county or state for any taxes or fees;
      (11)   A licensee knowingly or intentionally permitted a person under 18
years of age to enter the establishment;
      (12)   A licensee knowingly or intentionally attempted to sell his or her
business license, or has sold, assigned or transferred ownership or control of
the sexually-oriented business to a non-licensee; or
      (13)   A licensee knowingly or intentionally permitted a person or
persons to engage in specified sexual activities on the premises of the
sexually-oriented business.
   (B)   When the Town Clerk revokes a license, the revocation shall continue
for one year, and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually-oriented business
license for one year from the date revocation became effective. If, subsequent
to revocation, the town determines that the basis for the revocation has been
corrected or abated, the applicant shall be granted a license if at least 90
days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective.
   (C)   The notice and order of revocation shall become effective within ten
days after issuance unless the licensee appeals the suspension of a license.
(Prior Code, § 8-3-11)
§ 113.28 ADMINISTRATIVE APPEAL.
   (A)   An applicant may appeal the decision of the Town Clerk regarding a
denial, revocation or suspension to the Town Council by filing a written notice
of appeal with the Town Clerk within 15 days after service of notice upon the
applicant of the Town Clerk’s decision. The notice of appeal shall be
accompanied by a memorandum or other writing setting out fully the grounds for
such appeal and all arguments in support thereof. The Town Clerk may, within 15
days of service upon the Town Clerk of the applicant’s memorandum, submit a
memorandum in response to the memorandum filed by the applicant on appeal to
the Town Council.
   (B)   (1)   The applicant shall be afforded a hearing before the Town
Council at which the applicant or the applicant’s attorney shall be afforded
the right to address the Council and the Town Clerk’s decision, after which the
town may respond to the applicant’s presentation; the hearing shall be taken
within 31 calendar days after the date on which the Town Clerk receives the
notice of appeal.
      (2)   After reviewing submitted memoranda and exhibits as well as the
argument orally presented by the applicant and the town, the Town Council shall
vote either to uphold or overrule the Town Clerk’s decision.
   (C)   The Town Council’s decision shall be effective upon its rendering.
   (D)   Judicial review of a denial by the Town Clerk and Town Council may
then be made pursuant to this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 8-3-12)
§ 113.29 JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   (A)   After denial of an initial or renewal application, or suspension or
revocation of a license by the Town Council, the applicant or licensee may seek
judicial review of such administrative action in any court of competent
jurisdiction.
   (B)   At such time as the town is notified that an applicant has filed for
judicial review of the administrative action resulting in the denial of an
application, the town shall issue a provisional license to applicant allowing
it to carry on its requested activities, subject to the orders of the reviewing
court.
(Prior Code, § 8-3-13)
§ 113.30 CHANGE OF EMPLOYMENT.
   (A)   An establishment operator covered by this chapter shall keep and
maintain an up-to-date register of all employees including the following: each
employee’s name, address, age, sex and duties. The licensee must notify the
Town Clerk in writing within 15 days of hiring any attendant or employee.
   (B)   An establishment operator covered by this chapter must notify the Town
Clerk in writing within 15 days of any change of licensed employees employed at
the establishment.
   (C)   An employee covered by this chapter must notify the Town Clerk in
writing within 15 days of any change in the employee’s place of employment from
one establishment covered by this chapter to another.
(Prior Code, § 8-3-14)
§ 113.31 SALE, TRANSFER OR EXPANSION.
   (A)   (1)   Upon the sale or transfer of a substantial interest in a
sexually-oriented business, the license therefor shall be null and void, unless
the transaction was approved in advance by the Town Clerk, under the
application procedure of this chapter.
      (2)   An original application shall be made by any person, association,
firm or corporation desiring to own or operate the establishment upon its
transfer.
   (B)   An establishment licensee shall submit, upon sale or transfer of any
interest in an existing sexually-oriented business, or any enlargement or
expansion of the place of business of a sexually- oriented business, new
certifications of inspection as required of original applicants by this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 8-3-15)
§ 113.32 NOTICES.
   (A)   Any notice required or permitted to be given by the Town Clerk or any
other town office, division, department or other agency under this chapter to
any applicant, operator or owner of a sexually-oriented business may be given
either by personal delivery or by certified United States mail, postage
prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the most recent address as
specified in the application for the license, or any notice of address change
that has been received by the Town Clerk. Notices mailed as above shall be
deemed given upon their deposit in the United States mail. In the event that
any notice given by mail is returned by the postal service, the Town Clerk or
the Town Clerk’s designee shall cause it to be posted at the principal entrance
to the establishment.
   (B)   Any notice required or permitted to be given to the Town Clerk by any
person under this chapter shall not be deemed given until and unless it is
received in the office of the Town Clerk.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of each owner who is designated on the license
application and each operator to furnish notice to the Town Clerk in writing of
any change of residence or mailing address.
(Prior Code, § 8-3-16)
SPECIFIC CONDITIONS AND BUSINESSES
§ 113.45 ESCORT AGENCIES.
   (A)   An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of 18
years; neither shall any person who is under the age of 18 be employed or act
as an escort.
   (B)   A person shall not act as an escort or agree to act as an escort for
any person under the age of 18 years; neither shall an escort agency arrange
for an escort for any person under the age of 18 years.
(Prior Code, § 8-3-18) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.46 NUDE MODEL STUDIOS.
   (A)   A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of 18
years.
   (B)   A person under the age of 18 years shall not appear semi-nude or in a
state of nudity in or on the premises of a nude model studio.
   (C)   A person shall not appear in a state of nudity, or with knowledge,
allow another to appear in a state of nudity in an area of a nude model studio
premises which can be viewed from the public right- of-way.
   (D)   A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa or mattress
in any room on the premises; except that, a sofa may be placed in a reception
room open to the public and containing a partition to prevent visibility into
the studio.
(Prior Code, § 8-3-19) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.47 SOLICITATION OF GRATUITY PROHIBITED.
   An employee of a sexually-oriented business, while nude or semi-nude, shall
not solicit any gratuity from any patron or customer on the sexually-oriented
business premises, nor shall any patron or customer pay or give any gratuity to
any employee who appears in a state of nudity or semi-nudity on the sexually-
oriented business premises.
(Prior Code, § 8-3-20) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.48 EXHIBITION OF SEXUALLY-EXPLICIT FILMS AND VIDEOS.
   A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually-oriented business,
other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of
less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette or other video
reproduction, that depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas, shall comply with the following requirements.
   (A)   Upon application for a sexually-oriented business license, the
application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan
thereof specifying the location of one or more manager’s stations and the
location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the
premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager’s station may not
exceed 32 square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place
at which the business license will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A
professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer’s or architect’s
blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to
the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a
designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various
internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy
of plus or minus six inches. The Town Clerk may waive the foregoing diagram for
renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously
submitted and certified that the configuration of the premises has not been
altered since it was prepared.
   (B)   The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the
applicant.
   (C)   No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager’s station
may be made without the prior approval of the Town Clerk or the Town Clerk’s
designee.
   (D)   It is the duty of the owner and operator of the premises to ensure
that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each manager’s station at
all times that any patron is present inside the premises.
   (E)   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that
there is an unobstructed view from a manager’s station of the entire area of
the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose excluding
restrooms. Restrooms may neither contain, nor be surveilled by, video
reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more manager’s stations
designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a
manner that there is an unobstructed view of the entire area of the premises to
which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the
manager’s stations. The view required in this division (E) must be by direct
line of sight from the manager’s station.
   (F)   It shall be the duty of the operator, and it shall also be the duty of
any agents and employees present in the premises, to ensure that the view area
specified in division (E) above remains unobstructed by any doors, walls,
merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times and to ensure that
no patron in permitted access to any area of the premises that has been
designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted, as designated in
the application filed pursuant to division (A) above.
   (G)   No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any time.
   (H)   The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of
sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted
access at an illumination of not less than five foot-candles as measured at the
floor level.
   (I)   It shall be the duty of the operator, and it shall also be the duty of
any agents and employees present in the premises, to ensure that the
illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is
present in the premises.
   (J)   No licensee shall allow an opening of any kind to exist between
viewing rooms or booths.
   (K)   No person shall make any attempt to make an opening of any kind
between the viewing booths or rooms.
   (L)   The operator of the sexually-oriented business shall, during each
business day, inspect the walls between the viewing rooms or booths to
determine if any openings or holes exist. No licensee or employee of a
sexually-oriented business may permit a patron to occupy a viewing room or
booth containing any openings or holes allowing viewing between two or more
booths.
   (M)   The operator of the sexually-oriented business shall cause all floor
coverings in viewing booths to be non-porous, easily cleanable surfaces, with
no rugs or carpeting.
   (N)   The operator of the sexually-oriented business shall cause all wall
surfaces and ceiling surfaces in viewing booths to be constructed of, or
permanently covered by, non-porous, easily cleanable material. No wood,
plywood, composition board or other porous material shall be used within 48
inches of the floor.
(Prior Code, § 8-3-21) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.49 EXTERIOR PORTIONS OF SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES.
   (A)   An owner or operator of a sexually-oriented business shall not allow
the merchandise or activities of the establishment to be visible from a point
outside the establishment.
   (B)   An owner or operator of a sexually-oriented business shall abide by
the provisions of this chapter regulating the content of signs.
   (C)   An owner or operator of a sexually-oriented business shall not allow
exterior portions of the establishment to be painted any color other than a
single achromatic color. This provision shall not apply to a sexually-oriented
business if the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The establishment is a part of a commercial multi-unit center;
      (2)   The exterior portions of each individual unit in the commercial
multi-unit center, including the exterior portions of the business, are painted
the same color as one another or are painted in such a way so as to be a
component of the overall architectural style or pattern of the commercial
multi-unit center; but
      (3)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require the painting
of an otherwise unpainted exterior portion of a sexually-oriented business.
(Prior Code, § 8-3-22) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.50 SIGNAGE.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any other provision of the code, it shall be unlawful
for the operator of any sexually-oriented business or any other person to
erect, construct or maintain any sign for the sexually-oriented business other
than the one primary sign and one secondary sign, as provided herein. This
section is intended to augment the town’s Sign Code, not supplant it.
   (B)   Primary signs shall have no more than two display surfaces. Each such
display surface shall:
      (1)   Not contain any flashing lights;
      (2)   Be a flat plane, rectangular in shape;
      (3)   Not exceed 75 square feet in area; and
      (4)   Not exceed ten feet in height or ten feet in length.
   (C)   Primary and secondary signs shall contain no photographs, silhouettes,
drawings or pictorial representations in any manner, and may contain only the
name of the enterprise.
   (D)   Each letter forming a word on a primary or secondary sign shall be of
solid color, and each such letter shall be the same print-type, size and color.
The background behind such lettering on the display surface of a primary sign
shall be of a uniform and solid color.
   (E)   Secondary signs shall have only one display surface. Such display
surface shall:
      (1)   Not contain any flashing lights;
      (2)   Be a flat plane, rectangular shape;
      (3)   Not exceed 20 square feet in area;
      (4)   Not exceed five feet in height or five feet in width; and
      (5)   Be affixed or attached to a wall or door of the enterprise.
(Prior Code, § 8-3-23) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.51 SALE, USE OR CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PROHIBITED.
   The sale, use or consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises of a
sexually-oriented business is prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 8-3-24) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.52 PERSONS YOUNGER THAN 18 PROHIBITED FROM ENTRY; ATTENDANT REQUIRED.
   (A)   An owner or operator of a sexually-oriented business shall not allow a
person who is younger than 18 years of age to enter or be on the premises of a
sexually-oriented business at any time the sexually-oriented business is open
for business.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the operator of each sexually-oriented
business to ensure that an attendant is stationed at each public entrance to
the sexually-oriented business at all times during such sexually-oriented
business’ regular business hours. It shall be the duty of the attendant to
prohibit any person under the age of 18 years from entering the sexually-
oriented business. It shall be presumed that an attendant knew a person was
under the age of 18 unless such attendant asked for and was furnished:
      (1)   A valid operator’s, commercial operator’s or chauffeur’s driver’s
license; or
      (2)   A valid personal identification issued by the state reflecting that
such person is 18 years of age or older.
(Prior Code, § 8-3-25) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.53 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   No sexually-oriented business, except for an adult motel, may remain open at
any time between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on weekdays and
Saturdays, and 1:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. on Sundays.
(Prior Code, § 8-3-26) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Each day that a violation continues shall be considered a
separate offense.
      (2)   A person may be found guilty of violating any section regardless of
the person’s knowledge of the violation.
(Prior Code, § 8-3-29)
   (B)   Except a provided elsewhere in this chapter, any violation of this
chapter shall be a civil infraction and punishable by a fine.
(Prior Code, § 8-3-30)
   (C)   (1)   The failure of any person, firm, corporation or other entity to
comply with the provisions of any section of this chapter, and to pay any and
all fees when due, shall be a Class 1 misdemeanor, which shall be assessed
against the owner or operator of a firm or corporation in the event a firm or
corporation is in violation of that section.
      (2)   Any person violating a provision of this chapter is guilty of a
Class 1 misdemeanor.
      (3)   A person who knowing conducts, maintains, owns, manages and/or
operates any qualified establishment, as defined in this chapter, where any
person is in violation of any provision of this chapter, is guilty of a Class 1
misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 8-3-31)
CHAPTER 114: SHORT-TERM RENTALS
Section
   
114.01   Purpose
   
114.02   Definitions
   
114.03   Short-term rental requirements
   
114.04   Enforcement
   
114.05   Verified violations
 
   
114.99   Penalty
§ 114.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public’s health and safety and
the security of neighborhoods in the town by adopting requirements for short-
term rentals in compliance with A.R.S. § 9-500.39.
(Ord. 20-06, passed 3-10-2020)
§ 114.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   SHORT-TERM RENTAL. The same meaning as “vacation rental” and “short-term
rental” in A.R.S. § 9-500.39.
   VERIFIED VIOLATION. The same meaning as “verified violation” in A.R.S. § 9-
500.39.
(Ord. 20-06, passed 3-10-2020)
§ 114.03 SHORT-TERM RENTAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The owner of a short-term rental shall provide the Town Clerk with
contact information for the owner or the owner’s designee who is responsible
for responding to complaints in a timely manner in person, over the telephone
or by e-mail at any time of day before offering for rent or renting the short-
term rental.
   (B)   No short-term rental shall be used for non-residential uses, including
for a special event that requires a permit pursuant hereto.
   (C)   No short-term rental shall be used for a retail, restaurant, banquet
space or other similar use.
   (D)   Advertisements for short-term rentals shall include a statement that
activities violating state law, this chapter or §
130.08 of this code of ordinances are prohibited. Owners of the short-term
rentals shall post a copy of this chapter and §
130.08 of this code of ordinances in a conspicuous location inside the short-
term rental.
   (E)   Users of short-term rentals shall comply with the requirements of
applicable town codes and state law.
(Ord. 20-06, passed 3-10-2020)
§ 114.04 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The Code Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized to make inspections
for violations of this chapter in the normal course of his or her job duties,
or in response to a citizen complaint that an alleged violation of the
provisions of this chapter may exist, or when there is a reason to believe that
a violation of this chapter has been or is being committed.
   (B)   In order to determine compliance with this chapter, private property
may be entered with the consent of the owner or occupant or as authorized by a
court of competent jurisdiction.
   (C)   If the owner of the short-term rental has provided contact information
to the town and if the town issues a citation for a violation of the town’s
applicable codes or a state law that occurred on the owner’s short-term rental
property, the town shall make a reasonable attempt to notify the owner or
owner’s designee of the citation within seven business days after the citation
is issued using the contact information provided to the town. If the owner of a
short-term rental has not provided contact information, the town is not
required to provide such notice.
(Ord. 20-06, passed 3-10-2020)
§ 114.05 VERIFIED VIOLATIONS.
   Within 30 days after a verified violation, the town shall notify the state’s
Department of Revenue and the owner of the short-term rental of the verified
violation in compliance with A.R.S. § 9-500.39.
(Ord. 20-06, passed 3-10-2020)
§ 114.99 PENALTY.
   Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter shall be
guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,500 or by imprisonment for a period not
to exceed six months, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a
violation continues shall be a separate offense punishable as herein described.
(Ord. 20-06, passed 3-10-2020)
CHAPTER 115: CABLE COMMUNICATIONS
Section
   
115.01   Title
   
115.02   Purpose
   
115.03   Definitions
   
115.04   License requirement
   
115.05   Application
   
115.06   Standards for granting or denying license applications
   
115.07   License agreement
   
115.08   General requirements for operating a cable communications system
   
115.09   Fees, deposits and bonds
   
115.10   Termination; revocation
   
115.11   Change of control
   
115.12   Indemnity; insurance
   
115.13   Administration
   
115.14   General provisions
   
115.15   Rights reserved to town
§ 115.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be entitled the “Town of Quartzsite Communications
Chapter”.
(Prior Code, § 14-1-1)
§ 115.02 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to:
   (A)   Authorize the town to grant non-exclusive licenses to operate a cable
communications system in areas under its jurisdictions;
   (B)   Provide for the payment of certain fees and other considerations to
the town; and
   (C)   Promote the widespread availability of high quality cable
communications service to residents of the town.
(Prior Code, § 14-1-2)
§ 115.03 DEFINITIONS
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BASIC SERVICE. All subscriber services provided by licensee covered by the
regular monthly charge paid by all subscribers, excluding optional services for
which a separate charge is made, or as specifically provided in the license
agreement.
   CABLECASTING. A non-broadcast signal that originates within the facilities
of the cable communications system.
   CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM. Any facility that, in whole or in part,
receives directly or indirectly over the air, and amplifies or otherwise
modifies the signals transmitting programs broadcast by one or more television
or radio stations and distributes such signals together with such other signals
as authorized by the Federal Communications Commission and the town by wire or
cable to subscribing members of the public who pay for such service, but the
term shall not include:
      (1)   Any such system that serves only the residents of one or more
apartment dwellings under common ownership and commercial establishments
located on the premises of such apartment dwellings; or
      (2)   Any such system the facilities of which do not use a public street,
road, alley or easement if there is a connection of any such exempt system to a
licensed system such exemption shall cease.
   CHANNEL. A six megahertz (MHZ) frequency band capable of carrying one
standard color video signal or a combination of non-standard signals.
   FCC or FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION. The agency as presently
constituted by the Communications Act of 1934 as amended or any successor
agency.
   LICENSE. The right and authority granted by this chapter to licensee to
construct, maintain and operate a cable television system through use of the
public streets, other public rights-of-way or the public places in the town.
   LICENSE AREA. The area within the bounds of the town.
   LICENSEE. A person who executes a license agreement with the town, in
accordance with this chapter for the non-exclusive privilege to erect,
construct, operate, maintain or dismantle a cable communication system in the
town.
   PERSON. Any individual, corporation (whether for profit or non-profit),
joint venture, partnership or any other business entity who holds or applies
for a license from the town.
   PRIVATE CHANNEL. Any channel which is available only to subscribers who are
provided with a special tap, converter or terminal equipment to receive signals
on that channel.
   SUBSCRIBER. Any person or entity receiving cable services of licensee.
   SUBSCRIBER DENSITY. The number of business or residential units per mile of
system. Business and residential units shall be counted when they are within
250 feet of any portion of the cable distribution system including trunk or
feeder cable.
   TWO-WAY CAPABILITY. The ability to receive and transmit signals of any type
from a subscriber terminal to other points in the system.
(Prior Code, § 14-1-3)
§ 115.04 LICENSE REQUIREMENT.
   No person shall construct, install, maintain or operate a cable
communication system within, along, over or under any street or other public
property in the town, unless a license has first been granted pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 14-1-4) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 115.05 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Any person desiring to construct, install, maintain or operate a cable
communication system within the area under the jurisdiction of the town shall
make an application to be licensed to serve this area. This application shall
consist of executed application forms as prescribed and furnished by the town.
Failure of any applicant to fully provide all information requested on the
application forms will be sufficient cause for not considering the application.
This application shall be filed with the Town Clerk.
   (B)   Any application filed with the town prior to the adoption of this
chapter shall, upon payment of the application fee as required in §
115.09 of this chapter, be considered a valid application.
(Prior Code, § 14-1-5)
§ 115.06 STANDARDS FOR GRANTING OR DENYING LICENSE APPLICATIONS.
   In making any determination as to an application, the Council shall give due
consideration to the quality of the service proposed, the experience,
character, background and financial responsibility of the applicant,
willingness and ability to abide by the license limitations and requirements,
and any other considerations deemed pertinent by the Council for safeguarding
the interest of the town and the public.
(Prior Code, § 14-1-6)
§ 115.07 LICENSE AGREEMENT.
   (A)   Upon the granting of a license by the town, the licensee shall execute
a license agreement within 60 days. The license agreement shall incorporate all
terms and provisions of this chapter wherein a requirement is placed upon the
licensee, either expressed or implied by this chapter. The licensee shall
expressly and specifically agree to accept the terms of and be bound by the
terms of this chapter and any amendments thereto. This agreement shall be
binding upon the licensee, its successors, lessees or assignees.
   (B)   This license shall be non-exclusive and shall be for a period of 15
years commencing upon the execution of this license agreement between the town
and the licensee.
   (C)   Upon written notice by the licensee, not more than one year prior to
the fourteenth anniversary of the effective date, and after the holding of a
public hearing affording due process, the license may be renewed for a
reasonable term, but not for more than 15 years.
(Prior Code, § 14-1-7)
§ 115.08 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR OPERATING A CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM.
   A licensee shall conform to the following minimum standards relative to the
construction, operation and maintenance of a cable communications system in the
town. It is not the intent of this section to prevent any licensee from
providing more than the required minimum to meet the standards listed below.
   (A)   System capability. The cable communications systems shall be equipped
to provide:
      (1)   Two-way capability; and
      (2)   Emergency override of all channels during a declared emergency or
disaster.
   (B)   Construction method. All basic trunk lines, associated feeder lines
and single drops shall be placed by aerial or underground methods similar to
the electric and telephone utility lines in the same area. The licensee may,
with consent of the owner, use the poles and other equipment of utilities
serving the town. The cable communications system shall be installed and
maintained in accordance with standard good engineering practices and shall
conform when applicable with the National Electrical Safety Code and the
Federal Communications rules and regulations as they apply. The licensee shall
have all times up-to-date route maps showing trunk and distribution lines. The
licensee shall make all such maps available for review by the appropriate town
personnel.
   (C)   Service schedule. No licensee shall be required to provide service to
any site in his or her license area where such service is available from
another licensee. A licensee need not provide service to an area having less
density than 35 dwelling units per system cable mile.
   (D)   Removal of licensee property. In the event that licensee property has
been installed in a street or other dedicated public right-of-way without
complying with the requirements of this chapter, or the license has been
terminated, revoked or expired, of the use of any licensee property is
discontinued for any reason for a continuous period of 12 months, the licensee
shall, at it sole expense, on the demand of the town remove promptly from the
street all licensee property other than that which the town may permit to be
abandoned in place. Upon such removal of licensee property, the licensee shall
promptly restore the street or other public places from which the licensee
property was removed to a condition as near as possible to its prior condition.
Licensee property no longer in service may be left in place with the approval
of and in a manner prescribed by the town. Upon abandonment of said licensee’s
property in place, the licensee shall deliver to the town an instrument
transferring ownership of such abandoned licensee property to the town. Any
cost arising from compliance with this provision shall be borne by the license.
   (E)   Local office. The cable communications systems shall maintain an
office within ten miles, accessible during all business hours and have a listed
telephone and operate so that complaints and requests for repairs and
adjustments may be received. The licensee shall maintain a written record
listing date of customer complaints, identifying the subscriber, describing the
nature of the complaint and when and what action has been taken by the licensee
in response thereto; such record shall be kept at licensee’s office and shall
be available for inspection during regular business hours without further
notice or demand of the town. The licensee shall notify each subscriber at the
time of initial subscription to service of the procedure for reporting and
resolving complaints.
   (F)   Service provisions. The licensee shall:
      (1)   Render efficient service, make repairs promptly and interrupt
service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Repairs shall,
at all times, be made within three business days. If new service is requested,
said service shall be provided to the subscriber within three business days;
and
      (2)   Be able to demonstrate by instruments and otherwise to subscribers
that a signal of adequate strength and quality is being delivered to the
subscriber’s terminal.
   (G)   Local channel. Each system shall carry as part of the basic service
local channels broadcast in its area as required and defined in current FCC
regulations. In this regard, those parts of 47 C.F.R. part 76 relating to
carriage of local channel signals as existing, or as may be amended, shall
apply and are incorporated herein by reference. In the event the FCC deletes
the above referred requirement or ceases to exercise jurisdiction in this area,
said requirement shall continue to apply to this chapter as they existed on the
date immediately preceding such federal action.
   (H)   Interconnection. The system shall be designed and operated so as to
facilitate interconnection to any or all other systems within the county, the
Town of Parker and the town. The cost of such interconnection links shall be
shared equally by the connecting systems. The licensee shall interconnect such
channels and at such time as the town may direct.
   (I)   Privacy-monitoring. The licensee shall strictly observe and protect
the rights of privacy and property rights of subscribers and users at all
times. Individual subscriber preferences of any kinds, viewing habits,
political, social or economic philosophies, beliefs, creeds, religions or
names, addresses or telephone numbers shall not be revealed to any person,
governments unit, police department or investigating agency unless upon the
authority of a court of law or upon prior voluntary valid authorization of the
subscriber. Such authorization shall not in any event be required as a
condition of receiving service. Exclusive of signals useful only for the
control or measurement of systems performance, licensees shall not permit the
transmission of any signal, including “polling” or monitoring of channel
selection from the subscribers premises without first obtaining written
permission from the subscriber.
   (J)   Service to public buildings. The licensee shall make available, at a
cost not to exceed direct cost (time and material), one service outlet to a
conveniently accessible point in each public, private and parochial school,
non-profit college or university, police station, fire station and town hall or
other facility or building located within the license area and used for public
purposes as may be designated by the town. There shall be a minimum monthly
service charge at the above locations.
   (K)   Maintenance. The system shall be maintained in accordance with the
highest accepted standards of the industry. Each system shall be maintained so
as to comply with all applicable technical standards and regulations as
promulgated by the FCC in this regard, 47 C.F.R. §§ 76.601 et seq. (subpart K)
relating to technical standards (including, but not limited to, performance
monitoring and measurements) as existing or as may be amended, shall apply in
full and are incorporated herein by this reference. In the event the FCC
deletes the above referenced technical standards or ceases to exercise
jurisdiction in this area of technical standards, said standards shall continue
to apply to this chapter as they existed on the date immediately preceding such
federal action.
(Prior Code, § 14-1-8)
§ 115.09 FEES, DEPOSITS AND BONDS.
   The following fees are required for each license granted under the authority
of this chapter.
   (A)   Application fee. Each application for a license to be granted under
the authority of this chapter shall be accompanied by a non-refundable filing
fee in the amount of $1,250 by certified or cashier’s check made payable to the
town.
   (B)   License fee. Each licensee shall pay to the town an amount equal to 3%
of licensee’s gross revenues from all sources attributable to the operations of
the licensee pursuant to this chapter and the license agreement.
      (1)   This payment shall be computed quarterly, for the preceding
quarter, as of March 31, June 30, September 30 and December 31 of each year.
Each quarterly payment shall be due and payable no later than 30 days after the
relevant computation date. Each payment shall be accompanied by a financial
report showing in detail the gross revenues of the licensee related to that
quarter.
      (2)   The licensee fee shall be treated as a cost of operation and shall
not be recovered as a chargeable cost to subscribers.
   (C)   Performance bond. Within 30 days after the execution of the license
agreement, the licensee shall file with the town a performance bond for the
benefit of the town in the amount of $25,000. In the event that licensee fails
to comply with any provision of this chapter or the license agreement, then
there shall be recoverable jointly and severally from the principal and surety
any and all damages or costs suffered by the town. These damages or costs shall
include, but not be limited to, attorney’s fees, cost of any action or
proceeding and including the full amount of any compensation indemnification,
cost of removal or abandonment of any property or other costs due and owing the
town up to the full amount of such bond.
      (1)   The bond shall be maintained in full as a continuing obligation
during the entire term of the license agreement.
      (2)   The bond shall be issued by a surety company authorized to do
business in the state and shall be in a form approved by the Town Attorney.
   (D)   Security fund. Within 30 days after written notification of the award
of license by the town, the selected applicant shall deposit with the Finance
Director of the town, and maintain on deposit throughout the term of the
license agreement, a security fund in the sum of $2,000 as security for the
faithful performance by licensee of all provisions of this chapter and
compliance with all orders, permits and directions of any department of the
town.
      (1)   Within 15 days after written notice to licensee by the town that
the town has withdrawn any amount from the security fund, licensee shall
deposit or pay to the Finance Director a sum of money sufficient to restore
such security fund to the original amount of $2,000.
      (2)   Failure to maintain the security fund as required shall constitute
a violation of the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 14-1-9)
§ 115.10 TERMINATION; REVOCATION.
   (A)   Termination. The license shall terminate, upon the expiration of the
term thereof, unless renewal is applied for, as provided in §
115.07 of this chapter.
   (B)   Revocation. Sufficient cause for revocation shall exist when the
licensee:
      (1)   Fails to comply with any provision of this chapter or the license
agreement;
      (2)   Makes willful or misleading statements in any application;
      (3)   Engages in the practice of any misrepresentation, fraud or deceit
upon the town, its residents, subscribers or any other governmental entity or
agency;
      (4)   Fails to abide by the privacy provision of this chapter;
      (5)   Fails to make timely payment of any monies due the town pursuant to
this chapter; and
      (6)   Fails to commence construction in the license area within six
months and to commence basic service within 18 months from the effective date
of the license agreement.
   (C)   Appeal of revocation. The town shall deliver to the licensee written
notice of intent to revoke setting forth causes for revocation. A public
hearing on this revocation shall be held by the Council no less than 30 days
after issuance of said notice.
   (D)   System disposal.
      (1)   In the event of termination or revocation of a license, the
licensee involved shall offer to sell the cable system, at the fair market
value, to a new licensee or applicant for a license. The fair market value
shall be determined in accordance with generally accepted appraisal procedures.
The original cost of all tangible and intangible property, as well as salvage
value, book value, replacement cost, cash flow and other factors will be
considered. Under no circumstances shall any valuation be made for any right or
privilege granted by license.
      (2)   Should the licensee fail to negotiate a sale, as described above,
the town may purchase the system at the fair market value for the purpose of
leasing to a qualified operator until a buyer can be found.
   (E)   Continuity of service.
      (1)   At the discretion of the town, the licensee shall provide
continuous service for the entire term of the license agreement to all
subscribers and users in return for payment of the established rates, fees and
charges.
      (2)   If licensee seeks to sell or transfer, or if the town revokes or
fails to renew the license, the licensee shall continue to operate the system
as trustee for its successor in interest until an orderly and lawful change of
operation is effected.
      (3)   This period of operation shall not exceed six months from the
occurrence of any of the above events, and the town, in its discretion, may
shorten said period.
(Prior Code, § 14-1-10)
§ 115.11 CHANGE OF CONTROL.
   The licensee shall not sell, transfer, assign, exchange or release, or
permit the sale, transfer, assignment, exchange or release of more than 5% of
the cumulative ownership of the system without prior written authorization from
the town. For the purposes of this chapter, a merger or consolidation shall be
deemed a transfer or assignment. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to
prohibit a pledge or hypothecation or mortgage or similar instrument
transferring conditional owner ship of the system’s assets to the lender or
creditor in the ordinary course of business, unless such interests shall exceed
75% of the original cost or the fair market value, whichever is higher.
(Prior Code, § 14-1-11)
§ 115.12 INDEMNITY; INSURANCE.
   (A)   The licensee shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify, hold
harmless and defend the town, its officials, boards, commissions, agents and
employees, by providing immediate defense with counsel approved by the town,
against any and all claims, suits, causes of action, proceedings and judgments
for damages arising out of construction, maintenance or operation of the cable
communication system.
   (B)   The licensee, within 30 days after written notice of the granting of a
license, shall provide the town with and maintain in full force throughout the
term of the license agreement, insurance issued by a company duly authorized to
do business in the state, ensuring with respect to the installation,
construction, operation and maintenance of the system as follows.
      (1)   Liability, comprehensive general and automobile liability coverage
including, but not limited to, blanket contractual liability, completed
operations liability, broad form property damage including, but not limited to,
coverage for explosion, collapse, underground hazard and automobile non-
ownership liability. This insurance shall be written in the following minimum
amounts:
         (a)   For bodily injury, including death: $500,000 combined single
limit;
         (b)   Property damage: $500,000 combined single limit;
         (c)   Comprehensive automobile liability: bodily injury $500,000
combined single limit; and
         (d)   Excess umbrella liability in the minimum amount of 5,000,000.
      (2)   Workers’ compensation coverage as required by the laws and
regulations of the state.
      (3)   All insurance policies required herein shall include the town as a
named insured party.
      (4)   The licensee shall be solely responsible for all premiums due and
payable for insurance required herein.
      (5)   All insurance policies required herein shall be in a form approved
by the Town Attorney and shall include a 60-day notice of cancellation
endorsement.
(Prior Code, § 14-1-12)
§ 115.13 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Inspection of records. The town reserves the right during the term of
the license agreement and during normal business hours and upon the giving of
reasonable notice to examine, audit, review and obtain copies of licensee’s
contract, engineering plans, accounting, financial data and service records
relating to the property and operations of the licensee and to all other
records required to be kept pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   Licensee rules and regulations. Copies of such rules, regulations,
terms and conditions adopted by the licensee for the conduct of its business
shall be filed with the town.
(Prior Code, § 14-1-13)
§ 115.14 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Non-discrimination. The licensee shall not deny service, access or
otherwise discriminate against subscribers, users or residents of the town. The
licensee shall comply at all times with all applicable federal, state and town
laws, rules and regulations, executive and administrative orders relating to
non-discrimination and equal employment opportunities and requirements.
   (B)   Laws and codes. The licensee shall comply fully with all applicable
local, county, state and federal laws, codes, ordinances, rules and
regulations.
   (C)   Cumulative rights and remedies. All rights and remedies of the town in
this chapter are cumulative and may be exercised singly or cumulatively at the
discretion of the town.
(Prior Code, § 14-1-14)
§ 115.15 RIGHTS RESERVED TO TOWN.
   Without limitation upon the rights which the town may otherwise have, the
town does hereby expressly reserve the rights to amend any section or provision
of this chapter for any reason determined to be desirable by the town
including, but not limited to:
   (A)   New developments in the state of technology of cable communications
systems; and
   (B)   Any changes in federal or state laws, rules or regulations.
(Prior Code, § 14-1-15)
CHAPTER 116: TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES
Section
General Provisions
   
116.01   Definitions
License Requirements
   
116.15   License required
   
116.16   Exception
   
116.17   Existing licenses
   
116.18   Limitations
   
116.19   License not exclusive
   
116.20   License application
   
116.21   Conditions of license generally
   
116.22   License administration; enforcement
   
116.23   Renewal
   
116.24   Term
   
116.25   Compensation
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 116.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMERCIAL MOBILE RADIO SERVICE. Two-way voice commercial mobile radio
service, as defined by the Federal Communications Commission in 47 C.F.R. §
20.3.
   ENVIRONMENTAL LAWS. The Comprehensive Environmental Response Compensation
and Liability Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 9601 et seq., the state’s Hazardous Waste
Management Act, A.R.S. §§ 49-901 et seq., the Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq., or the Toxic Substances Control Act,
15 U.S.C. §§ 2601 et seq., or any other applicable federal, state, county or
local law pertaining to hazardous substances, waste or toxic substances and
their reporting requirements.
   FACILITIES. The plant, equipment and property used in the provision of
telecommunications services and not owned by the town, including, but not
limited to, wires, pipe, conduits, pedestals, antennas and other appurtenances
placed under the public highways and not owned by the town and used in the
provision of telecommunication services. The term does not include wireless
facilities as that term is defined in A.R.S. § 9-591 or video service provider
as defined in A.R.S. § 9-591.
   HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES. Those substances defined as toxic or hazardous
substances, pollutants or wastes by environmental laws and the following
substances: gasoline, kerosene or other petroleum products; toxic pesticides
and herbicides; volatile solvents; materials containing asbestos or
formaldehyde; and radioactive materials.
   IN-KIND PAYMENTS. Facilities and/or services provided or to be provided by
licensee in lieu of all or a portion of the fees imposed by town for the use of
the public highway.
   INTERSTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES. Telecommunications services provided
between users in Arizona and users outside of Arizona.
   LICENSE. This non-exclusive authorization granted by the town to construct,
operate, maintain, reconstruct, repair and remove the facilities of licensee.
   PUBLIC EMERGENCY. Any condition which, in the opinion of town officials,
poses an immediate threat to the fives or property of the citizens of the town
or others caused by any natural or human-made disaster, including, but not
limited to, storms, floods, fire, accidents, explosions, major water main
breaks, hazardous material spills and the like.
   PUBLIC HIGHWAY or HIGHWAY. All roads, streets and alleys and all other
dedicated public rights-of-way and public utility easements of the town.
   SYSTEM ROUTE MAP. The map showing the locations of the facilities in the use
areas pursuant to a license, as may be amended by Town Engineer approval of
permits for new use areas.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS. The transmission, between or among points specified by
the user, of information of the user’s choosing, without change in the form or
content of the information as sent and received, as defined in A.R.S. § 9-581.
The term does not include commercial mobile radio services, pay phone services,
interstate services, wireless services or video services.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS CORPORATION. Any public service corporation to the extent
that it provides telecommunications services in the state.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES. The offering of telecommunications for a fee
directly to the public, or to such users as to be effectively available
directly to the public, regardless of the facilities used. The
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES of a licensee shall be described in the license
approved by the Council.
   USE AREAS. The initial locations of the facilities of a licensee as set
forth in a license and approved new use areas pursuant to §
116.22 of this chapter.
   USER CONTRACTS. Contracts a licensee enters into with third parties to use
the facilities pursuant to a license.
   VIDEO SERVICES. The same meaning as in A.R.S. § 9-1401.
   WIRELESS SERVICES. The same meaning as in A.R.S. § 9-591.
(Ord. 20-01, passed 1-14-2020)
LICENSE REQUIREMENTS
§ 116.15 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No telecommunications corporation shall install, maintain, construct or
operate telecommunications facilities in any public highway in the town unless
a license to use the highways to provide telecommunications services has first
been granted by the Town Council under this chapter to such telecommunications
corporation; provided, however, that, this chapter does not apply to the
installation, maintenance, construction and operation of wireless facilities as
that term is defined in A.R.S. § 9-591 or a video service network as that term
is defined in A.R.S. § 9-1401.
(Ord. 20-01, passed 1-14-2020)
§ 116.16 EXCEPTION.
   Notwithstanding §
116.15 of this chapter, any telecommunications corporation that was providing
telecommunications service within the state as of 11-1-1997, pursuant to a
grant made to it or its lawful predecessors prior to the effective date of the
Arizona Constitution, may continue to provide telecommunications services
pursuant to that state grant, until and unless the state grant is lawfully
repealed, revoked or amended, and need not obtain any further grant from the
town to provide telecommunications services; provided, however, that, such
entity must in all other respects comply with the requirements applicable to
the telecommunications corporations as provided in A.R.S. Title 9, Ch. 5, Art.
7.
(Ord. 20-01, passed 1-14-2020)
§ 116.17 EXISTING LICENSES.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to affect the terms or conditions of
any license or permit issued by the town prior to the effective date of the
amendments of this chapter or to release any party from its obligations
thereunder. Those licenses or permits shall remain fully enforceable in
accordance with their terms. The Town Manager, with the consent of the Council,
may enter into agreements with licensees or permittees to modify or terminate
an existing license or agreement.
(Ord. 20-01, passed 1-14-2020)
§ 116.18 LIMITATIONS.
   A license to any telecommunications corporation to use the highways to
install, maintain, construct or operate telecommunications facilities shall not
authorize the use of the highways to provide any other service, including video
services and wireless services; nor shall the issuance of the same invalidate
any license or permit that authorizes the use of the highways for such other
services; nor shall the fact that a telecommunications corporation holds a
license or permit to make any other use of the highway or to provide any other
service, authorize installation, maintenance, construction or operation of
telecommunications facilities in any highway in the town, without obtaining a
license hereunder.
(Ord. 20-01, passed 1-14-2020)
§ 116.19 LICENSE NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   Any license granted shall not be exclusive.
(Ord. 20-01, passed 1-14-2020)
§ 116.20 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (A)   Application. Any telecommunications corporation desiring a license
under this chapter to construct, install, operate and maintain
telecommunications facilities in public highways of the town shall file an
application with the Town Clerk requesting a license in the form prescribed by
the town and shall pay an application fee in an amount established by
resolution of the Town Council. Such amount shall be payable in cash, certified
or cashier’s check, wire transfer, or in any other manner acceptable to the
Town Manager, made payable to the town. No application shall be considered
without receipt of said fee. The applicant shall be responsible for reimbursing
the town’s full reasonable costs in excess of the application fee in processing
the application. The application fee is in addition to any permit fees
established for persons doing work or locating facilities in the public
highway.
   (B)   Application content. Each application shall be in a form provided by
the town and, at a minimum:
      (1)   Show where the initial facilities the applicant will use will be
located, or contain such other information as the town may deem necessary in
order to ensure that the applicant will comply with requirements for use of the
highways;
      (2)   Identify the applicant, its name, address and telephone number;
      (3)   Contain a description of the services to be provided; and
      (4)   Set out a description of any agreement with any other entity that
would permit such entity to use the facilities.
   (C)   Letter of credit. Each applicant shall provide a letter of credit in
favor of the town in the amount of $100,000 to be in effect during construction
of the initial system build out. The letter of credit shall then be reduced to
$50,000 for the remaining term of the license.
   (D)   Telecommunications license. Upon receiving an application for a
license that satisfies the conditions of division (B) above, the town shall
promptly proffer a telecommunications license to the applicant for its review,
and may inquire into matters relevant to the issuance of the license. If the
applicant agrees to the terms and conditions of the license, the request shall
be submitted to the Council with a recommendation for approval.
(Ord. 20-01, passed 1-14-2020)
§ 116.21 CONDITIONS OF LICENSE GENERALLY.
   As a condition of issuing or renewing a license to use the public highways
to provide telecommunications services, the town may require:
   (A)   Proof that the applicant has received a certificate of public
convenience and necessity from the state’s Corporation Commission;
   (B)   The applicant to agree to comply with highway use requirements that
the town may establish from time to time;
   (C)   The applicant to agree to provide and maintain accurate maps showing
the location of all its facilities and the facilities it will use in the
highways within the town, and to comply with such other mapping requirements as
the town may establish from time to time; the applicant shall provide the town
with electronic mapping information in a format compatible with the current
town electronic mapping;
   (D)   The applicant to obtain the insurance, and provide proof of insurance
as required by the town; to post the performance bonds and security fund
required by the town; and to agree to fully indemnify the town, its officers,
agents, boards and commissions, in a form satisfactory to the town; and agree
that it shall have no recourse whatsoever against the town or its officials,
boards, commissions, agents or employees for any loss, costs, expense or
damages arising out of any provision or requirement of the town because of the
enforcement of the license or because of defects in this chapter or the license
issued;
   (E)   The applicant to agree to comply with and be bound by the
administrative and enforcement provisions as may be prescribed from time to
time by the town.
(Ord. 20-01, passed 1-14-2020)
§ 116.22 LICENSE ADMINISTRATION; ENFORCEMENT.
   Every license shall be subject to the following administrative and
enforcement provisions.
   (A)   The permission granted by a license is limited to the use areas, which
shall be identified in the system route map attached to an approved license.
New use areas may be approved upon application for a permit pursuant to
Ch. 152 of this code of ordinances for such new use areas. The applications
shall include specific information on the location of the new use areas and the
proposed facilities. Upon approval by the Town Engineer, the new use areas
shall be depicted on the system route map and shall be subject to all terms and
conditions of the license and lawful conditions, if any, imposed by the town.
   (B)   A licensee’s facilities shall meet the applicable standard
specifications and requirements of the town. The licensee’s use of the public
highway shall be according to plans approved by the Town Engineer; provided
that, such approval shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed. Facilities
shall not be located above-ground unless there is no practical alternative and
any such facilities shall be earth-toned colors or screened to the extent
reasonably practical. The licensee’s installation of facilities shall be
coordinated with the town to accommodate opportunities for common installation.
Prior to the start of any construction work, the licensee shall notify all
affected residents or businesses at least 48 hours in advance of any street,
alley, sidewalk and driveway closures in order to allow them to make suitable
arrangements to have all vehicles moved to a satisfactory location outside the
closed area. If an emergency requires activity without such written notice, the
licensee shall use reasonable efforts to provide timely actual notice to the
owners or other persons having lawful control of the adjoining property. The
licensee shall identify a representative, such as a project manager, who shall
be the contact person for the town during any construction periods.
   (C)   A licensee shall maintain “as-built” drawings of its facilities
located within the public highway and furnish a copy electronically in a
mapping format compatible with the current town electronic mapping format and
in hard copy form. Upon completion of new or relocation construction of
underground facilities in the public highway, the licensee shall create and
maintain precise, up-to-date maps of any of its facilities and any above ground
equipment located in the public highway and precise and verifiable horizontal
and vertical location information and will make this information available to
the town upon the installation of any new facilities. A licensee will also
provide surface-location marking of the licensee’s facilities that are located
underground within any public highway within 30 business days of installation.
If complete updates are not provided in a compatible format, licensee shall pay
the actual, reasonable costs the town incurs to update the town’s electronic
mapping format due to the location or relocation of the licensee’s facilities.
In the event the licensee fails to supply records in the town specified format
and there is a cost to the town in converting licensee-provided files, the
licensee will be responsible for the conversion costs and will pay such costs
within 30 days of the date of the bill from the town invoicing the amount due.
   (D)   The authority granted by a license does not authorize the licensee’s
use of the facilities for the construction, installation or operation of
wireless facilities, a cable television system, a cable system or a video
services system or authorize the licensee to operate as a cable operator or
video services provider as those terms are defined in the Communications Act of
1934, being 47 U.S.C. §§ 201 et seq., state law or the town code. The authority
granted by a license does not authorize the use of the public highway for an
open video system as defined in the Communications Act of 1996, being 47 U.S.C.
§§ 571 et seq., or as defined or authorized by the federal communications
commission. The authority granted by a license is not in lieu of any other
license or franchise the town may require to occupy the public highways to
provide service other than as authorized under a license.
   (E)   A licensee shall comply with rules and regulations of the Federal
Communications Commission and the state’s Corporation Commission that apply to
the services that licensee provides over the facilities in the public highway.
   (F)   In order for the town to determine a licensee’s compliance with the
terms of a license, within 30 days of a request for disclosure by the town, the
licensee shall provide the documentation requested by town. For purposes of
confirming that the licensee is providing solely services authorized under a
license, upon reasonable request and notice by the town, the licensee shall
make available for joint inspection and testing as requested by the town, the
current services being provided by licensee through the facilities authorized
by a license. If the licensee determines that in order to respond to the town’s
request for documentation and inspection that it must reasonably provide
proprietary information, the licensee shall so designate such claim to
proprietary treatment on documents provided to the town.
   (G)   If the facilities of a licensee or any other licensee equipment,
improvements or activities within the use areas present any immediate hazard or
impediment to the public, to the town, to other improvements or activities
within or without the use areas, or to the town’s ability to safely and
conveniently operate the public highway or perform the town’s utility, public
safety and other public health, safety and welfare functions, then licensee
shall immediately remedy the hazard, comply with the town’s requests to secure
the use areas, and otherwise cooperate with the town at no expense to town to
remove any such hazard or impediment. The licensee’s work crews shall report to
the use areas within four hours of any request by the town under this division
(G).
   (H)   If a licensee abandons use of its facilities, or upon cancellation,
revocation or termination of a license, the licensee shall notify the town and
may, subject to the town’s approval, permanently abandon the facilities in
place. In lieu of permanent abandonment, the town may require a licensee to the
reasonable satisfaction of the town and, without cost or expense to the town,
promptly to remove its facilities and to restore the public highway. If a
licensee fails or refused to remove the facilities required by town to be
removed, the town may do so and licensee shall pay the cost of such removal and
the restoration of the highway. Upon permanent abandonment, if the town does
not require removal, a licensee shall submit to the town a proposal and
instruments for transferring ownership to the city. Any facilities which are
not removed within 120 days of the town’s written request, automatically shall
become the property of the town. The Arizona Blue Stake Center must be notified
to record abandoned facilities.
   (I)   Any and all rights granted to a licensee shall be subject to the prior
and continuing right of the town to use the public highway, including the use
areas. Any and all rights granted to a licensee shall also be subject to all
deeds, easements, dedications, conditions, covenants, restrictions,
encumbrances and claims to title which may affect the public highway. A license
shall be construed to grant, convey, create or vest a perpetual real property
interest in land to a licensee.
   (J)   A licensee accepts the risk that there may now or in the future exist
in the use areas other work and improvements that the town may approve from
time to time. The town shall have full authority to regulate use of the use
areas and to resolve competing demands and preferences regarding use of the use
areas and to require a licensee to cooperate and participate in implementing
such resolutions.
   (K)   Neither the town nor any agent, contractor or employee of the town
shall be liable to a licensee, its customers or third parties with user
contracts for any service disruption or for any other harm caused them or the
facilities due to competing uses of the public highway.
   (L)   A licensee may enter into user contracts with unrelated third parties
in the ordinary course of the licensee’s business for use of portions of the
facilities of the licensee. All such third parties shall obtain a license from
the town pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-583(D). No person shall transmit data over the
facilities of the licensee or otherwise use the facilities, except under a user
contract with a licensee. The licensee shall provide to town:
      (1)   The name of the third party;
      (2)   The name, title, address, telephone number and email address of a
person with authority to speak for the third party;
      (3)   The route of the proposed service; and
      (4)   Any other information relevant to the use of the public highway by
the third party reasonably requested by the town.
   (M)   All signage is prohibited; except that, a licensee shall install and
thereafter maintain all signs and markings that the facilities and the
licensee’s activities may make necessary for safe use of the use areas by the
public, the town, the licensee and other persons who may be at the use areas at
any time for any reason.
   (N)   Licenses shall be personal to the licensee. Except as provided in the
license, no transfer of a license or licensee, or change of control over the
same (including, but not limited to, transfer by forced or voluntary sale,
merger, consolidation, receivership or any other means) shall occur unless
prior application is made to the town and the town’s prior written consent is
obtained, which consent will not be unreasonably withheld or delayed. In making
a determination as to whether to approve a transfer, the town may consider the
same information and qualifications required of an original application for a
license; whether the licensee is in compliance with its license and this
chapter and, if not, the proposed transferee’s commitment to cure such non-
compliance; whether the transfer would result in an evasion of other applicable
provisions of law, or impair lawful contracts; and the effect of the transfer
on the town’s interest. No application for a transfer of a license shall be
granted unless the proposed transferee agrees in writing that it will abide by
and accept all terms of the chapter and the license, and that it will assume
all obligations, liabilities and responsibility for all acts and omissions,
known and unknown, of the previous licensee under this chapter and the license
for all purposes, including renewal. Approval by the town of a transfer of a
license does not constitute a waiver or release of any of the rights of the
town under this chapter or the license, whether arising before or after the
date of the transfer.
   (O)   Every licensee shall be subject to the town’s exercise of such police,
regulatory and other powers as it now has or may later obtain, and a license
may not waive the application of the same.
   (P)   Every license shall be subject to revocation if the licensee fails to
comply with the material terms and conditions of the license, or applicable
law; provided, however, that, a license shall not be revoked unless the
licensee is given written notice of the defect in performance, and fails to
cure the performance within 60 days of the notice, except where the town finds
that the defect in performance is due to intentional misconduct, is a violation
of criminal law, or is part of a pattern of violations where the licensee has
already had notice and opportunity to cure. A hearing shall be held before a
license is revoked if the licensee requests a hearing.
   (Q)   (1)   Activities of a licensee and contractors of a licensee in the
public highway shall be subject to environmental laws, now or hereafter
imposed. A licensee and/or its contractors shall not produce, dispose,
transport, treat, use or store any hazardous substances upon or about the
public highway. These prohibitions shall not apply to:
         (a)   Ordinary gasoline, diesel fuel or other fuels or lubricants
necessary for ordinary use in motor vehicles and ordinary construction
machinery permitted upon the highway, and any such materials shall be properly
and lawfully contained in ordinary quantities in ordinary tanks and receptacles
that are permanently installed in such vehicles and machinery, or small
portable tanks that are being used for fueling permitted construction
machinery; and
         (b)   Electric backup batteries and other materials that may contain
hazardous substances that are commonly used in the provision of
telecommunications services.
      (2)   Disposal of hazardous substances shall be in accordance with
environmental law. A licensee shall promptly notify the town of any hazardous
substance at any time discovered or existing upon the highway. Within 24 hours
after any violation by a licensee or its contractors of this license pertaining
to hazardous substances, the licensee shall give the town notice reporting such
violation.
   (R)   The town shall have the right, because of a public emergency, to
sever, disrupt, remove, tear out, dig up or otherwise damage and/or destroy
facilities of a licensee without any prior notice to licensee, if the action is
deemed necessary by the Town Manager. In such event, the town shall not be
liable to the licensee, its contractors or its customers or their parties for
any harm so caused to them or the facilities, except due to gross negligence or
willful misconduct of town. The town shall inform the licensee of any actions
taken. The licensee shall be responsible for repair at its sole expense of any
of its facilities damaged pursuant to any such action taken by the town.
   (S)   (1)   Any remedies available to the town are cumulative, and are not
limited by the recovery of any amounts pursuant to the insurance provisions of
the license or pursuant to any indemnity clause.
      (2)   A requirement that if the licensee fails to pay amounts owed to the
town by the time prescribed for payment, the licensee shall pay interest on the
amounts owed, at the rate of 1% per month.
      (3)   A requirement that licensee shall produce books and records for the
town’s inspection and copying, prepare reports, respond to questions and permit
the town to have access to its facilities as the town may request in order to
determine whether licensee has complied with its obligations under the license
or other applicable law.
(Ord. 20-01, passed 1-14-2020)
§ 116.23 RENEWAL.
   A licensee that receives a telecommunications service license pursuant to
this chapter may apply for a renewal of its license, which renewal shall be
reviewed in accordance with the requirements of state law.
(Ord. 20-01, passed 1-14-2020)
§ 116.24 TERM.
   (A)   Any license granted by the town pursuant to this chapter shall
commence upon adoption of the license and acceptance of the license by the
licensee within 30 days of the grant.
   (B)   The license shall be effective for a period of five years and subject
to the conditions and restrictions provided in the instrument and this chapter.
(Ord. 20-01, passed 1-14-2020)
§ 116.25 COMPENSATION.
   (A)   Amount of compensation. The town shall not levy a tax, rent, fee or
charge to a telecommunications corporation for the use of a public highway to
provide telecommunications services, or levy a tax, fee or charge upon the
privilege of engaging in the business of providing telecommunications services;
except that, in connection with its provisions of telecommunications services
and its use of the highways to provide the same, each telecommunications
corporation shall:
      (1)   Pay a transaction privilege tax on the business of providing
telecommunications services or applicable use tax;
      (2)   Pay public highway construction permit fees and utility poles and
wires construction permit fees established from time to time by the town
pursuant to
Ch. 152 of this code of ordinances;
      (3)   Pay all reasonable costs associated with the construction,
maintenance and operation of its facilities in the public highways used to
provide telecommunications services, including reasonable costs associated with
damage caused to the public highways;
      (4)   A telecommunications corporation that has placed facilities in
public highways that carry interstate traffic between and among the
telecommunication corporation’s points of presence exclusive of facilities used
by the local network and the portion of the interstate network that carries
intrastate calls, shall pay an annual fee based on the number of linear feet of
trench in the public highways. The rate per linear foot shall be set by Council
resolution and shall not exceed the highest rate per linear foot a political
subdivision charged a licensee on or before 12-31-1999. The rate per linear
foot shall not be increased in any year by more than the increase in the
average Consumer Price Index as published by the United States Department of
Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics; and
      (5)   The licensee may provide in-kind benefits such as facilities or
services to the town if agreed to by the town and licensee. The calculation of
the in-kind benefits shall be set forth in the license. Any in-kind facilities
provided to the town under the license shall remain in possession and ownership
of the town after the term of the license expires. The value of in-kind
benefits shall be less than or equal to, and may be offset against, payments of
interstate linear foot charges or transaction privilege tax on the business of
providing telecommunications service owed to the town, but shall not be offset
for any combination of intrastate and interstate charges.
   (B)   Disputes. If the licensee disputes the amount of town construction
permit fees or other fees payable under this chapter, the matter shall be
referred to a dispute resolution board. The board shall consist of three
members agreed upon by both parties. Expenses for the board shall be shared
equally by the town and the licensee. The board will hear the dispute promptly,
and render a decision within 20 days after the hearing. All decisions of the
board are non-binding on the town and the licensee; however, the findings of
the board shall be admissible in any legal action. The town and the licensee
shall accept or reject findings of the board within 30 days after receipt of
the findings. If damages are assessed by the board, the licensee shall pay town
within 30 days of receipt of an invoice. Late charges of 5% and interest
charges of 1.5% per month shall be added for late payment.
   (C)   Denial of application. If an application for a license is denied, the
Town Manager will provide the applicant with a written justification for the
denial with references to the applicable statutes, ordinances, codes or
substantive policy statements on which the denial is based. The notice of
denial will explain the applicant’s right to protest the denial to the Town
Council, that the applicant must specify the basis for its protest, including a
description for why it believes Town Council incorrectly denied the license,
and that the protest must be filed within 20 working days of the date of the
denial.
(Ord. 20-01, passed 1-14-2020)
CHAPTER 117: VIDEO SERVICES
Section
General Provisions
   
117.01   Purpose and intent
   
117.02   Definitions
   
117.03   Unlawful acts; violation
   
117.04   Enforcement
Uniform Video Service Licenses
   
117.15   Application and issuance
   
117.16   Authority granted
   
117.17   Undergrounding of facilities
   
117.18   Limitations of license
   
117.19   Obligations upon expiration
   
117.20   Notification; transferablity
Duties of Video Service Providers
   
117.35   Construction in the highways
   
117.36   Revocation for non-use of uniform video service license
   
117.37   Reports
   
117.38   Bundling of services
   
117.39   Notice of change of information
Fees and Charges; In-Kind Goods or Services
   
117.50   License fee on gross revenue; transaction privilege taxes
   
117.51   Public, educational or governmental access programming
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 117.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   The purposes of this chapter are to comply with the requirements of
A.R.S. Title 9, Ch. 13, and federal law and to set forth regulations for the
application by video service providers for uniform video services licenses for
the provision of video services and other authorized services in the town, to
provide for issuance of uniform video services licenses in accordance with law,
to provide for imposition of non-discriminatory license fees and to otherwise
carry out the mandates of A.R.S. Title 9, Ch. 13, and federal law.
   (B)   It is the intent of this chapter that all rights and obligations set
forth in A.R.S. Title 9, Ch. 13, are preserved and shall apply, irrespective of
whether specifically set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 19-03, passed 11-12-2019)
§ 117.02 DEFINITIONS.
   The definitions set forth in A.R.S. § 9-1401 shall apply to this chapter.
(Ord. 19-03, passed 11-12-2019)
§ 117.03 UNLAWFUL ACTS; VIOLATION.
   (A)   It is unlawful for a video service provider to establish, operate or
to carry on the business of video service in the town without first having been
issued and continuing to hold a local license issued pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any video service provider to construct, operate or
maintain a video service network within the boundaries of the town without
first having been issued and continuing to hold a local license issued by the
town pursuant to this chapter.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to make any unauthorized connections,
whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively or otherwise, with
any part of a licensed video service network within the town for the purpose of
enabling himself or herself or others to receive any video service without the
permission of the video service provider to whom a local license has been
issued.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of a
licensee, to willfully tamper with, remove or injure any equipment associated
with a video service network of a video service provider.
(Ord. 19-03, passed 11-12-2019) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 117.04 ENFORCEMENT.
   This requirements of this chapter shall be enforced through the procedures
set forth in A.R.S. § 9-1451.
(Ord. 19-03, passed 11-12-2019)
UNIFORM VIDEO SERVICE LICENSES
§ 117.15 APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE.
   (A)   This subchapter shall not apply to incumbent cable operators who have
elected to continue to operate within a service area as defined in its existing
local license with the town. The requirements of this section shall apply to
video services licenses granted on or after 1-1-2020.
   (B)   Prior to the commencement of any construction or expansion of a video
service network or the provision of any video service, a video service provider
shall file with the Town Clerk an application and an affidavit in a form
provided by the Town Clerk. The application shall be in the form of application
approved by the Council and shall include all information and not more than the
information required by the application form and A.R.S. § 9-1414.
   (C)   The application shall be accompanied by an affidavit in the form
approved by the Council signed by one of the principal executive officers or
general partners of the applicant that the information set forth in the
application are true and accurate.
   (D)   The application and affidavit shall be submitted to the Town Clerk,
who shall forward the application and affidavit to the town’s Community
Development Department for review.
   (E)   If the Community Development Department determines that the
application and affidavit are incomplete or otherwise deficient under A.R.S. §
9-1414, written notice shall be given to the applicant not later than 15 days
after the date of filing of the application and affidavit. The written notice
shall:
      (1)   Explain the incompleteness or deficiency in detail; and
      (2)   Specify the information or other items that are necessary for
proper completion of the application and affidavit.
   (F)   A uniform video services license shall be issued within 30 days from
the date a complete application was filed with the Town Clerk. The term of a
uniform video services license shall not exceed ten years.
   (G)   If written notice of an incomplete or deficient application and
affidavit is not given within 15 days after the date of filing, or if the
uniform video services license is not issued within 30 days from the date a
complete application has been submitted, the agreement shall be deemed complete
and issued to the applicant in the form submitted.
   (H)   No fees shall be charged for filing or processing an application,
affidavit, notice or other document related to the issuance of the uniform
video services licenses.
   (I)   Amendments to a uniform video services license to add service areas
shall be processed in the same manner as the original uniform video services
license.
   (J)   The term of a uniform video services license may be extended by the
holder of a video service provider filing with the Town Clerk a notice to
extend the term for a specified period not to exceed ten years. The notice
shall be filed at least one month before the end of the term of the uniform
video services license.
   (K)   Any use of or attachment by a video service provider to a utility or
other pole owned by the town must first be approved in a separate contract with
the town, at the sole discretion of the Town Council. If, pursuant to such
contract, the town requires the video service provider to locate facilities in
ducts or conduits or on poles owned by the town, the town shall not require the
video service provider to pay for the installation in the ducts or conduits or
on the poles.
   (L)   If a video services provider submits an application, the town shall
issue to a video service provider or its affiliate a permit to attach allowed
Wi-Fi radio equipment to the video service network in the highways. The permit
shall allow installation, operation and maintenance of allowed Wi-Fi radio
equipment. The town may require that all of the allowed Wi-Fi radio equipment
at a single location fit within a 15-inch cube and be contained entirely within
a ground-mounted pedestal or be connected directly to and mounted at the same
height as one of the video service provider’s aerial horizontal conductors.
This division (L) does not do any of the following:
      (1)   Prohibit the town from requiring a video service provider to place
underground aerial facilities to which allowed Wi-Fi equipment is attached;
      (2)   Prohibit the imposition of a tax, rent, fee or charge on revenue
from services provided through allowed Wi-Fi radio equipment;
      (3)   Affect the authority of the town to manage its highways or to
exercise its police powers, including review and approval of an application
before issuing a permit; or
      (4)   Affect the town’s authority to deny, limit, restrict or determine
the terms and conditions for the use of or attachment to the utility poles or
attachments to other poles of the town by a video service provider.
(Ord. 19-03, passed 11-12-2019)
§ 117.16 AUTHORITY GRANTED.
   A uniform video services license granted by the town shall authorize the
video service provider to:
   (A)   Provide video service in the town in the service area designated in
the application and affidavit during the term of the uniform video services
license;
   (B)   Construct and operate a video service network in the highways in each
service area, in compliance with the uniform video services license and town
laws; and
   (C)   Operate and maintain facilities installed in the highways in the
service area pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-1442(H), (I) and (J) (Wi-Fi radio equipment
on cable systems), A.R.S. § 9-584 (microcell equipment) and A.R.S. Title 9, Ch.
5, Art. 8 (small wireless facilities).
(Ord. 19-03, passed 11-12-2019)
§ 117.17 UNDERGROUNDING OF FACILITIES.
   All wires, cable, conductors, ducts, conduits and similar facilities shall
be placed underground unless such facilities are attached to existing utility
or telephone poles and the poles are used primarily for utility or telephone
purpose.
(Ord. 19-03, passed 11-12-2019)
§ 117.18 LIMITATIONS OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Any uniform video services license granted under this chapter shall be
non-exclusive.
   (B)   Any privilege claimed under any uniform video services license by the
video service provider in any highway shall be subordinate to any lawful
occupancy or use thereof by the town and shall be subordinate to any prior
easements, prior licenses to use the highways and any other private property
rights that may be superior to the uniform video services license issued.
   (C)   A video service provider shall be subject to all existing requirements
of the town’s rules, regulations and specifications or hereafter enacted or
established pursuant to the town’s police powers and taxing authority, and
shall comply with all applicable existing state and federal laws and
regulations or hereafter enacted or established.
   (D)   Any uniform video services license granted shall not relieve the video
service provider of any obligation involved in obtaining pole space from any
department of the town, utility company or from others lawfully maintaining
poles in highway.
   (E)   A video service provider shall agree to comply with all generally
applicable non-discriminatory ordinances, including, but not limited to, street
or highway use, mapping, insurance, performance bonds, security fund,
indemnification or similar requirements that apply to the use and occupation of
any highway. There is hereby preserved to the town the power to amend any
section of the town code related to construction in highways pursuant to its
police powers.
(Ord. 19-03, passed 11-12-2019)
§ 117.19 OBLIGATIONS UPON EXPIRATION.
   A video service provider may terminate a uniform video service license by
filing a written notice of termination with the Town Clerk. Such notice shall
be filed at least 90 days before termination of service. The notice shall also
be sent to all subscribers within the affected service area at least 90 days
prior to termination of service.
(Ord. 19-03, passed 11-12-2019)
§ 117.20 NOTIFICATION; TRANSFERABILITY.
   (A)   The town shall notify in a timely manner each video service provider
with a uniform video services license in the town of changes to the boundaries
of the town.
   (B)   Audits, including audits of bundled services, of a video services
provider’s books and records shall be conducted in compliance with A.R.S. § 9-
1445.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided by law or federal regulation, a uniform
video service license is fully transferable to any person whether the transfer
arises through merger, sale, assignment, restructuring, change of control or
other type of transaction. A transfer does not include an assignment of a
uniform video service license for the purpose of securing indebtedness. A
transfer may include less than all service areas associated with a uniform
video service license. The video service provider shall file with the Town
Clerk written notice of the transfer of the uniform video service license. On
the filing of notice under this division (C), the transferee becomes the holder
of the uniform video service license.
   (D)   Enforcement of this chapter shall be in compliance with A.R.S. § 9-
1451.
   (E)   A uniform video services license is subject to and shall be governed
by all applicable provisions of federal, state and local law. Notwithstanding
any other provisions of the uniform video services license to the contrary, the
uniform video services license shall at all times comply with all laws and
regulations of the state and federal government or any administrative agencies
thereof; provided, however, if any such state or federal law or regulations
shall require the licensee to perform any service, or shall permit the licensee
to perform any service, or shall prohibit the licensee from performing any
service, in conflict with the terms of the license or this chapter, then as
soon as possible following knowledge thereof, the licensee shall notify the
Town Attorney of the point of conflict believed to exist between such
regulation or law and this chapter or the license.
(Ord. 19-03, passed 11-12-2019)
DUTIES OF VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDERS
§ 117.35 CONSTRUCTION IN THE HIGHWAYS.
   Video service providers and their subcontractors shall comply with:
   (A)   The requirements of this chapter and
Ch. 152 of this code of ordinances;
   (B)   Construction standards of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC)
rules and regulations, part 76 subpart K (Technical Standards), as amended from
time to time; and
   (C)   Detailed standards submitted by the video service provider as part of
any application submitted to the town.
(Ord. 19-03, passed 11-12-2019)
§ 117.36 REVOCATION FOR NON-USE OF UNIFORM VIDEO SERVICE LICENSE.
   A video service provider shall provide video service to at least one
subscriber within each service area authorized by a uniform video service
license within 24 months after the date the uniform video service license is
issued. If the video service provider fails to comply with this section, the
town may revoke the uniform video service license.
(Ord. 19-03, passed 11-12-2019)
§ 117.37 REPORTS.
   A video service provider shall file all reports required by and in
compliance with A.R.S. § 9-1432. The reports shall be filed with the Town
Clerk. All such reports shall be confidential unless the video service provider
has consented in writing to the disclosure.
(Ord. 19-03, passed 11-12-2019)
§ 117.38 BUNDLING OF SERVICES.
   Except as otherwise provided by federal law, if a video service provider
offers video service bundled with other services that are not video service for
a single discounted price, all of the following apply:
   (A)   The method that the video service provider uses to determine gross
revenue subject to license fees by allocating the single discounted price among
the bundle of video service and non-video services shall be reasonable and
supported by the video service provider’s books and record;
   (B)   For the purpose of meeting the video service provider’s burden of
proof, the town shall accept as reasonable, for purposes of meeting the video
service provider’s burden of proof, an allocation based on an objective and
verifiable method using the books and records that the video service provider
kept in the regular course of business for other purposes, including non-tax
purposes; and
   (C)   A video service provider may not use bundled offerings as a means to
evade paying license fees.
(Ord. 19-03, passed 11-12-2019)
§ 117.39 NOTICE OF CHANGE OF INFORMATION.
   If any information required by §
117.15(B) of this chapter changes, the video service provider shall notify the
town in writing within 30 days of such change.
(Ord. 19-03, passed 11-12-2019)
FEES AND CHARGES; IN-KIND GOODS OR SERVICES
§ 117.50 LICENSE FEE ON GROSS REVENUE; TRANSACTION PRIVILEGE TAXES.
   (A)   A video service provider shall pay to the town a license fee as a
percentage of gross revenues for the use of the highways to provide video
service within its service area. The license fee shall be established by
resolution of the Town Council and shall be imposed equally and uniformly on
video service providers and holdover cable operators.
      (1)   The license fee shall be paid quarterly on or before the twentieth
day of the month following the quarter end, and becomes delinquent on the last
business day of that month. If such payment is not made by the next to the last
business day of the following month, the town will impose a rate of interest
for both underpayments and overpayments in the amount of the federal short-term
rate determined pursuant to 26 U.S.C. § 6621(b), plus three percentage points
per month commencing from the date payment should have been made, unless the
payment is subject to a bona fide dispute, and continuing until the payment is
made. Fractions of a month shall be considered to constitute a full month for
the purpose of computing interest.
      (2)   The license fee shall be imposed equally and uniformly on all video
service providers and holdover cable operators.
   (B)   The total of the rates of the license fee, the transaction privilege
taxes imposed and in-kind contributions described in FCC Rule 19-80 (unless
agreed to in a separate agreement) shall not exceed a rate of 5%.
   (C)   The payment of the license fee by the licensee to the town shall be
made by delivery of the same to the town hall on or before the twentieth day of
the month following the quarter end, and becomes delinquent on the last
business day of that month.
(Ord. 19-03, passed 11-12-2019)
§ 117.51 PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL OR GOVERNMENTAL ACCESS PROGRAMMING.
   (A)   Video service providers shall provide channel capacity to transmit
programming over which the video service provider exercises no editorial
control except as authorized by 47 U.S.C. § 531. The channel capacity shall be
limited to one of the following:
      (1)   Not more than two channels of public, educational or governmental
access programming in the basic service tier of the video service network and
not more than two channels of non-commercial governmental programming, at least
one of which may be programmed by the federal government, in the digital
programming tier of the video service network,
      (2)   Not more than two lines of access programming with each line of
programming carried on up to two standard definition channels and two switched
digital high-definition channels.
   (B)   None of the annual fair market value of any channel capacity provided
pursuant to division (A) above may be offset against the license fee set forth
in §
117.50 of this chapter.
   (C)   A video service provider may require that channels regularly display
an unobtrusive logo or other suitable identifier of the video service provider,
if the town requires channel capacity pursuant to this section.
   (D)   (1)   A video service provider shall pay all capital costs and related
to the facilities and equipment of the video service network, including
facilities and equipment for signal carriage, processing, reformatting and
interconnection for all of the following:
         (a)   To connect the video service network or cable system, as it may
be relocated from time to time, to transmit programming to and from existing
locations of public, educational or governmental access facilities and to allow
monitoring of access programming at the facilities; and
         (b)   To transmit public, educational and governmental access channels
to subscribers with the same prevailing quality, functionality and
identification as other channels.
      (2)   Costs other than capital costs incurred by the video service
provider are subject to FCC Rule 19-80.
   (E)   All video service providers and incumbent cable operators shall
provide at no initial or recurring charge the basic service tier of video
service to one outlet and one receiving device at each building occupied by the
town that is not more than 200 feet from the nearest technically and
commercially feasible point of connection on the video service network. The
town shall designate the building in writing to the video service provider.
Costs incurred by the video service provider or incumbent cable operator are
subject to FCC Rule 19-80.
(Ord. 19-03, passed 11-12-2019)
CHAPTER 118: SPECIAL EVENTS
Section
   
118.01   General
   
118.02   Issuance of permits
   
118.03   Contents of applications
   
118.04   Special event regulations
   
118.05   Revocation of special event permit
   
118.06   Special provisions related to parades and public assemblies
 
   
118.99   Penalty
§ 118.01 GENERAL.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to set forth regulations for
special events and short-term rental special events in the town and standards
for the issuance of permits for such events in order that public safety,
health, and general welfare is protected.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      EXHIBITION. An outdoor display of items, including but not limited to
vehicles, agricultural products, home-made items, arts or crafts, whether for
sale or not.
      FAIR. A gathering of stalls, amusements, rides, sideshows, games of
skill, and/or vendors for public entertainment.
      FESTIVAL. A recreational, social, educational, or cultural activity that
includes activities such as rides, animal events, art shows, cultural
exhibitions and/or live music in an outdoor setting.
      MUSIC CONCERT. A performance of music for an audience primarily attended
by members of the public, whether or not there is an entrance fee.
      PARADE. Any march, demonstration, procession, motorcade, or race
consisting of persons, animals, or vehicles or a combination thereof upon the
streets, parks, or other public grounds within the town intended to attract
public attention that interferes with the normal flow or regulation of
pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic upon the streets, parks, or other public
grounds.
      PERMIT. Includes both special event permits and short-term rental special
event permits.
      PUBLIC ASSEMBLY. Any meeting, demonstration, picket line, rally, or
gathering of persons for a common purpose as a result of prior planning that
interferes with the normal flow or regulation of pedestrian or vehicular
traffic or has significant impacts on the standard, ordinary, and normal uses
of the property being used. PUBLIC ASSEMBLY does not include block parties.
      REVIVAL. A large outdoor meeting, usually in tents, led by a religious
leader intended to make converts.
      SHORT-TERM RENTAL. Has the same meaning as “vacation rental” or “short-
term rental” as defined in A.R.S. § 9-500.39.
      SHORT-TERM RENTAL SPECIAL EVENT. A gathering of ten or more invited
persons in a short-term rental.
      SPECIAL EVENT. Outdoor musical concerts, festivals, fairs, exhibitions,
or revivals to which the public is invited or allowed to attend.
      SPORTING EVENT. A competition or activity involving numerous participants
and spectators including but not limited to football, baseball, basketball,
golf, and races.
      TAX CODE. The town’s transaction privilege license tax code as set forth
in
Ch. 36 of this code.
(Ord. 23-09, 10-10-2023)
§ 118.02 ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.
   (A)   Permits required; application.
      (1)   No person may conduct a special event or a short-term rental
special event without having first obtained a permit from the town. Short-term
rental special events shall not be open to the public.
      (2)   If the same venue will be used multiple times for the same type of
special event, the applicant may request a blanket special event permit rather
than a permit for each special event. The blanket special event permit shall be
valid for one year. After approval of the blanket special event permit, if
there is a change in any of the information submitted pursuant to §
118.03 of this chapter, the applicant shall either apply for a special event
permit pursuant to division (A)(1) above or an amended blanket special event
permit that addresses the changes. A blanket permit is not available for short-
term rental special events.
      (3)   Prior to approval of a permit, if any sales at the event require a
transaction privilege tax license, the applicant shall obtain a transaction
privilege license for reporting and paying all taxes due under the tax code for
the person’s own activities. It shall be unlawful for any holder of a special
event permit to allow any vendor to conduct sales at the special event until
the vendor consents to reporting and paying taxes due under the tax code. No
such sales shall be conducted at a short-term rental special event.
      (4)   Applications for special events and short-term rental special
events shall be submitted to the Town Manager at least 30 days prior to the
scheduled start of the special event or short-term rental special event, or in
the case of a blanket special event permit, prior to the scheduled start of the
first special event. The application shall be on a form provided by the town
and shall include a site plan depicting existing facilities and proposed
temporary facilities and activities, the plans required by §
118.03(A) through (G) of this chapter, and any other information required by §
118.03.
      (5)   The Town Manager or his designee shall review the application for
completeness and notify the applicant in writing of any incomplete items within
five working days of the receipt of the application. Within ten days of receipt
of an application, the Town Manager shall approve, approve with modifications
or conditions, or deny the application.
      (6)   The Town Manager may deny an application for a permit if:
         (a)   The application contains a misrepresentation, false or
misleading statement, evasion, or suppression of a material fact;
         (b)   Another special event has been approved to occur on the same day
in the same area or traffic circulation would be impeded or public safety would
be compromised by having two or more special events in the same area;
         (c)   The application does not comply with this chapter and all other
applicable codes, ordinances, or other laws; and/or
         (d)   The proposed special event or short-term rental special event is
unlawful or constitutes a public nuisance.
      (7)   A decision of the Town Manager to deny an application under this
division (A) of this section may be appealed to the Town Council in accordance
with division (E) of this section.
      (8)   The permit shall include the approved duration of the special event
or short-term rental special event.
      (9)   The special event or short-term rental special event shall only be
held on property with zoning that permits the activity to be conducted as a
special event or short-term rental special event. The special event shall
comply with all applicable federal, state, county and town ordinances,
statutes, and regulations.
      (10)   The special event shall not be advertised as a special event of
the town, nor shall the town be a sponsor of a special event, unless the Town
Council approves a contract for such sponsorship which sets forth the duties,
responsibilities, and participation of the town with respect to the special
event.
      (11)   The permit shall be displayed at the special event site or the
short-term rental special event site in a conspicuous location for the duration
of the special event.
      (12)   The Town Manager may require the applicant to notify adjacent
owners and residents of the special event or short-term rental special event
prior to commencement of the special event due to its size or the activity
proposed.
   (B)   Permit fee.
      (1)   A non-refundable fee established by resolution of the Council shall
be required for each permit application, which fee shall be paid at the time of
submittal of the application.
      (2)   Except for vendors exempt pursuant to
Ch. 111 of this code of ordinances, vendors selling products at a special event
shall obtain a seasonal vendor business license permit pursuant to §
111.03 of this code and comply with all requirements of
Ch. 111.
   (C)   Special events on town property.
      (1)   In addition to a special event permit, if the special event will be
held on town property the applicant shall enter into a contract with the town
that includes at a minimum a description of the special event, a requirement
for a deposit in an amount established by resolution of the Town Council,
insurance and indemnification requirements of the town, a list of vendors
required by §
118.03(J) of this chapter, and a description of all streets and other property
or facilities to be used by or affected by the special event. Town property,
including town facilities used for the special event, shall be restored to
their original condition, including but not limited to removal of debris and
waste. The Town Manager may require a greater deposit if he determines that the
size or nature of the special event warrants a greater deposit.
      (2)   The request to hold a special event on town property may be
submitted at the same time as the application for a special event permit. The
request shall be submitted at least 30 days prior to the scheduled start of the
special event.
      (3)   The Town Manager is authorized to approve agreements for special
events on town property that comply with this section. All other agreements
require approval by the Town Council.
   (D)   Authority to waive fees and deposits. The Town Manager may waive the
permit fee for a special event solely sponsored and operated by, or in which
the entire proceeds accrue to, an entity which is exempt from federal income
taxation under section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986. No such
waiver shall be granted where a for-profit entity is involved in organizing or
operating the special event.
   (E)   Appeal to Town Council. 
      (1)   If the Town Manager denies an application for a special event or
short-term rental special event, the applicant may appeal the decision to the
Town Council by written request stating the reasons thereof filed with the Town
Clerk within ten days after the notice of denial is received.
      (2)   An appeal hearing shall be held by the Town Council within 30 days
after receipt of an appeal. The applicant shall be provided written notice of
the appeal hearing at least five days prior to the hearing. At the hearing all
parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel, to present testimony
and evidence and to cross-examine witnesses. The proceedings shall be recorded
and transcribed at the expense of the party so requesting. The Town Council
shall by majority vote of members present render a written decision based on
findings of fact and the application of the standards herein which shall be
mailed to the applicant. The decision of the Council shall be final.
   (F)   Duration of permit. A permit shall be effective for the approved
duration of the special event or the short-term rental special event.
   (G)   Extensions of permit. The Town Manager may grant an extension of the
permit provided the applicant submits, in writing, a request for such an
extension prior to the end of the special event or the short-term rental
special event.
(Ord. 23-09, passed 10-10-2023)
§ 118.03 CONTENTS OF APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Security and safety.
      (1)   The application for a special event with a duration of more than
four hours shall include the following information and provide for the
following:
         (a)   Crowd control plan. The crowd control plan shall include a
minimum of two off-duty sworn public safety officers or other security
personnel, approved by the Town Manager and the town's Police Department, to
monitor crowd control. Priority for such off-duty services shall be given to
the Quartzsite Police Department. Such security shall be provided for special
events anticipated to generate between 200 and 1,000 total persons and one
additional officer or other approved security personnel for every anticipated
1,000 persons thereafter. The Town Manager has the authority to determine the
anticipated number of people in attendance. The above minimum requirements may
be increased or reduced upon authorization of the Town Manager in consultation
with the town’s Police Department.
         (b)   Town code compliance plan. A plan to address all fire and life
safety concerns and the provisions of the town’s building and other life safety
codes. The Town Manager and the fire and emergency services provider for the
town shall determine the appropriate number of fire and medical personnel
needed to provide fire prevention and medical coverage.
      (2)   The application for any short-term rental special event shall
include the number of people invited and shall comply with fire code occupancy
restrictions.
   (B)   Traffic circulation and parking.
      (1)   The application for a special event with a duration of more than
four hours shall include the following information and provide for the
following:
         (a)   Traffic circulation. A plan for traffic circulation and control,
including provisions for emergency vehicle access before, during and after the
event, for each day of the event. The adequacy of the plan shall be determined
by the Town Manager and the fire and emergency services provider for the town.
The Town Manager has the authority to determine the level of law enforcement
personnel needed to regulate traffic associated with the event. A copy of the
contract with such law enforcement personnel shall be submitted to the Town
Manager at least seven days prior to the special event. No special event shall
be conducted without law enforcement personnel as required by the Town Manager.
         (b)   Parking. A plan to address anticipated parking demands. Parking
along the shoulder of any major arterial road is prohibited. Vehicles shall not
be parked in any manner that would create a traffic hazard as determined by the
Town Manager.
      (2)   The application for any short-term rental special event shall
include a plan to address anticipated parking demands. Parking shall only be
permitted on designated owner and guest parking spaces for the short-term
rental. If the designated owner and guest parking spaces are full, parking is
permitted on the public street.
   (C)   Noise.
      (1)   For special events.
         (a)   If amplified sound is to be produced at the special event, a
plan shall be prepared that assures that the sound levels shall not disturb the
peace and quiet of residents of the town. The plan shall include sufficient
information so that the Town Manager may determine whether the sound will be
heard by residents in residential neighborhoods. Such information shall
include: the decibel level of the sound measured one meter from the source of
the amplified sound, the location and direction of the source of the amplified
sound, and the distance from the source of the amplified sound to the nearest
residential property line. Sound levels shall not exceed 58 dB measured at the
nearest residential property line. The Town Manager is authorized to determine
compliance with the sound level standards by taking the measurement with a
digital sound level meter with 1.5 dB accuracy meeting the ANSI and IEC 6.51 T
II standard.
         (b)   The Town Manager may, after consultation with a noise or sound
professional, modify the maximum sound only if he or she determines that the
sound level will not exceed 58 dB measured at the nearest residential property
line. The required measures and the adjusted maximum sound level shall be set
forth in the special event permit.
      (2)   For short-term rental special events, the noise limitations of §
130.06 of this code shall apply.
   (D)   Toilet facilities. The application for a special event shall include a
plan for adequate toilet facilities. The plan shall provide for a minimum of
three toilet facilities per 1,000 total persons anticipated to attend the
special event and a schedule for waste disposal to avoid unsanitary conditions
and offensive odors. The Town Manager may approve variations from these
standards based on the length of the event, the spatial characteristics of the
event, or other factors or considerations. Sufficient toilet facilities
complying with the Americans with Disabilities Act accessibility guidelines
shall be available.
   (E)   Solid waste disposal. The application for a special event shall
include a plan for collection and disposal of solid waste and litter and, if
the special event will include food vendors, for disposal of grease barrels for
cooking oil. All solid waste, litter and recyclable materials shall be removed
from the site within 24 hours following the event. For multiple-day events, the
grounds shall be maintained during each day of the event with no on-site
accumulations which would create a nuisance or pose a health hazard. All solid
waste shall be deposited at the appropriate county landfill. The permittee is
responsible for removing solid waste to a landfill immediately after the
special event or short-term rental special event.
   (F)   Electrical hookups. The application for a special event shall include
a plan for any electrical work required, including the use of a generator for
the provision of electric service. All wiring shall be installed in compliance
with the provisions of the National Electric Code and the town's electrical
code and be approved by the Building Inspector.
   (G)   Temporary structures. The application for a special event shall set
forth the plans for temporary structures, including but not limited to tents,
stages, scaffolding and platforms. Such temporary structures shall be erected
in compliance with the provisions of the town’s building codes and be approved
by the Building Inspector. No temporary structure shall be situated in such a
manner that it could create a traffic hazard.
   (H)   Street closures. If the special event requires closure of any public
streets, approval by the Town Council shall be obtained prior to issuance of
the special event permit. Requests for street closure shall be submitted at
least 30 days prior to the special event in order to allow sufficient time to
place the request on the Council agenda.
   (I)   Use of alcohol. If the special event will include sale, use or
distribution of alcohol on public property, approval by the Town Council shall
be obtained prior to the issuance of the special event permit. Requests for
sale, use or distribution of alcohol shall be submitted at least 30 days prior
to the special event in order to allow sufficient time to place the request on
the Council agenda. The Council shall establish by resolution a fee for the use
of alcohol at the special event to offset additional public safety costs.
   (J)   Vendors. If the special event will include vendors, the applicant
shall provide a list of the vendors to the Town Manager at least seven days
prior to the special event and shall submit an updated list to the Town Manager
within seven days following the special event. Each vendor shall obtain a
business license from the town. At the request of the applicant, the town may
establish an on-site license application process at which a license for each
vendor may be issued immediately prior to the commencement of the special
event.
   (K)   Inspection required; re-inspection fee. Prior to the opening of the
special event or the short-term rental special event, the applicant shall call
for an inspection to assure compliance with all permitting conditions. If the
inspection is required outside of town regular business hours, the town may
charge an additional fee for such inspection. If the Building Inspector or the
Fire Marshal finds that any permitting conditions have not been met, he or she
shall notify the applicant of the required corrections. The Building Inspector
shall re-inspect the special event site without further charge. If extra
inspections are required for any of the following reasons, a charge shall be
made for each re-inspection (see fee schedule):
      (1)   Wrong address;
      (2)   Repairs or corrections not made when inspections are requested; or
      (3)   The site is not ready for inspection when called.
   (L)   Applicant responsible for costs. All costs associated with the special
event shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Such costs may include, but
are not limited to, costs of special event permit, traffic control, on-site
security, off-duty police officers, toilet facilities, solid waste disposal,
inspections, on-site business license issuance and fee for alcohol use.
(Ord. 23-09, passed 10-10-2023)
§ 118.04 SPECIAL EVENT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Compliance.
      (1)   A condition of the permit shall be compliance with the plans
approved with the application pursuant to §
118.03(A) through (G) for the duration of the special event and short-term
rental special event.
      (2)   A condition of the permit shall be compliance with all applicable
town ordinances and all applicable county, state and federal laws and
regulations.
   (B)   Hours of operation. The hours of operation of the special event or the
short-term rental special event shall be as set forth on the permit. Amplified
sound shall not begin before 9:00 a.m. nor extend beyond 10:00 p.m. The Town
Manager may approve adjustments to hours of operation and hours of amplified
sound based upon individual circumstances.
   (C)   Insurance.
      (1)   At least ten calendar days prior to the special event or short-term
rental special event, proof of insurance in the amounts and types of coverage
as determined by the Town Manager shall be submitted. All issuers of insurance
shall be authorized to do business within the State of Arizona and carry an
A.M. Best rating of at least B++. Minimum coverage shall include, but not be
limited to: commercial general liability; automobile liability; and liquor
coverage as the type of special event may necessitate. All such insurance shall
be endorsed to provide for a waiver of underwriter's rights of subrogation in
favor of the town. The certificates shall provide that no material alteration
or cancellation, including expiration and non-renewal, shall be effective until
15 business days after receipt of written notice by the town.
      (2)   All coverages shall be provided on a "per occurrence" form. If
coverage is only available on a "claims made" form, the insured shall agree to
maintain extended reporting coverage for a minimum of two years past the
expiration of the annual policy term.
      (3)   The coverage(s) required under this section shall survive and not
be terminated, reduced, or otherwise limited by any expiration or termination
of particular policies for insurance coverages.
      (4)   All coverages shall be primary and non-contributory with respect to
all other available sources. Where the town is named as an additional insured,
it shall be by endorsement and not solely as a listed party on the certificate
of insurance. The town shall be an additional insured to the full limits of
coverage purchased by the applicant even if those limits are in excess of the
minimums required by this section.
   (D)   Payment for use of town resources. The holder of the special event
permit shall pay for all town resources used for the special event in
compliance with the fee schedule adopted by the Town Council. At least ten days
prior to the special event, the applicant shall enter into a contract with the
town to pay for town resources that will be used at the special event. The
applicant shall pay the amount due within fifteen days of receipt of an invoice
from the town.
(Ord. 23-09, passed 10-10-2024) Penalty, see §
118.99
§ 118.05 REVOCATION OF SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT.
   (A)   Grounds for revocation of permit.
      (1)   A permit may be revoked by the Town Manager for the following:
         (a)   Failure to comply with the plans approved pursuant to §
118.03(A) through (G);
         (b)   Failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter; or
         (c)   Failure to comply with applicable town ordinances and county,
state and federal laws and regulations.
      (2)   A notice of revocation shall be delivered or mailed by first class
mail to the permittee. All activities associated with the special event shall
immediately cease as of the date of the notice.
   (B)   Appeal of revocation.
      (1)   If a permit is revoked, an appeal to the Town Council may be filed
following the same procedures as set forth in §
118.02(E). The filing of an appeal shall not stay the decision to revoke the
permit.
      (2)   The Town Clerk or designee shall set a time and place for a hearing
before the Council on such appeal, to be held within 30 days from the filing
date of the appeal. Notice of such hearing shall be mailed by the Town Clerk,
to the appellant setting forth specifically the time and place of the hearing.
      (3)   The decision of the Town Council on appeal shall be final.
(Ord. 23-09, passed 10-10-2023)
§ 118.06 SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATED TO PARADES AND PUBLIC ASSEMBLIES.
   (A)   Special event permit required. The provisions of §§
118.01 through
118.04 shall apply to parades and public assemblies except as modified by this
section. Except as provided in this section, no person shall engage in or
conduct any parade or public assembly without a special event permit for said
parade or public assembly.
   (B)   Activities where no special event permit required. A special event
permit shall not be required for the following:
      (1)   Funeral processions;
      (2)   Students going to and from school classes or participating in
educational activities, provided that such conduct is under the immediate
direction and supervision of school authorities;
      (3)   A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions; and
      (4)   Spontaneous events occasioned by news or affairs coming into public
knowledge within two days of such public assembly, provided that the organizer
thereof gives written notice to the town at least 24 hours prior to such parade
or public assembly.
   (C)   Application.
      (1)   An application for a permit for a public assembly other than a
parade shall be filed with the Town Manager at least ten days before the public
assembly is proposed to commence. An application for a parade shall be filed
with the Town Manager at least 30 days before the parade. The Town Manager may
waive the minimum filing period and accept an application filed within a
shorter period if, after due consideration of the date, time, place, and nature
of the parade or public assembly, the anticipated number of participants, and
the town services required in connection with the event, the Town Manager
determines the waiver will not present a hazard to public safety. The Town
Manager may waive the application fee for a demonstration, protest, picket
line, or rally.
      (2)   The application for a parade or public assembly permit shall be in
a form as provided by the town.
      (3)   Persons engaging in parades or public assemblies conducted for the
sole purpose of public issue speech protected under the First Amendment are not
required to pay for any police protection provided by the town.
   (D)   Issuance of permit.
      (1)   The Town Manager shall issue a permit as provided for herein when,
from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may
otherwise be obtained, he or she finds that:
         (a)   The conduct of the parade or public assembly will not
substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other pedestrian or
vehicular traffic contiguous to its route or location;
         (b)   The conduct of the parade or public assembly will not require
the diversion of so great a number of town police officers to properly police
the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal
police protection of the town;
         (c)   The concentration of persons, animals, and vehicles at staging
or public assembly points of the parade or public assembly will not unduly
interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to,
areas contiguous to such staging and public assembly areas;
         (d)   The conduct of the parade or public assembly is not reasonably
likely to cause injury to persons or property;
         (e)   The parade or public assembly is scheduled to move from its
point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without
unreasonable delays;
         (f)   Adequate sanitation and other required health facilities are or
will be made available in or adjacent to any staging and public assembly areas;
         (g)   There are sufficient parking places near the site of the parade
or public assembly to accommodate the number of vehicles reasonably expected;
         (h)   The applicant has secured the police protection, if any,
required by the Town Manager;
         (i)   Such parade or public assembly is not for the primary purpose of
advertising any product, goods, or event that is primarily for private profit,
and the parade itself is not primarily for profit. The prohibition against
advertising any product, goods, or event shall not apply to signs identifying
organizations or sponsors furnishing or sponsoring exhibits or structures used
in a parade;
         (j)   No parade or public assembly permit application for the same
time and location is already granted or has been received and will be granted;
         (k)   No parade or public assembly permit application for the same
time but not location is already granted or has been received and shall be
granted, and the police resources required for that prior parade or public
assembly are so great that in combination with the subsequent proposed
application, the resulting deployment of police services would have an
immediate and adverse effect upon the welfare and safety of persons and
property; and
         (l)   No event is scheduled elsewhere in the town where the police
resources required for that event are so great that the deployment of police
services for the proposed parade or public assembly would have an immediate and
adverse effect upon the welfare and safety of persons and property.
      (2)   The Town Manager shall act promptly upon a timely filed application
for a parade or public assembly permit but in no event shall grant or deny a
permit less than five days prior to the event. If the Town Manager disapproves
the application, he or she shall notify the applicant either by personal
delivery or certified mail at least five days prior to the event of his or her
action and state the reasons for denial.
      (3)   Each permit shall include the following information:
         (a)   Starting and approximate ending time;
         (b)   The portions of the streets that may be occupied by the parade
or public assembly;
         (c)   The start and finish locations; and
         (d)   Such other information as the Town Manager shall find necessary
to the enforcement of this section.
      (4)   Immediately upon the issuance of a parade or public assembly
permit, the Town Manager shall notify affected town departments.
   (E)   Responsibilities of permittee.
      (1)   A permittee shall comply with all permit directions and conditions
and with all applicable laws and ordinances. The parade or public assembly
chairman or other person heading such activity shall carry the parade or public
assembly permit upon his person during the conduct of the parade or public
assembly.
      (2)   Within 24 hours after the parade or public assembly concludes, all
animal waste, trash and debris resulting from the parade or public assembly
shall be removed and disposed of in appropriate receptacles or landfills.
   (F)   Prohibited activities. The following prohibitions shall apply to all
parades and public assemblies:
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to stage, present, or conduct
any parade or public assembly without first having obtained a permit as herein
provided;
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to participate in a parade or
public assembly for which the person knows a permit has not been granted;
      (3)   It shall be unlawful for any person in charge of, or responsible
for the conduct of, a duly licensed parade or public assembly to knowingly fail
to comply with any condition of the permit;
      (4)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any parade or
public assembly activity that would constitute a substantial hazard to the
public safety or that would materially interfere with or endanger the public
peace or rights of residents to the quiet and peaceful enjoyment of their
property; and
      (5)   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, drive, or cause to be
ridden or driven any animal or any animal-drawn vehicle upon any public street,
unless specifically authorized by the permit.
   (G)   Responsibilities of the general public. The public shall conduct
itself as follows:
      (1)   No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede, or interfere
with any parade or public assembly or with any person, vehicle, or animal
participating or used in a parade or public assembly.
      (2)   No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons
comprising a parade or public assembly when such vehicles or persons are in
motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade or public assembly.
      (3)   The Town Manager shall have the authority, when reasonably
necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a street
constituting a part of the route of a parade or public assembly. The Town
Manager shall post signs to that effect, and it shall be unlawful for any
person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No person
shall be liable for parking on a street unposted in violation of this section.
   (H)   Denial of permit. The Town Manager, in denying an application for a
parade or public assembly permit, may authorize the conduct of the parade or
public assembly at a date, time, location, or route different from that named
by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall,
within five days after notice of the action of the Town Manager, file a written
notice of acceptance with the Town Manager. An alternate parade or public
assembly permit shall conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect
of, a permit issued under this section.
   (I)   Appeal. Any applicant shall have the right to appeal the denial of a
parade or public assembly permit to the Town Council. The denied applicant
shall make the appeal within five days after receipt of the denial by filing a
written notice with the Town Manager and a copy of the notice with the Town
Clerk. The Town Council shall act upon the appeal at its next scheduled meeting
following receipt of the notice of appeal. In the event that the Town Council
rejects an applicant's appeal, the applicant may file an immediate request for
review with a court of competent jurisdiction.
   (J)   Revocation of permit. The Town Manager shall have the authority to
revoke a parade or public assembly permit instantly upon violation of the
conditions or standards for issuance as set forth in this section or when a
public emergency arises where the police resources required for that emergency
are so great that deployment of police services for the parade or public
assembly would have an immediate and adverse effect upon the welfare and safety
of persons or property.
(Ord. 23-09, passed 10-10-2023) Penalty, see §
118.99
§ 118.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any section of this chapter shall be subject
to the penalties set forth in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Nothing provided herein shall be construed to limit the authority or
ability of the town to seek civil injunctions to prohibit violations of this
chapter or any other lawful remedy, in addition to the criminal penalties set
forth in this section.
(Ord. 23-09, passed 10-10-2023)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
General Provisions
   
130.01   Dangerous constructions
   
130.02   Excavations to be covered
   
130.03   Explosives
   
130.04   Unauthorized use of town letterhead
   
130.05   Minors
   
130.06   Anti-noise
   
130.07   Obstruction of view
   
130.08   Offensive business
   
130.09   Offensive premises
   
130.10   Prostitution
   
130.11   Searchlights
   
130.12   Signs and banners
   
130.13   Spitting
   
130.14   Water; flow upon streets prohibited
   
130.15   Loitering
   
130.16   Obstruction of streets, sidewalks or other public grounds; free use of
property from injurious, indecent or offensive acts
   
130.17   Aggressive solicitation
Fireworks
   
130.30   Definitions
   
130.31   Fireworks prohibited; exceptions
   
130.32   Limited use of permissible consumer fireworks
   
130.33   Sale of fireworks
   
130.34   Posting signs by persons engaged in sale
   
130.35   Authority to enforce violations; means of enforcement
   
130.36   Liability for emergency responses related to use
Alcohol
   
130.50   Alcoholic beverages in a motor vehicle
   
130.51   Underage drinking
 
   
130.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 130.01 DANGEROUS CONSTRUCTIONS.
   It is unlawful for any person to maintain or allow any signs, billboards,
awnings and other similar structures over or near streets, sidewalks, public
grounds or places frequented by the public, so situated or constructed as to
endanger the public safety.
(Prior Code, § 11-1-1) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.02 EXCAVATIONS TO BE COVERED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to make any excavation or dig any hole,
drain or ditch in any highway or thoroughfare in the town without providing a
sufficient light at night and a temporary fence or suitable obstruction around
or in front of such excavation to protect the public during the day.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to maintain a well, cellar, pit or other
excavation of more than two feet in depth on any un-enclosed lot, without
substantial curbing, covering or protection of such excavation.
(Prior Code, § 11-1-2) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.03 EXPLOSIVES.
   It is unlawful for any person within the limits of the town to blast or use
powder or other explosives without a permit from the Chief of Police in
writing.
(Prior Code, § 11-1-3) (Ord. 18-11, passed 11-27-2018) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.04 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF TOWN LETTERHEAD.
   It shall be unlawful for anyone to use town letterhead who is not a town
employee engaged in official duties or the Mayor, Vice Mayor or any other
member of the Common Council explicitly authorized by a majority of the Common
Council to submit correspondence on behalf of the Common Council.
(Prior Code, § 11-1-4) (Ord. 12-03, passed - -2012) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.05 MINORS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person 17 years old or under to idle or loiter
upon the streets or public places of the town between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 6:00 a.m. unless such person is accompanied by a parent, guardian or other
person of lawful age having legal custody of such person. It is unlawful for
any parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of such
person to encourage or allow such person to idle or loiter upon the streets or
public places between the hours specified in this section unless accompanied by
such parent or guardian. The provisions of this section shall not apply when
exempted under division (B) below.
   (B)   It is an exemption to a violation under this section that the person
engaged in the prohibited conduct while:
      (1)   Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian;
      (2)   On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop;
      (3)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
      (4)   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home
from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
      (5)   Involved in an emergency;
      (6)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence or abutting the
residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the
Police Department about the minor’s presence;
      (7)   Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization,
or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to
or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school,
religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by
the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor;
      (8)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the
right of assembly; or
      (9)   Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed
in accordance with state law.
(Prior Code, § 11-1-5) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.06 ANTI-NOISE.
   (A)   It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and it is unlawful for
any person, firm or corporation owning or operating or in control of any
restaurant, hotel, dance hall, show, store, residence or any public place, or
area of amusement, entertainment or accommodation, to play or permit to be
played any music or musical instrument whether played by individuals,
orchestra, radio, phonograph, music box, vehicle “boom box” or other mechanical
device or means in such a loud or unusual manner as to be offensive to the
senses, or so as to disturb the slumber, peace and quiet, or otherwise
interfere with or annoy the comfortable enjoyment of life or property of any
person or neighborhood and is no less a nuisance because the extent of the
annoyance inflicted is unequal.
   (B)   It is unlawful to play, operate or use any device known as a sound
truck, loud speaker or sound amplifier, radio or phonograph with loud speaker
or sound amplifier or any instrument of any kind or character which emits loud
and raucous noises and is attached to and upon any vehicle unless such person
in charge of such vehicle shall have first applied to and received permission
from the Chief of Police to operate any such vehicle so equipped.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to create, assist in creating,
permit, continue or permit the continuance of any unreasonably loud, disturbing
or unnecessary noise in the town that produces annoyance, inconvenience,
discomfort or hurt to any person, or to the enjoyment of property or comfort of
any person, or affect the safety, health or morals of the public.
   (D)   It is unlawful for an operator of a diesel-powered motor vehicle
having a load capacity of two tons or more to allow said vehicle to idle for a
period of time in or adjoining a neighborhood within the town limits. This
provision shall not apply to vehicles being repaired, nor to vehicles engaged
in loading or unloading cargo.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a truck or other motor
vehicle in such a manner as to cause the engine to emit additional noise from
its exhaust or muffler system through deceleration or through a practice using
the truck’s or vehicle’s engine as a brake (i.e., unmuffled compression brake),
except in circumstances of emergency for the protection of persons or property.
   (F)   The standard to be adopted in evaluating a violation under this
section shall be that of a “reasonable human” of ordinary sensitivities.
(Prior Code, § 11-1-6) (Ord. 97-06, passed - -1997; Ord. 03-01, passed - -2003)
Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.07 OBSTRUCTION OF VIEW.
   It is unlawful for any person to maintain or allow any tree, hedge,
billboard or other obstruction which prevent persons driving vehicles on public
streets, alleys or highways from obtaining a clear view of traffic when
approaching an intersection or pedestrian crosswalk.
(Prior Code, § 11-1-7) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.08 OFFENSIVE BUSINESS.
   It is unlawful for any person to establish or maintain any slaughterhouse or
make a practice of slaughtering cattle, hogs, sheep or any other kind of
animal, or establish or maintain any soap factory, render tallow or pursue,
maintain or carry on any other business or occupation offensive to the senses
or prejudicial to the public health within the limits of the town.
(Prior Code, § 11-1-8) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.09 OFFENSIVE PREMISES.
   It is unlawful for any person to suffer, or permit any premises belonging to
or occupied by him or her or any cellar, privy, vault, pool, sewer or private
drain therein to become nauseous, foul or offensive to the senses or
prejudicial to the public health or comfort.
(Prior Code, § 11-1-9) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.10 PROSTITUTION.
   It is unlawful for any person to practice prostitution, to patronize a
prostitute or to solicit any person to visit or patronize a prostitute or place
of prostitution.
(Prior Code, § 11-1-10) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.11 SEARCHLIGHTS.
   It is unlawful for any person to operate within the town any incandescent or
arc-type searchlight, beacon light or similar lighting device designed to and
capable of projecting a beam of light into the sky for a distance in excess of
one-half mile unless permission is obtained from the Council. The provisions of
this section shall not apply to emergency searchlights or beacons operated
pursuant to public authority.
(Prior Code, § 11-1-11) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.12 SIGNS AND BANNERS.
   It is unlawful for any person to place any banner or sign upon any
streetlight pole, traffic signal pole or utility pole within the town without
first obtaining authorization from the Council.
(Prior Code, § 11-1-12) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.13 SPITTING.
   It is unlawful for any person to spit upon any of the public sidewalks or
crosswalks in the town or upon any public path, by-way or highway, or in or on
any public ground or park in the town or upon the floor or interior of any
public building in the town.
(Prior Code, § 11-1-13) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.14 WATER; FLOW UPON STREETS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to willfully or negligently permit or
cause the escape or flow of water in such quantity as to cause flooding, or to
impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic, to create a hazardous condition to such
traffic or to cause damage to the public streets of the town.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to willfully or negligently permit or
cause the escape or flow of irrigation water in such quantity as to cause
flooding, to impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic, to create a hazardous
condition to such traffic or to cause damage to the public streets of the town
through the failure or neglect to properly operate or maintain any irrigation
structure, deliver ditch or waste ditch in which said person has a vested right
or interest or through the willful or negligent failure of said person to
accept irrigation water after it has been ordered by him or her.
(Prior Code, § 11-1-14) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.15 LOITERING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to loaf, loiter or congregate upon
any of the rights-of-way in the town so as to obstruct the use of the rights-
of-way.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person who is not properly authorized to
be within any town park, playground or recreational area during the hours of
closure for such premises as established by the town’s Parks and Recreation
Board.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to linger, loiter or otherwise use
for business or social purposes any public room in any place of public
accommodation after such person has been notified by the owner or manager
thereof, or his or her agent, to leave the premises and not return.
(Prior Code, § 11-1-15) (Ord. 96-01, passed - -1996) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.16 OBSTRUCTION OF STREETS, SIDEWALKS OR OTHER PUBLIC GROUNDS; FREE USE OF
PROPERTY FROM INJURIOUS, INDECENT OR OFFENSIVE ACTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct any public street or alley,
sidewalk or park or other public grounds within the town by committing any act
of, or doing anything which is injurious to the health, or indecent or
offensive to the senses, or to do in or upon any such streets, alleys,
sidewalks, parks or other public grounds, any act or thing which is an
obstruction or interference to the free use of any property or with any
business lawfully conducted by anyone, in or upon, or facing or fronting on any
of such streets, alleys, sidewalks, parks or other public grounds in the town.
(Prior Code, § 11-1-16) (Ord. 96-01, passed - -1996) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.17 AGGRESSIVE SOLICITATION.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      AGGRESSIVE MANNER. Either individually or as a group:
         (a)   Intentionally or recklessly making any physical contact with or
touching another person in the course of the solicitation without the person’s
consent; or
         (b)   Approaching or following the person being solicited, if the
conduct is:
            1.   Intended to or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear
imminent bodily harm to oneself or another, or damage to or loss of property,
or the commission of a criminal act upon the person or property in the person’s
possession;
            2.   Intended to or is reasonably likely to intimidate a reasonable
person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation;
            3.   Continuing to solicit within five feet of the person being
solicited after the person has made a negative response to such solicitation;
            4.   Intentionally, knowingly or recklessly obstructing the safe or
free passage of the person being solicited, or requiring the person, or the
driver of a vehicle, to take evasive action to avoid physical contact with the
person making the solicitation. Acts authorized as an exercise of one’s
constitutional right to picket or legally protest, and acts authorized by a
permit issued by the town, shall not constitute obstruction of pedestrian or
vehicular traffic; or
            5.   Intentionally or recklessly using obscene or abusive language
or gestures:
               a.   Intended to or likely to cause a reasonable person to fear
imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon the person or
property in the person’s possession; or
               b.   Intended to or is reasonably likely to intimidate a
reasonable person into responding affirmatively to the solicitation.
      AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE. A device, linked to a financial institution’s
account records, which is able to carry out transactions including, but not
limited to: account transfers; deposits; cash withdrawals; balance inquiries;
and mortgage and loan payments.
      AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE FACILITY. The area comprised of one or more
automated teller machines and any adjacent space which is made available to
banking customers after regular banking hours. It shall be presumed that any
automobile parking space within 25 feet of an automated teller machine is part
of the automated teller machine facility to provide access to bank customers.
      BANK. A bank, credit union or other similar financial institution.
      PUBLIC AREA. An area to which the public or a substantial group of
persons has access and includes, but is not limited to, alleys, bridges,
buildings, driveways, parking lots, parks, playgrounds, plazas, sidewalks and
streets open to the general public, and the doorways and entrances to buildings
and dwellings and the grounds enclosing them.
      PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION VEHICLE. Any vehicle used for the transportation of
passengers on scheduled routes on an individual passenger fare-paying basis.
      SOLICIT.
         (a)   To request an immediate donation of money or other thing of
value from another person, regardless of the solicitor’s purpose or intended
use of the money or other thing of value.
         (b)   The SOLICITATION may be, without limitation, by the spoken,
written or printed word, or by other means of communication.
   (B)   Prohibited acts. It shall be unlawful for any person or group to
solicit money or other things of value or to solicit the sale of goods or
services:
      (1)   In an aggressive manner in a public area;
      (2)   In any public transportation vehicle or from any persons within 15
feet of any transit stop, bus stop, taxi stand, train station platform or the
inside of the train station; except that, the operator of a public
transportation vehicle may request or accept payment of a fare;
      (3)   Within 15 feet of any entrance or exit of any bank or automated
teller machine facility, without the consent of the owner or other person
legally in possession of such facility; or
      (4)   Immediately adjacent to the entrance of a business in a manner that
physically interferes with ingress or egress to that business entrance.
(Ord. 15-03, passed 2-24-2015) Penalty, see §
130.99
FIREWORKS
§ 130.30 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONSUMER FIREWORK. Those fireworks defined by A.R.S. § 36-1601.
   DISPLAY FIREWORK. Those fireworks defined by A.R.S. § 36-1601.
   FIREWORKS. Any combustible or explosive composition, substance or
combination of substances, or any article prepared for the purpose of producing
a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or
detonation, that is a consumer firework, display firework or permissible
consumer firework as defined by A.R.S. § 36-1601.
   NFPA 1124. The national fire protection association code for the
manufacture, transportation, storage and retail sales of fireworks and
pyrotechnic articles as defined by A.R.S. § 36-1601.
   NOVELTY ITEMS. Federally deregulated novelty items that are known as
snappers, snap caps, party poppers, glow worms, snakes, toy smoke devices,
sparklers and certain toys as defined in A.R.S. § 36-1601.
   PERMISSIBLE CONSUMER FIREWORKS. Those fireworks as defined by A.R.S. § 36-
1601 that may be sold within the town even where the use of those items has
been prohibited.
   SUPERVISED PUBLIC DISPLAY. A monitored performance of display fireworks open
to the public and authorized by permit by the Police Chief or his or her
designee.
(Ord. 18-11, passed 11-27-2018)
§ 130.31 FIREWORKS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   The use, discharge or ignition of fireworks within the town is
prohibited on all public property, including, but not limited to, public
buildings, parking lots, public parks, public schools, streets and public
rights-of-way, except as authorized in division (C) below.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the use,
discharge or ignition of novelty items or the occurrence of a supervised public
display of fireworks.
   (C)   Permits may be granted by the town for conducting a properly
supervised public display of fireworks. Every such public display of fireworks
shall be of such character and so located, discharged or fired only after
proper inspection and in a manner that does not endanger persons, animals or
property. A permit shall not be issued, and may be revoked, during time periods
of high fire danger. The town may impose conditions on any permits granted,
including conditions by the Police Chief and the Fire Chief of the fire
district or their designees.
(Ord. 18-11, passed 11-27-2018) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.32 LIMITED USE OF PERMISSIBLE CONSUMER FIREWORKS.
   The use, discharge or ignition of permissible consumer fireworks is
prohibited within the town; except that, permissible consumer fireworks may be
used from June 24 through July 6 of each year and December 24 of each year
through January 3 of the following year, except when a federal or state agency
implements a stage one or higher restriction on these dates.
(Ord. 18-11, passed 11-27-2018) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.33 SALE OF FIREWORKS.
   (A)   No person shall sell or permit or authorize the sale of permissible
consumer fireworks to a person who is under 16 years of age.
   (B)   No person shall sell or permit or authorize the sale of permissible
consumer fireworks in conflict with state law, this code or NFPA 1124.
   (C)   (1)   No person shall sell or permit or authorize the sale of
permissible consumer fireworks, except from May 20 through July 6 of each year
and December 10 of each year through January 3 of the following year.
      (2)   The sale of permissible consumer fireworks shall be prohibited from
May 20 through July 6 of each year and December 10 of each year through January
3 of the following year when a federal or state agency implements a stage one
or higher restriction during these dates.
(Ord. 18-11, passed 11-27-2018) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.34 POSTING SIGNS BY PERSONS ENGAGED IN SALE.
   (A)   (1)   Prior to the sale of permissible consumer fireworks, every
person engaged in such sales shall prominently display signs indicating the
following:
 
State of Arizona Consumer Fireworks Regulations
A.R.S. §§ 36-1601 et seq.
•   The use of permissible consumer fireworks as defined under state law is
allowed: June 24 - July 6 and December 24 - January 3
•   The sale of permissible consumer fireworks as defined under state law is
allowed: May 20 - July 6 and December 10 - January 3
•   All other fireworks are prohibited, except as authorized by local Fire
Department permit
 
      (2)   The sale and use of novelties known as snappers (pop-its), party
poppers, glow worms, snakes, toy smoke devices and sparklers are permitted at
all times. Permissible consumer fireworks may not be sold to persons under 16
years of age. Check with the local Fire Department for additional regulations
and dates before using.
   (B)   Signs required under this section shall be placed at any retail sales
display of permissible consumer fireworks.
   (C)   The sign shall be eight and one-half inches by 11 inches in size, on
cardstock paper, in landscape orientation and displayed on a contrasting
background. A model sign shall be posted on town’s website and filed with the
Clerk’s office.
(Ord. 18-11, passed 11-27-2018)
§ 130.35 AUTHORITY TO ENFORCE VIOLATIONS; MEANS OF ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The town’s Police Chief or designee may issue civil complaints to
enforce violations of this subchapter designated as civil offenses and criminal
complaints to enforce violations of this subchapter designated as criminal
offenses.
   (B)   Any person authorized pursuant to this subchapter to issue a complaint
may also issue a notice of violation specifying actions to be taken and the
time in which they are to be taken to avoid issuance of a complaint.
(Ord. 18-11, passed 11-27-2018)
§ 130.36 LIABILITY FOR EMERGENCY RESPONSES RELATED TO USE.
   (A)   A person who uses, discharges or ignites permissible consumer
fireworks, fireworks or anything that is designed or intended to rise into the
air and explode or to detonate in the air or to fly above the ground, is liable
for the expenses of any emergency response that is required by such use,
discharge or ignition. The fact that a person is convicted or found responsible
for a violation(s) of this subchapter is prima facie evidence of liability.
   (B)   The expenses of an emergency response are a charge against the person
liable for those expenses. The charge constitutes a debt of that person and may
be collected proportionately by the public agencies, for-profit entities or
not-for-profit entities that incurred the expenses. The person’s liability for
the expense of an emergency response shall not exceed $10,000 for a single
incident. The liability imposed under this division (B) is in addition to and
not in limitation of any other liability that may be imposed by law.
   (C)   The Town Attorney may commence legal action to enforce this section.
   (D)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      EXPENSES OF AN EMERGENCY RESPONSE. Reasonable costs directly incurred by
public agencies, for-profit entities or not-for-profit entities that make an
appropriate emergency response to an incident.
      REASONABLE COSTS. Includes the costs of providing police, firefighting,
rescue and emergency medical services at the scene of an incident and the
salaries of the persons who respond to the incident.
(Ord. 18-11, passed 11-27-2018) Penalty, see §
130.99
ALCOHOL
§ 130.50 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN A MOTOR VEHICLE.
   (A)   No person shall drink any alcoholic beverage while in a motor vehicle
upon a street or highway within the town limits.
   (B)   No person shall have in his or her possession on his or her person,
while driving a motor vehicle upon a street or highway within the town limits,
any bottle, can, or other receptacle containing alcoholic beverages which has
been opened, or the seal broken or the contents of which have been partially
removed.
   (C)   No person shall have in his or her possession, while in a motor
vehicle upon a street or a highway within the town limits, any bottle, can, or
other receptacle, containing any alcoholic beverage which has been opened, or
the seal broken or the contents of which have been partially removed.
   (D)   It is unlawful for the registered owner of any motor vehicle, or the
driver if the registered owner is not then present in the vehicle, when such
vehicle is upon a street or highway within the town limits, of have any bottle,
can, or other receptacle containing any alcoholic beverage which has been
opened, or the seal broken or the contents of which have been removed, unless
such container is kept in the trunk of the vehicle, or kept in some other area
of the vehicle not normally occupied by the driver or passengers, if the
vehicle is not equipped with a trunk. A utility compartment or glove
compartment shall be deemed to be within the area occupied by the driver and
passengers.
(Prior Code, § 11-3) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.51 UNDERAGE DRINKING.
   (A)   Definition. SPIRITUOUS LIQUOR has the same meaning as defined in
A.R.S. Title 4.
(Prior Code, § 11-6-1)
   (B)   Permitting or encouraging underage drinking. No person of legal
drinking age in the state shall knowingly permit or fail to take reasonable
action to prevent the consumption of spirituous liquor by an underage person on
premises owned by the person or under the person’s control. This section does
not apply to spirituous liquor used exclusively as part of a religious service.
(Prior Code, § 11-6-2) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Violation of §
130.04 of this chapter is a Class 1 misdemeanor as defined by Arizona Revised
Statutes and subject to the penalties prescribed therefor by Arizona Revised
Statutes.
(Prior Code, § 11-1-4)
   (C)   Any person found guilty of violating any provision of §
130.17 of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,500 or by imprisonment
for a period not to exceed six months, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each
day that a violation continues shall be a separate offense punishable as herein
described.
   (D)   (1)   Unless otherwise provided above, any person found in violation
of any provision of §§
130.30 through
130.36 of this chapter shall be responsible under §
10.99 of this code of ordinances for a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not to exceed $2,500 or by imprisonment
for a period not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate offense punishable as
hereinabove described.
      (2)   Failure to comply with any permit requirements, per §
130.31 of this chapter, is a civil offense punishable by a fine of $1,000 for
each violation.
      (3)   Failure to comply with §
130.34 of this chapter is a civil offense punishable by a fine of $1,000 for
each violation.
   (E)   A person who violates §
130.51 is guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 11-1-15)
(Ord. 12-03, passed - -2012; Ord. 15-03, passed 2-24-2015; Ord. 18-11, passed
11-27-2018)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
      
151.   STREET NUMBERING
      
152.   RIGHTS-OF-WAY
      
153.   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
      
154.   SUBDIVISIONS
      
155.   ZONING
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
Section
General Provisions
   
150.01   Building Official
   
150.02   Building permits; fees; posting
   
150.03   Addendums and alternatives to the technical codes
Codes Adopted
   
150.15   Building Code
   
150.16   Electrical Code
   
150.17   Mechanical Code
   
150.18   Plumbing Code
   
150.19   Fire Code
   
150.20   Existing Buildings Code
   
150.21   International Residential Code
   
150.22   Fuel Gas Code
   
150.23   Property Maintenance Code
   
150.24   Swimming Pool and Spa Code
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.01 BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   The Building Official and administrative authority, as such may be
referenced in any section of this chapter for all matters pertaining to any
building, plumbing, electrical or any other inspections, shall be vested in the
office of the Manager; provided that, the Council may authorize such deputies
as needed to perform any inspection work or other functions that may be
required by this chapter.
(Prior Code, Art. 7-7)
§ 150.02 BUILDING PERMIT; FEES; POSTING.
   A building permit must be applied for and issued by the Building Safety
Department prior to constructing any commercial or residential improvement,
addition, renovation or accessory structure/building which is greater than 120
square feet or that is not currently exempted from the permitting requirements
of those code adopted within this chapter.
(Prior Code, Art. 7-8) (Ord. 90-13, passed - -1990; Ord. 06-09, passed - -2006)
§ 150.03 ADDENDUMS AND ALTERNATIVES TO THE TECHNICAL CODES.
   (A)   Adoption of Technical Codes. Those certain documents, on file in the
office of the Town Clerk, being marked and designated as the Technical Codes
including the identified Appendices and amendments, as published by the
International Code Council, be and are hereby adopted as the Technical Codes of
the town for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all
property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied
utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to
ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use and
the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use
and the demolition of such structures as herein provided; providing for the
issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the
regulation, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Technical Code
on file in the town are hereby adopted and made a part hereof, as fully set out
in this section, with the additions, insertion, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in division (C) below.
   (B)   Amendments shall be as follows: the following amendments, additions,
and deletions are hereby made to the Technical Codes as adopted in §§
150.15 et seq. Paragraphs and section numbers refer to the applicable Technical
Code numbering system. Code references not amended in this section shall be
enforced as published in the reference document.
      (1)   Insert the words “Town of Quartzsite” as the “name of the
jurisdiction” Section 101 of the publications as adopted in §§
150.15 et seq.
      (2)   Amend all sections referencing “Fire prevention” in the
publications adopted in §§
150.15 et seq. to read as follows: “The provisions of the current adopted fire
code shall apply to matters affecting or relating to structures, processes and
premises from the hazard of fire and explosion arising from the storage,
handling, or use of structures, materials or devices; from conditions hazardous
to life, property or public welfare in the occupancy of structures or premises;
and from the construction, extension, repair, alteration or removal of fire
suppression, automatic sprinkler systems and alarm systems or fire hazards in
the structure or on the premises from occupancy or operation.”
      (3)   Amend all sections referencing “Creation of enforcement agency” in
the publications adopted in §§
150.15 et seq. to read as follows: “The Community Development Department,
Building Safety Division is hereby created and the official in charge thereof
shall be known as the building official.”
      (4)   Amend all sections referencing “Flood hazard areas” in the
publications adopted in §§
150.15 et seq. specifying the adopted Town Flood Damage Prevention ordinance.
      (5)   Amend all sections referencing “Design flood elevations” in the
publications adopted in §§
150.15 et seq. specifying the adopted Town Flood Damage Prevention ordinance.
      (6)   Amend all sections referencing “Work commencing before permit
issuance” in the publications adopted in §§
150.15 et seq. by adding to end of section, “An investigation fee, in addition
to the permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is then or
subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be determined by the building
official, based on the circumstances, nature, and severity of the infraction.
The minimum investigation fee shall be $50.00, and the maximum shall be an
amount up to the same as the fee set forth in Table 1-A.”
      (7)   Amend all sections referencing “Refunds or Fee Refunds” in the
publications adopted in §§
150.15 et seq. to read as follows:
         “The building official shall authorize the refunding of fees as
follows:
            a.   The full amount of any fee paid hereunder that was erroneously
paid or collected.
            b.   Not more than 80 percent of the permit fee paid when no work
has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code.
            c.   Not more than 80 percent of the plan review fee paid when an
application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn
or canceled before any plan review effort has been expended.
         The building official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee
paid except upon written application filed by the original permittee not later
than 180 days after the date of fee payment.”
      (8)   Amend all sections referencing “Board of Appeals” in the
publications adopted in §§
150.15 et seq., delete in its entirety and replace as follows: “A person shall
have the right to appeal a decision of the Code Official pursuant to Town Code
§
92.07 administrative appeals Code of Ordinances.”
      (9)   Amend all sections referencing “Violation penalties” in the
publications adopted in §§
150.15 et seq. to read as follows: “Any person who violates a provision of this
code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects,
constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the
approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a
permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be
subject to the penalty and fine described in this ordinance.”
      (10)   Amend all sections referencing “Unlawful continuance” in the
publications adopted in §§
150.15 et seq. to read as follows: “Any person who shall continue any work
after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that
person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall
be subject to the penalty and fine described in this ordinance.”
(Ord. 23-06, passed 10-10-2023)
CODES ADOPTED
§ 150.15 BUILDING CODE.
   (A)   Adoption of International Building Code.
      (1)   A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office
of the Town Clerk, being marked and designated as the International Building
Code 2018 edition, including Appendices C, I and J, as published by the
International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Building Code of
the town for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all
property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied
utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to
ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use and
the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use
and the demolition of such structures as herein provided; providing for the
issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the
regulation, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Building Code
on file in the town are hereby, adopted and made a part hereof, as fully set
out in this section, with the additions, insertion, deletions and changes, if
any, prescribed in division (A)(2) below.
      (2)   The following sections are hereby revised:
         (a)   Section 101.1. Insert: Town of Quartzsite;
         (b)   Section 1612.3. Insert: Town of Quartzsite;
         (c)   Section 1612.3. Insert: March 10, 2005; and
         (d)   Section 3410.2. Insert: March 10, 2005.
   (B)   Conformance with Zoning Ordinance. Whenever a building permit is
issued to any person or entity and a building inspection performed, such
building must conform to the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance of the town in
addition to the provisions of this section.
   (C)   Adoption of construction standards. The certain document known as
“Town of Quartzsite Construction Standards” is hereby adopted and made a part
of this chapter the same as though said document were specifically set forth in
full herein and at least three copies of the said document shall be filed in
the office of the Clerk and kept available for public use and inspection.
(Prior Code, Art. 7-1) (Res. 90-01, passed - -1990; Ord. 90-01, passed - -1990;
Ord. 97-02, passed - -1997; Ord. 97-07, passed - -1997; Ord. 98-02, passed - -
1998; Ord. 02-07, passed - -2002; Ord. 05-04, passed - -2005; Ord. 09-30,
passed - -2009; Ord. 23-06, passed 10-10-2023)
§ 150.16 ELECTRICAL CODE.
   A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Town Clerk, being marked and designated as the “National Electrical Code”
published by the National Fire Protection Association, be and is hereby adopted
as the Electrical Code of the town, for regulating the design, construction
quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location,
relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of electric conductors
and equipment within or on public and private buildings or other structures,
including mobile homes, recreational vehicle and floating building; and other
premises such as yards, carnival, parking and other lots, and industrial
substations, conductors and equipment on the premises, and optical fiber cable
in the town; providing issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore;
and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such
National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition, published by the National Fire
Protection Association, on file in the office of the town are hereby referred
to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this section.
(Prior Code, Art. 7-2) (Res. 90-02, passed - -1990; Ord. 90-02, passed - -1990;
Ord. 97-10, passed - -1997; Ord. 05-01, passed - -2005; Ord. 09-33, passed - -
2009; Ord. 23-06, passed 10-10-2023)
§ 150.17 MECHANICAL CODE.
   (A)   A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of
the Town Clerk, being marked and designated as the International Mechanical
Code, 2018 Edition, including Appendix A, as published by the International
Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Mechanical Code of the town,
regulating and governing the design, construction, quality of material,
erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement,
addition to, use or maintenance of mechanical systems as herein provided;
providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and
each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of
said Mechanical Code on file in the office of the town are hereby referred to
adopted, and make a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with the
additions, insertions, deletions and changes if any prescribed in division (B)
below.
   (B)   The following sections are hereby revised:
      (1)   Section 101.1. Insert: Town of Quartzsite;
      (2)   Section 106.5.2 Insert: Adopted by ordinance; and
      (3)   Section 108.4. insert: Misdemeanor, Two thousand five hundred
($2500.00), six months.
(Prior Code, Art. 7-3) (Ord. 90-04, passed - -1990; Res. 90-04, passed - -1990;
Ord. 97-09, passed - -1997; Res. 05-03, passed - -2005; Ord. 09-32, passed - -
2009; Ord. 23-06, passed 10-10-2023)
§ 150.18 PLUMBING CODE.
   (A)   (1)   A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the
office of the Town Clerk, being marked and designated as the International
Plumbing Code, 2018 edition, including Appendices C and E as published by the
International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Plumbing Code of
the town, regulating and governing the design construction, quality of
material, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation,
replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of mechanical systems as herein
provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees
therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said Plumbing Code on file in the office of the town
are hereby referred to adopted, and make a part hereof, as if fully set out in
this ordinance, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes if any
prescribed in division (A)(2) below.
      (2)   The following sections are hereby revised:
         (a)   Section 101.1. Insert: Town of Quartzsite;
         (b)   Section 106.5.2 Insert: Adopted by ordinance;
         (c)   Section 108.4. Insert: Misdemeanor, Two thousand five hundred
($2500.00) six months;
         (d)   Section 305.6.1 Insert: 12, 12; and
         (e)   Section 904.1. Insert: 12.
(Prior Code, Art. 7-4)
   (B)   The International Plumbing Code (IPC), 2018 Edition, Chapter 10 Traps,
Interceptors and Separators. Sections 1005 and 1006 are amended to read as
follows:
      (1)   Section 1005, Maintenance, is added to Chapter 10 Traps,
Interceptors and Separators, as follows:
SECTION 1005 MAINTENANCE
1005.1 Cleaning and maintenance.
Cleaning and maintenance shall be performed when the:
1.   Total volume of captured fats, oil, grease and solids displaces more than
25 percent of the total volume of the interceptor or separator.
2.   pH of a sample taken from the interceptor effluent is below 5.0.
3.   Odor becomes a health issue or nuisance.
4.   Town determines a cleaning is necessary.
1005.1.1 Immediate action required.
When atmospheric hydrogen sulfide levels are “Immediately Dangerous to Life and
Health” (Occupational, Safety and Health Administration level of 100 ppm or
above), immediate action shall be taken to return hydrogen sulfide to safe
levels. If the hydrogen sulfide level cannot be immediately resolved, all use
of the interceptor shall cease until the level becomes safe.
1005.2 Maintenance logs.
All interceptors and separators shall be maintained by the facility in
efficient operating condition at all times. Written logs of all cleaning,
repair, calibration, and maintenance shall be maintained at the facility for a
minimum of three (3) years. The town shall have access to such logs upon
request.
1005.3 Maintenance inspection.
All interceptors and separators are subject to town inspection.
1005.4 Skimming.
Skimming, decanting or discharging removed waste or wastewater back into any
interceptor and separator, or into any part of the wastewater collection
system, is strictly prohibited.
1005.5 Complete cleaning frequency.
All fats, oil, grease and sand interceptors with a capacities greater than
100gpm/200 pounds shall be completely cleaned at least once every 90 calendar
days. Interceptors with a capacity of 100gpm/200 pounds or less shall be
completely cleaned at least once every 30 calendar days. Interceptors shall be
cleaned more frequently when necessary or required by the town. Complete
cleaning shall be by a licensed contractor.
Exception: A person owning or operating an interceptor with a capacity no
larger than 50gpm/100 pounds may petition the town utilities department, in
writing, to modify the 30-day cleaning schedule. If approved, the maximum
cleaning frequency shall not be greater than 90 days.
Documentation of the interceptor is required before granting any modification.
The cleaning frequency modification shall be revoked if an inspection indicates
that the interceptor has fallen out of compliance.
1005.6 Self-cleaning operator.
Facilities with interceptors (traps) with capacities shown in Table 1003.3.4.1
may request approval as an interceptor self-cleaning operator. Self-cleaning
shall not be done before approval. Approved self-cleaning operators shall:
1.   Use approved on-site material disposal methods.
2.   Place interceptor waste in a leak-proof, sealable container.
3.   Maintain detailed logs with the following information:
a.      Dates of cleaning, not less than every thirty (30) days;
b.   Amount of fats, oil and grease (in gallons) removed and disposed of;
c.      Waste disposal method used;
d.   Certification that the interceptor was completely cleaned, and all parts
were in operable condition; and
e.      Name and signature of the person doing the cleaning.
1005.7 Self-cleaning operator revocation.
Self-cleaning operator approval shall be revoked if an inspection indicates
that the self-cleaning operator is not in compliance with this section. Upon
revocation, the facility shall contract with a La Paz County-licensed hauler to
immediately clean out the interceptor and bring it into compliance with this
chapter.
1005.8 Periodic inspection.
All interceptors and separators are subject to town inspections.
      (2)   Section 1006, Enforcement, is added to Chapter 10 Traps,
Interceptors and Separators, as follows:
SECTION 1006 ENFORCEMENT
1006.1 Discharge permit.
The town may require a discharge permit to supplement enforcement of this code
and other town codes, policies and regulations.
1006.2 Minimization program.
All facilities required to install an interceptor or separator shall use best
management practices on a daily basis to minimize the discharge of fats, oil,
grease and solids entering the interceptor or separator and the town sewer
system.
1006.3 Training.
All facilities required to have an interceptor or separator shall train
employees in maintaining the interceptor and separator to minimize the
discharge of fats, oil, grease and solids entering the interceptor or separator
and the town sewer system.
1006.4 Special enforcement action.
1.   The following facilities are subject to special enforcement action:
a.      A facility where an interceptor or separator has more than one (1)
violation in a 90-day period.
b.   A facility that causes multiple problems in the town sewer system.
c.      A facility that causes an obstruction of a town sewer because of an
overburdened or poorly maintained interceptor.
2.   The special enforcement action may result in:
a.      Penalties under this code and other chapters of the Quartzsite Revised
Code.
b.   Town or other corrective action and associated costs.
c.      Discontinued sewer service.
d.   Other remedies as provided by law.
1006.5 Owner responsible.
If the town cleans up a sanitary sewer overflow caused by a blockage on private
property, the property owner is responsible for the cost of the cleanup.
1006.6 Repairs or replacements.
When repairs or replacements are necessary to an interceptor or separator, all
repairs or replacements shall be completed within the time frame stated on the
notice to comply. The town may authorize a time extension, not to exceed 30
days, for justifiable cause.
(Ord. 90-03, passed - -1990; Res. 90-03, passed - -1990; Ord. 97-08, passed - -
1997; Ord. 05-06, passed - -2005; Ord. 09-35, passed - -2009; Ord. 20-03,
passed 1-28-2020; Ord. 23-06, passed 10-10-2023)
§ 150.19 FIRE CODE.
   The certain code, entitled 2018 Edition of the International Fire Code,
including Appendices B, C, D, E, F, G and I, copyrighted by the International
Code Council is hereby adopted as the Fire Code of the town and made a part of
this section the same as though said code was specifically set forth in full
herein; and at least three copies of said code shall be filed in the office of
the Town Clerk and kept available for public use and inspection.
(Prior Code, Art. 7-5) (Ord. 03-04, passed - -2003; Res. 06-06, passed - -2006;
Ord. 23-06, passed 10-10-2023)
§ 150.20 EXISTING BUILDINGS CODE.
   The certain documents, three copies of which are on file in the office of
the Town Clerk, being marked and designated as the Existing Buildings Code,
2018 edition, published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby
adopted as the code for the abatement of dangerous buildings of the town for
the purpose of providing a just, equitable and practicable method, to be
cumulative with and in addition to, any other remedy provided by the Uniform
Building Code or otherwise available at law, whereby buildings or structures
which from any cause endanger the life, limb, health, morals, property, safety
or welfare of the general public or their occupants may be required to be
repaired, vacated or demolished, this code shall apply to all dangerous
buildings, as defined by the code, which are now in existence or which may
hereafter become dangerous in the town.
(Prior Code, Art. 7-6) (Ord. 90-06, passed - -1990; Res. 90-06, passed - -1990;
Ord. 97-11, passed - -1997; Ord. 23-06, passed 10-10-2023)
§ 150.21 INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE.
   (A)   A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of
the Town Clerk, being marked and designated as the International Residential
Code, 2018 edition, including Appendices G, H, P and Q, as published by the
International Code Council, be and is here by adopted as the Residential Code
of the town, for regulating and governing the construction, alteration,
movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, location, removal and
demolition of detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family
dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories in height with separate
means of egress as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and
collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of said Residential Code on file in the office
of the town are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully
set out in this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes,
if any, prescribed in division (B) below.
   (B)   The following sections are hereby revised:
      (1)   Section R101.1 Insert: Town of Quartzsite;
      (2)   Table R301.2 (1) insert:
Ground Snow Load                 Zero
Wind Speed                       90
Seismic Design Category          C
Weathering                       Negligible
Frost Line Depth                 12”
Termite                          Moderate to Heavy
Decay                            None
Winter Design Temp               39 Degrees
Ice Shield Underlayment Required No
Flood Hazards                    FEMA Firm Map
Air Freezing Index               0
Mean Annual Temp                 73 Degrees
 
      (3)   Section P2603.6.1 Insert: 12”, 12”; and
      (4)   Section P3103.1 Insert: 12”, 6”.
(Prior Code, § 7-9) (Ord. 05-02, passed - -2005; Ord. 09-34, passed - -2009;
Ord. 23-06, passed 10-10-2023)
§ 150.22 FUEL GAS CODE.
   (A)   (1)   A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the
office of the Town Clerk, being marked and designated as the International Fuel
Gas Code, 2018 edition, including Appendices A and B, as published by the
International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Fuel Gas Code of
the town, regulating and governing the design construction, quality of
material, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation,
replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of mechanical systems as herein
provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees
therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said Fuel Gas Code be on file in the office of the town
are hereby referred to adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in
this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes if any
prescribed in division (A)(2) below.
      (2)   The following sections are hereby revised:
         (a)   Section 101.1. Insert: Town of Quartzsite;
         (b)   Section 106.5.2 Insert: Adopted by resolution; and
         (c)   Section 108.4. Insert: Misdemeanor, Two thousand five hundred
($2500.00), six months.
   (B)   The Building Official or his or her designee(s) shall review all plans
for any improvement prior to the issuing of a building permit and shall collect
a fee for such permit prior to its issuance. The building permit fees shall be
computed according to a schedule to be adopted by resolution and reviewed
periodically by the Council and do not include any engineering or development
fees.
   (C)   Once a building permit has been applied for and obtained, the building
permit card must be posted in a conspicuous location on site prior to the
commencement of work. The building permit card must be posted on the job site
so that it can be found.
   (D)   Work being done with a permit, but with the permit card not posted,
may result in additional inspection fees on an hourly basis being charged to
the permit holder.
   (E)   All work must be inspected by the Building Inspector. Failure to call
for required inspections may result in a fee being assessed on an hourly basis.
(Prior Code, Art. 7-10) (Ord. 05-05, passed - -2005; Ord. 09-31, passed - -
2009; Ord. 23-06, passed 10-10-2023)
§ 150.23 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.
   A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Town Clerk, being marked and designated as the International Property
Maintenance Code, 2018 Edition including Appendix A as published by the
International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Property
Maintenance Code of the Town, with the additions, insertions, deletions and
changes, if any, as adopted by the town.
(Ord. 23-06, passed 10-10-2023)
§ 150.24 SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE.
   A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Town Clerk, being marked and designated as the International Swimming Pool and
Spa Code, 2018 Edition as published by the International Code Council, be and
is hereby adopted as the Swimming Pool and Spa Code of the town.
(Ord. 23-06, passed 10-10-2023)
CHAPTER 151: STREET NUMBERING
Section
   
151.01   Definitions
   
151.02   Addresses required
   
151.03   Lighted numbers
   
151.04   Additional information
   
151.05   Numbers on unimproved lots
   
151.06   Administration
   
151.07   911 emergency street maps
   
151.08   Compliance
 
   
151.99   Penalty
§ 151.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADDRESS. The numbers assigned to a particular lot or parcel of land under
the 911 Emergency Response System, which is the public record filed with the
Town Clerk entitled “911 Emergency Street Maps”.
   DIRECTOR. The director appointed by the Mayor and Council to be responsible
for administration of this system in the town.
   OWNER. The individual, partnership, corporation or other legal entity
holding legal title to a lot or parcel in the town.
(Prior Code, § 18-1-1)
§ 151.02 ADDRESSES REQUIRED.
   Every owner of any house or building located on an improved lot or parcel in
the incorporated area of the town is hereby required, within 120 days after
receiving notice of the assignment of an address by the town to place the
designated address on such house or building, or on another secure structure in
the front yard or driveway of the improved lot or parcel. Addresses shall be
displayed in a conspicuous location, so that the number is discernible and
readable from a publicly accessible street or road. Numbers shall be at least
three and one-half inches high, at least two inches wide with a line width of
at least eight-tenths inch. Addresses shall be posted using durable materials
and contrasting shades or colors to facilitate visibility.
(Prior Code, § 18-1-2)
§ 151.03 LIGHTED NUMBERS.
   Internally or externally lighted numbers may be utilized. However, no such
lighted number shall violate applicable provisions of the town’s Zoning
Ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 18-1-3)
§ 151.04 ADDITIONAL INFORMATION.
   Additional directional or identification information may be placed with
addresses. No such additional information shall violate applicable provisions
of the zoning ordinances of the town as they currently exist or as amended.
(Prior Code, § 18-1-4)
§ 151.05 NUMBERS ON UNIMPROVED LOTS.
   Addresses may also be placed on premises not occupied by houses or
buildings. However, owners are not required to place addresses on unimproved
lots or parcels. The town encourages the placement of such additional addresses
in order to improve emergency and delivery services throughout the town.
(Prior Code, § 18-1-5)
§ 151.06 ADMINISTRATION.
   The Director shall be responsible for informing owners of addresses
applicable to their property and of the requirements of this chapter. The
Director shall also be responsible for informing owners and the 911 emergency
response system when addresses are altered or reassigned. The Director shall
institute a program to advise owners who fail or refuse to display the address
on an improved lot or parcel of the need to comply and to warn such owners that
citations may be issued if the correct address is not displayed in the manner
required by this chapter within 30 days after written notice of the warning.
(Prior Code, § 18-1-6)
§ 151.07 911 EMERGENCY STREET MAPS.
   The certain document known as “911 Emergency Street Maps”, three copies of
which are on file in the office of the Town Clerk, which document was made a
public record by Res. 95-05 is hereby referred to, and adopted and made a part
hereof as if fully set out in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 18-1-7)
§ 151.08 COMPLIANCE.
   Any owner who fails or refuses to display an address in accordance with this
chapter shall be provided written notice and a warning to comply within 30
days.
(Prior Code, § 18-1-8)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $25 per day. Each
day a violation continues shall be a separate offense punishable as hereinabove
described, but not to exceed four days.
(Prior Code, § 18-1-8)
CHAPTER 152: RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Section
General Provisions
   
152.01   Permit required; exceptions
   
152.02   Permit application
   
152.03   Traffic-control
   
152.04   Location and relocation of facilities in the public right-of-way
   
152.05   Damage to right-of-way and facilities; pavement restoration
   
152.06   Bond
   
152.07   Insurance
   
152.08   Liability
   
152.09   Fees
   
152.10   Work begun without permit
   
152.11   Emergencies
   
152.12   Sight visibility
   
152.13   Wireless facilities in the right-of-way
   
152.14   Microcell equipment in the right-of-way
Managing Public Trees
   
152.30   Definitions
   
152.31   Authority and power
   
152.32   Tree planting and care standards
   
152.33   Prohibition against harming public trees
   
152.34   Adjacent owner responsibility
   
152.35   Certain trees declared a nuisance
 
   
152.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.01 PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      DIRECTOR. The Director of the Public Works Department.
      PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. Right-of-way dedicated to the public for roadway or
other public purpose.
      TOWN STANDARDS. Ordinances and codes of the town, specifications adopted
by the town, and, for wireless communications facilities in the right-of-way,
the standard terms and conditions and design standards adopted pursuant to §
152.03 of this chapter.
      WIRELESS FACILITY. The same meaning as in the standard terms and
conditions adopted pursuant to §
152.13 of this code.
   (B)   Permit required. It is unlawful for any person to work, build,
construct, reconstruct, repair, alter or grade, including the placement of any
structures, including utility lines and poles, telecommunications facilities,
pipelines, signs and plantings, within the public rights-of-way or within a
public utility easement of the town without first obtaining a permit from the
town, obtaining approval for the planned work and having the work supervised
and inspected by the town.
   (C)   Exceptions.
      (1)   (a)   Plantings by residents of property abutting the right-of-way
are exempt from this permit requirement so long as such planting:
            1.   Does not interfere with travel on the public street or the
visibility of traffic signs;
            2.   Is on that portion of the right-of-way abutting the resident’s
property; and
            3.   Is more than 25 feet from an intersection.
         (b)   The town shall immediately remove any plantings in the right-of-
way if the Town Engineer determines that the requirements of this division (B)
(1) are not met. The town shall have no obligations to provide reimbursement
for the plantings removed.
      (2)   Utilities which have been granted franchises to utilize public
streets and other public areas in the town are exempt from the permit fees
specified in §
152.09 of this chapter.
   (D)   If the structure is a wireless facility, it shall comply with the
requirements of §
152.13 of this chapter, including the requirement to obtain a master license
prior to issuance of a permit.
(Prior Code, § 19-1-1) (Ord. 01-11, passed - -2001; Ord. 21-04, passed 5-11-
2021)
§ 152.02 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   An applicant for a permit hereunder shall file with the town an application
showing:
   (A)   The name, address and license number of the party doing the work;
   (B)   The location of the work area;
   (C)   Plans (attached to the application) showing details of the proposed
work. Said plans shall be prepared and sealed by an engineer duly registered
and licensed in the state unless this requirement is waived in writing by the
town;
   (D)   The estimated cost of alteration;
   (E)   A traffic-control plan in accordance with §
152.03 of this chapter;
   (F)   For wireless facilities, all information required in the standard
terms and conditions for wireless facilities in the right-of-way adopted
pursuant to §
152.13 of this chapter; and
   (G)   Such other information as the Director shall find reasonably necessary
to determine whether a permit should be issued hereunder.
(Prior Code, § 19-1-2) (Ord. 01-11, passed - -2001; Ord. 21-04, passed 5-11-
2021)
§ 152.03 TRAFFIC-CONTROL.
   (A)   Traffic-control plans. A permittee shall submit a traffic-control plan
application to the Public Works Department at least two business days prior to
the proposed start date of construction activities. The traffic-control plan
application shall include a traffic-control plan. The traffic-control plan
shall be designed and submitted by a traffic-control designer. No work in the
public right-of-way shall commence until the Director has approved the traffic-
control plan. The Director may waive the requirement for a traffic-control plan
if he or she determines that the extent of the work will not affect traffic
flow.
   (B)   Traffic-control manual. The town designates the Manual of Traffic-
Control Devices (2009 Edition) as a public record and hereby adopts the Manual
of Traffic-Control Devices (2009 Edition), three copies of which are on file in
the Town Clerk’s office as the town’s official traffic-control manual for
construction work zones with the following changes:
      (1)   Arrow boards are required for all lane closures on arterial
streets; and
      (2)   A permittee shall hire a uniformed off-duty police officer to be
present when construction activities take place within 300 feet of a signalized
intersection or if required by the Director. Permittees must arrange for a
police officer five calendar days in advance of planned construction
activities.
(Ord. 21-04, passed 3-11-2021)
§ 152.04 LOCATION AND RELOCATION OF FACILITIES IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   (A)   General. If the work to be performed in a public right-of-way involves
the installation, construction, erection, replacement or relocation of any
facilities, a permit shall be obtained from the Public Works Department. Such
permit shall be issued on such conditions as are reasonable and necessary to
ensure compliance with the terms and conditions of town standards. The
application shall include all information required in §
152.02 of this chapter. Each permittee is responsible for ensuring that its
facilities are installed, constructed and maintained in strict accordance with
town standards; that all required licenses, franchises and other permits are
applied for and obtained before any work commences; and that the terms and
conditions thereof are strictly followed. Where a facility is used by more than
one permittee, each permittee is fully responsible for ensuring that all
requirements are satisfied. Facilities shall be installed, constructed and
maintained so that no additional provision of this code, the Zoning Code or the
Subdivision Code, or the provisions of any license, permit, or franchise issued
by town shall be violated. This shall require, at a minimum, compliance with
the provisions of this section.
   (B)   Joint use of trenches. In order to minimize degradation of streets,
traffic impacts and other interference with the use of public right-of-ways,
work shall be coordinated so that to the greatest extent possible, consistent
with economic feasibility, joint trenching is utilized. The Public Works
Department shall adopt rules to facilitate joint trenching in the public right-
of-ways.
   (C)   Traffic safety. The facilities to be constructed, installed, operated,
and maintained by the permittee shall be so located or relocated as to
interfere as little as possible with traffic or other authorized uses over,
under, or through the right-of-way. Those phases of construction relating to
traffic-control, backfilling, compaction, and paving, as well as the location
or relocation of said facilities shall be subject to regulation by the Council.
   (D)   Records. The permittee shall keep accurate records of the location of
all facilities in the right-of-way and furnish them to the town upon request or
at such periodic intervals as the town may require. In order for the town to
regulate users in the right-of-way, upon completion of new or relocation
construction of underground facilities in the right-of-way, the permittee shall
provide the town with the location of the underground and aboveground
facilities in a format compatible with the current town mapping format.
   (E)   Landscaping. Landscaping, whether in the public rights-of-way or on
private property, which is damaged by a permittee shall be restored to its
condition as it existed prior to the work. A permittee shall exercise special
care when working near established trees or shrubs. If established trees or
shrubs die within six months of completion of work by a permittee, it is
presumed that the permittee caused such damage if the work performed was in the
location of the roots of such tree or shrub.
   (F)   Town’s facilities. The installation, use and maintenance of the
permittee’s facilities within the right-of-way authorized herein shall be in
such a manner as not to interfere with placement, construction, use, and
maintenance of public rights-of-way, street lighting, water pipes, drains,
sewers, traffic signal systems, or other utility systems that have been, or may
be, installed, maintained, used or authorized by the town. Upon the town’s
request, the permittee’s facilities will be relocated at permittee’s expense
(unless state law expressly requires otherwise). Upon the town’s request, by a
time specified by the town, if the permittee fails to move its facilities, the
town may do so and will bill the permittee the costs therefor and the permittee
shall pay those costs within 30 days after its receipt of the invoice therefor.
Further, the permittee shall reimburse the town any additional cost the town
incurs due to the location or relocation of the permittee’s facilities,
including all design and construction costs.
   (G)   Interference. The permittee shall not install, maintain, or use any of
its facilities in such a manner as to damage or interfere with facilities of
another located within the right-of-way.
   (H)   Location and maintenance of aboveground facilities. The location of
aboveground facilities, such as boxes, cabinets and similar equipment or
appurtenances, require the approval of the town prior to installation. The
permit shall set forth the location of such aboveground facilities. If the
Director determines that a proposed location would impair traffic visibility or
visibility of existing signage or would substantially harm existing
landscaping, or that similar conditions exist which would justify a denial of a
permit in that location, the permit shall be denied. Aboveground facilities
shall be maintained in good condition. If the town finds any of permittee’s
aboveground facilities are not maintained in good condition, permittee shall
correct such condition within three business days of receiving notice from the
town.
   (I)   Plans. All facilities shall be installed per plans prepared by a
registered professional engineer. All plans shall be approved by the town
before the work commences. A permittee may install facilities on existing
utility poles or in existing conduit where permission is granted by owner of
the utility pole or conduit, and such permission is verified by the town except
where those same poles are scheduled to be replaced with buried facilities. The
town may require the permittee to prove that it has such permission from the
owner to use the owner’s facilities. No new poles, or longer poles, will be
permitted in the public right-of-ways for any new facilities except where
otherwise required or permitted by law. If permittee installs facilities on
existing poles as provided herein, the permittee shall bury or remove its
facilities if such poles are removed and not replaced in kind for any reason.
If the permittee makes use of existing conduit of another person, the permittee
shall be subject to the provisions of this section in the use of such conduit
in the public right-of ways. As used herein, a pole installed to replace a
damaged pole or to remedy a safety hazard and which is substantially the same
size as the pole being replaced shall not be considered to be a new pole.
   (J)   Repairs. A permit shall be obtained from the Public Works Department
prior to a person removing, relocating, or reconstructing, if necessary, any
portion of a person’s facilities. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the town
understands and acknowledges there may be instances when a person is required
to make repairs, in compliance with federal or state laws, that are of an
emergency nature. The permittee will notify the town prior to such repairs, if
practicable, and will obtain the necessary permits in a reasonable time after
notification.
   (K)   Failure to complete work. If the permittee fails to complete the work
authorized by the permit within the time period set forth in the permit, or an
extended period of time as authorized by the Director, the town may draw on the
letter of credit to complete the work.
   (L)   Completion of work. Upon completion of work authorized by a permit,
the permittee shall request a final inspection. The permittee, at the
permittee’s expense shall:
      (1)   Restore the public and private improvements, including landscaping,
in the right-of-way;
      (2)   Restore natural features, including vegetation, in the right-of-
way;
      (3)   Remove any encroachments owned by permit holder (that are not
permitted); and
      (4)   Take other actions to return the right-of-way to its public uses.
   (M)   Stop work order. If the Director determines that work in the right-of-
way is being conducted in a manner that is contrary to the provisions of this
chapter or presents a public health or safety threat, the Director is
authorized to issue a written stop work order. The stop work order shall state
the reason for the order and the conditions under which it may resume. Upon
receipt, the permittee shall immediately cease work.
   (N)   Letter of acceptance. Upon acceptance, the Director shall issue a
letter of acceptance. The warranty period required by the mag standards begins
on the date the Director issues the letter of acceptance.
   (O)   Damaging of right-of-way. A permittee who damages right-of-way or
public improvements in the right-of-way shall reimburse the town the expense of
repairing the damage.
(Ord. 21-04, passed 3-11-2021)
§ 152.05 DAMAGE TO RIGHT-OF-WAY AND FACILITIES; PAVEMENT RESTORATION.
   (A)   A permit to work in the right-of-way which requires excavation of a
paved right-of-way shall comply with this section, in addition to other
requirements of this chapter. If the permittee damages or disturbs the surface
or subsurface of any rights-of-way or adjoining public property, or the public
improvement located thereon, therein, or thereunder, the permittee shall
promptly, at its own expense, and in a manner acceptable to the town, restore
the surface or subsurface of the right-of-way or public property, or repair or
replace the public improvement thereon, therein, or thereunder, in as good a
condition as before such damage or disturbance. If such restoration, repair or
replacement of the surface, subsurface, or any structure located thereon,
therein, or thereunder is not completed within a reasonable time, or such
repair or replacement does not meet town standards, the town shall have the
right to perform the necessary restoration, repair, or replacement, either
through its own forces, or through a hired contractor, and the occupant agrees
to reimburse the town for its expense in so doing within 30 days after receipt
of the invoice therefor.
   (B)   As used in this section:
      (1)   A paved right-of-way is considered “new” when it is first
constructed, when it is reconstructed or when it is renovated;
      (2)   A right-of-way is considered “reconstructed” when all lanes are
completely rebuilt by removing all the pavement and aggregate base course
material, re-compacting the sub-base and restoring the base material and then
completely repaving for a distance approved by the Director;
      (3)   A right-of-way is considered “renovated” when there is a major
rehabilitation, including a mill and overlay or other similar improvement work
that physically modifies the surface of the right-of-way prior to applying a
new surface or other similar work as determined by the Director; and
      (4)   The date of construction, reconstruction or renovation shall be the
date such work was accepted by the town.
   (C)   An application to work in the right-of-way which includes excavation
in a new paved right-of-way shall not be granted until at least two years after
completion and acceptance of the construction, reconstruction or renovation of
the paved right-of-way unless one of the following applies:
      (1)   Emergency which endangers life or property;
      (2)   Interruption of essential utility or communications service;
      (3)   Work that is mandated by town, county, state or federal
legislation; or
      (4)   Service for buildings where no other feasible means of providing
service exists.
   (D)   (1)   If an excavation is permitted pursuant to divisions (C)(1)
through (C)(4) above, the permittee shall restore the paved right-of-way by
mill and overlay/inlay, for a minimum of the full width of all lanes impacted
by the excavation(s) (outside lane includes to the curb). For arterial streets,
this shall require extending the restoration a minimum length of 50 feet both
directions from the area of the excavation(s) and, for collector streets, this
shall mean extending the restoration a minimum length of 25 feet both
directions from the area of the excavation(s), all as more specifically
directed by the Director. For excavations smaller than two square feet, the
requirement to restore by mill and overlay/inlay shall not apply. All
renovations shall comply with the town’s standard details and specifications.
The permittee may elect to fully reconstruct the paved right-of-way in
accordance with specifications provided by the Director in lieu of paying the
pavement restoration fee.
      (2)   For excavation commencing two years or later after the paved right-
of-way is new (as defined in division (B)(1) above) but before seven years
after a paved right-of-way is new (as defined in division (B) above), the
permittee may elect to renovate such paved right-of-way by mill and overlay/
inlay for a minimum of the full width of all lanes impacted by the excavation
(s) (outside lane includes to the curb) and for arterial streets extending a
minimum length of 50 feet both directions from the area of the excavation(s)
and for collector streets extending a minimum length of 25 feet both directions
from the area of the excavation(s), all as more specifically directed by the
Director, in lieu of payment of the pavement restoration fee.
   (E)   (1)   In addition to the other requirements of this section, a
permittee shall pay a pavement restoration fee established by resolution of the
Council. The pavement restoration fee shall be reviewed annually with the
budget for street repair.
      (2)   The pavement restoration fee shall be paid prior to or at the time
a permit to work in the public right-of-way is issued. In the event the
pavement restoration fee is amended after a permit to work in the public right-
of-way is issued, an adjusted fee shall be paid as follows:
         (a)   If the original permit was for one square yard through 20 square
yards, the pavement restoration fee shall be adjusted pursuant to the new fee
schedule if the increase/decrease to the pavement excavation is one square yard
or larger;
         (b)   If the original permit was for 21 square yards through 100
square yards, the pavement restoration fee shall be adjusted pursuant to the
new fee schedule if the increase/decrease to the pavement excavation is more
than 5% of the original;
         (c)   If the original permit was for more than 100 square yards, the
pavement restoration fee shall be adjusted pursuant to the new fee schedule if
the increase/decrease to the pavement excavation is more than five square
yards; or
         (d)   Such amended pavement restoration fee shall be applied for and
any additional fees shall be paid within one week of the field change or prior
to any new permit issued to permittee.
(Ord. 21-04, passed 3-11-2021)
§ 152.06 BOND.
   (A)   Each applicant with a project that the Director determines has a cost
of work of $25,000 or more must deposit with the town an amount in cash or a
performance bond of 100% of the amount of the cost of work proposed in the
application, as determined by the Director, as a guarantee that the work will
be completed in accordance with the permit and the town’s adopted or approved
details and specifications. If the applications solely for the placement of a
structure in the right-of-way which will require disturbance of the roadway or
other public facilities, the amount of the cash deposit or bond shall be 100%
of the estimated cost of restoration of the roadway or public facility.
   (B)   The bond required under division (A) above shall be joint and several
in form and made payable to the town. The bond shall be signed by the
applicant, or the property owner if he or she is not the applicant, and a
qualified surety company authorized to transact business in the state. The
condition shall be that the applicant will faithfully complete the work
described in the application in accordance with the plans, specifications and
conditions thereof.
   (C)   The bond required under division (A) above shall be released upon
satisfactory completion and acceptance of the work, or may be cancelled after
the applicant has provided other security satisfactory to the town, which will
cover obligations that remain.
   (D)   No deposit shall be less that $50 on work done under this subchapter.
   (E)   The bond required under division (A) above is subject to cancellation
as noted above, or may be terminated after all obligations are fulfilled which
were “permitted” prior to the Director receiving cancellation notice from the
surety. The surety shall not cancel, change or amend any bond without ten days’
prior written notice having been served on the Director.
(Prior Code, § 19-1-3) (Ord. 01-11, passed - -2001; Ord. 21-04, passed 5-11-
2021)
§ 152.07 INSURANCE.
   (A)   No applicant with a project that the Director determines has a cost of
work of $25,000 or more shall be entitled to a permit unless and until he or
she shall have filed and maintained on file with the town a certificate
certifying that he or she or his or her company or business firm carries public
liability and property damage insurance issued by an insurance carrier
authorized to do business in the state insuring the applicant and the town and
its agents against loss by reason of injuries to, or death of, persons or
damages to property arising out of or related to work performed by the
applicant, its agents or its employees while performing any work under such
permit. Such insurance shall be primary and provide coverage for all liability
assumed by the applicant under this section, and shall be provided by any
permittee in the following minimum amounts:
      (1)   Five hundred thousand dollars for death of, or injury to, any one
person in any one accident;
      (2)   One million dollars for death of, or injuries to, more than one
person in any one accident; and
      (3)   Five hundred thousand for damages to property.
   (B)   Failure by the applicant to provide the town with such a certificate
as required under division (A) above, and failure by the town to demand the
filing by the permittee of such a certificate before such a permit is issued,
shall not be deemed to waive the permittee’s obligation to provide the
insurance specified herein. Such insurance certificate shall remain in effect
and be kept on file with the Director until all work to be performed by the
permittee under the permit has been completed. Where an encroachment involves a
permanent obstruction, such insurance certificate requirements and other
resolution stipulations shall remain in effect until such construction is
removed. The insurance certificate shall provide that coverage cannot be
cancelled or expire without providing 15 days’ written notice of such action to
the town also noting the permit number.
   (C)   No evidence of liability insurance or surety bond shall be required as
condition precedent to the issuance of a permit to a federal, state, county or
political subdivision.
(Prior Code, § 19-1-4) (Ord. 01-11, passed - -2001; Ord. 21-04, passed 5-11-
2021)
§ 152.08 LIABILITY.
   (A)   The permittee shall be responsible for all liability imposed by law
for personal injury or property damage arising out of or related to work
performed by the permittee under the permit, or arising out of the failure on
the permittee’s part to perform its work under the permit.
   (B)   If any claim of such liability is made against the town, its officers,
agents, boards or employees, the permittee shall defend, indemnify and hold
them, and each of them, harmless from such claim, including claims alleging the
joint negligence of the town, its officers and employees, and the permittee,
except to the extent actual negligence of the town has been established.
(Prior Code, § 19-1-5) (Ord. 01-11, passed - -2001; Ord. 21-04, passed 5-11-
2021)
§ 152.09 FEES.
   The Town Council shall, by resolution, establish a schedule of fees for the
application processing and plan checking and for plan reviews and inspection
permits required by this subchapter:
   (A)   Utility companies serving the general public, including electricity,
natural gas, and telephone companies, and telecommunications and video services
companies: annual one-time permit fee of $1,000 for blanket encroachment permit
covering all work for a 12-month period anywhere in the town;
   (B)   Single-family residential encroachment permit: fee of $25 for each
individual encroachment permit;
   (C)   Multi-family residential encroachment permit: fee of $40 for each
individual encroachment permit;
   (D)   Commercial and industrial projects: fee of $100 for each individual
encroachment permit;
   (E)   Recreational vehicle and mobile home parks: fee of $50 for each
individual encroachment permit; and
   (F)   Permits issued after work is begun: fee is double the normal permit
fee.
(Prior Code, § 19-1-6) (Ord. 01-11, passed - -2001; Res. 03-02, passed - -2003;
Ord. 21-04, passed 5- 11-2021)
§ 152.10 WORK BEGUN WITHOUT PERMIT.
   If any work is undertaken prior to securing a permit therefor, the Director
may require the road right-of-way to be restored to its original condition
prior to granting a permit, or may charge a reasonable fee not to exceed $500,
in addition to the normal fee schedule for inspection and examination of the
work done prior to issuance of a permit. All work shall cease until the
Director determines whether the public road should be restored to its original
condition or to grant a permit in accordance with this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 19-1-7) (Ord. 01-11, passed - -2001; Ord. 21-04, passed 5-11-
2021)
§ 152.11 EMERGENCIES.
   This chapter shall not prevent any person from maintaining any pipe or
conduit lawfully on or under any public street, or from making excavation as
may be necessary for the preservation of life or property when an urgent
necessity therefore arises during the hours the offices of the Director are
closed; except that, those making emergency use shall apply for a permit within
one calendar day after the offices are again opened.
(Prior Code, § 19-1-8) (Ord. 01-11, passed - -2001; Ord. 21-04, passed 5-11-
2021)
§ 152.12 SIGHT VISIBILITY.
   (A)   Corner cutback area. Corner parcels shall be developed in a manner
that ensures visibility across the corners of the intersecting streets, alleys
and private driveways. The corner cutback area shall be described as a
triangular shaped area on a corner parcel formed by measuring 25 feet from the
intersection of the front and street side property lines, or an intersecting
alley or driveway, and connecting the lines diagonally across the property
making a 90-degree triangle, as shown in the following diagram:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c900e4be57b1635e55f2b96bfa67ca34bcf24c6f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1209.png]
   (B)   Height of obstructions. The maximum height of any object (e.g., fence,
landscaping, signs, walls and the like) located in the corner cutback area
shall be two feet, measured from the adjoining top of curb. The two-foot height
limit shall not apply to traffic safety devices, trees trimmed to eight feet
above the adjacent top of curb, utility poles and other government utility
installed devices.
(Prior Code, § 19-1-10) (Ord. 01-11, passed - -2001; Ord. 09-21, passed - -
2009; Ord. 21-04, passed 5-11-2021)
§ 152.13 WIRELESS FACILITIES IN THE RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   This section applies to the use of the public right-of-ways by
wireless providers as that term is defined in A.R.S. § 9-591. It applies to
telecommunications corporations as that term is defined in A.R.S. § 9-581 only
if and to the extent a telecommunications corporation has or intends to locate
wireless facilities in the public right-of-way and is a wireless provider.
   (B)   Those certain documents, three copies of which are on file with the
Town Clerk entitled “Wireless Facilities in the Right-of-Way Standard Terms and
Conditions Dated May 11, 2021” and “Design Standards, Concepts and Requirements
Wireless Facilities in the Right-of-Way Dated May 11, 2021” are hereby declared
to be public records and are adopted by reference to regulate work on, below or
above a right-of-way that involves wireless facilities. In addition to other
requirements in this section, an applicant requesting to locate a wireless
facility in the right-of-way shall comply with the requirements set forth in
the wireless facilities in the right-of-way standard terms and conditions and
design standards, concepts and requirements wireless facilities in the right-
of-way.
(Ord. 21-04, passed 3-11-2021)
§ 152.14 MICROCELL EQUIPMENT IN THE RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   Applicability. Notwithstanding any provisions of this chapter to the
contrary, the provisions of this division (A) shall apply to the installation,
operation and maintenance of microcell equipment mounted on strands in the town
by telecommunications corporations and cable operators. A person that has all
applicable authorizations required to provide commercial mobile radio service
using microcell equipment may use microcell equipment to provide commercial
mobile radio service.
   (B)   Applications. Applications for the installation, operation and
maintenance of microcell equipment on strands within the town shall comply with
the requirements of this section.
   (C)   Fees. The Council shall establish fees for microcell equipment mounted
on strands by resolution.
   (D)   Limitations. At each site where microcell equipment is installed, such
installation is limited to:
      (1)   Not more than two strand-mounted antennas and radio pairs that are
owned by a person described in division (D)(1) of this section; and
      (2)   Related devices owned by the applicant that are mounted on a strand
between the microcell poles on which the strands are mounted, including power
supplies, housings, cables and similar supporting furnishings and improvements.
   (E)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      MICROCELL EQUIPMENT. Devices that are connected to aerial facilities that
are used solely for transmitting, processing and receiving voice and data
wireless telecommunications services. MICROCELL EQUIPMENT does not include any
ground-based equipment.
      MICROCELL POLE. A pole or similar structure and attached appurtenances,
including strands, that is designed for telecommunications, cable, data or
electric.
(Ord. 21-04, passed 3-11-2021)
MANAGING PUBLIC TREES
§ 152.30 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DAMAGE. Any injury to or destruction of a tree, including but not limited
to: uprooting; severance of all or part the root system or main trunk; storage
of material on or compaction of surrounding soil; a substantial change in the
natural grade above a root system or around a trunk; surrounding the tree with
impervious paving materials; or any trauma caused by accident or collision.
   NUISANCE. Any tree, or limb thereof, that has an infectious disease or
insect; is dead or dying; obstructs the view of traffic signs or the free
passage of pedestrians or vehicles; or threatens public health, safety and
welfare.
   PARKWAY. The area along a public street between the curb and the sidewalk
or, if there is no curb or sidewalk, the unpaved portion of the area between
the street right-of way line and the paved portion of the street or alley.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. All grounds and rights-of-way owned or maintained by the
town.
   PUBLIC TREE. Any tree or woody vegetation on town-owned or town-maintained
property or rights-of-way.
   TOP or TOPPING. The non-standard practice of cutting back of limbs to stubs
within a tree's crown to such a degree as to remove the normal canopy and
disfigure the tree.
(Ord. 21-07, passed 8-24-2021)
§ 152.31 AUTHORITY AND POWER.
   (A)   Delegation of authority and responsibility. Under the direction of the
Town Manager, the Public Works Director and/or his or her designee, hereinafter
referred to as the “Director,” shall have full authority and responsibility to
plant, prune, maintain and remove trees and woody plants growing in or upon all
municipal streets, rights-of-way, town parks, and other public property. This
shall include the removal of trees that may threaten electrical, telephone,
gas, or any municipal water or sewer line, or any tree that is affected by
fungus, insect, or other pest disease.
   (B)   Coordination among town departments. Town departments will coordinate
as necessary with the Director and provide services to ensure compliance with
this subchapter as it relates to streets, alleys, rights-of-way, drainage,
easements and other public properties not under direct jurisdiction of the
Director.
   (C)   Interference. No person shall hinder, prevent, delay, or interfere
with the Director or his or her agents while engaged in carrying out the
execution or enforcement of this subchapter.
(Ord. 21-07, passed 8-24-2021)
§ 152.32 TREE PLANTING AND CARE STANDARDS.
   (A)   Standards. All planting and maintenance of public trees shall conform
to the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) A-300 "Standards for Tree
Care Operations" and shall follow all tree care best management practices
(BMPs) published by the International Society of Arboriculture.
   (B)   Requirements of franchise utility companies. The maintenance of public
trees for utility clearance shall conform to all applicable utility industry
standards.
   (C)   Tree species list. The Director shall develop and maintain an official
list of desirable tree species for planting on public property in two size
classes: Ornamental (20 feet or less in height at maturity) and Shade (greater
than 20 feet at maturity). Only trees from this approved list may be planted on
public property without written approval from the Director.
   (D)   Planting distances. The Director shall develop and maintain an
official set of spacing requirements for the planting of trees on public
property. No tree may be planted within the visibility triangle of a street
intersection or within ten feet of a fire hydrant.
   (E)   Planting trees under electric utility lines. Only trees listed as
Ornamental trees on the official town tree species list attached to Ord. 21-07
may be planted under or within 15 lateral feet of any overhead utility wire.
   (F)   Protection of public trees during construction. Any person, firm,
corporation, or town department performing construction near any public tree
must employ appropriate measures to protect the tree, including, but not
limited to, placing barriers around the tree to prevent damage.
(Ord. 21-07, passed 8-24-2021) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.33 PROHIBITION AGAINST HARMING PUBLIC TREES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to damage,
remove, or cause the damage or removal of a tree on public property without
written permission from the Director.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to attach any
cable, wire or signs or any other object to any street, park, or public tree.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to top any
public tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, where best
pruning practices are impractical, may be exempted from this provision at the
determination of the Director.
(Ord. 21-07, passed 8-24-2021) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.34 ADJACENT OWNER RESPONSIBILITY.
   No property owner shall allow a tree or other plant growing on his or her
property or within the adjacent parkway to obstruct or interfere with
pedestrians or the view of drivers, thereby creating a hazard. If an
obstruction persists, the Director shall notify the property owner to prune or
remove the tree or plant. If the owner fails to comply with the notice, the
town may undertake the necessary work and charge the cost to the property
owner.
(Ord. 21-07, passed 8-24-2021) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.35 CERTAIN TREES DECLARED A NUISANCE.
   (A)   Any tree, or limb thereof, on private property determined by the
Director to have contracted a lethal, communicable disease or insect; to be
dead or dying; to obstruct the view of traffic signs or the free passage of
pedestrians or vehicles; or that threatens public health, safety, and welfare
is declared a nuisance and the town may require its treatment or removal.
   (B)   Private property owners have the duty, at their own expense, to remove
or treat nuisance trees on their property. The town may remove such trees at
the owner's expense if the owner does not comply with treatment and/or removal
as specified by the Director within the written notification period.
(Ord. 21-07, passed 8-24-2021) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person found guilty of violating any provision of §§
152.30 to
152.35 shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof
shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,500 or by imprisonment for a
period not to exceed six months, or both such fine and imprisonment.
   (B)   Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate offense
punishable as herein described.
(Ord. 21-07, passed 8-24-2021)
CHAPTER 153: FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
153.01   Statutory authorization
   
153.02   Findings of fact
   
153.03   Statement of purpose
   
153.04   Methods of reducing flood losses
   
153.05   Definitions
   
153.06   Lands to which chapter applies
   
153.07   Basis for establishing special flood hazard areas
   
153.08   Compliance
   
153.09   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
153.10   Interpretation
   
153.11   Disclaimer of liability
   
153.12   Statutory exceptions
   
153.13   Unlawful acts
   
153.14   Declaration of public nuisance
   
153.15   Abatement of violations
   
153.16   Severability
Administration and Enforcement
   
153.30   Floodplain Administrator
   
153.31   Development permit
   
153.32   Critical facilities planning
   
153.33   Variances; conditions
   
153.34   Floodplain Review Board
Flood Hazard Reduction
   
153.45   Construction standards
   
153.46   Storage of materials and equipment
   
153.47   Water supply and waste disposal systems
   
153.48   Additional development standards, including subdivisions
   
153.49   Manufactured homes
   
153.50   Recreational vehicles
   
153.51   Floodways
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 153.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   In A.R.S. § 48-3610, the state legislature enabled the town to assume the
powers and duties for floodplain management and adopt regulations in
conformance with A.R.S. § 48-3609 designed to promote the public health, safety
and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the town does ordain as
follows.
(Ord. 18-09, passed 7-24-2018)
§ 153.02 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   The flood hazard areas of the town are subject to periodic inundation
which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief and impairment of the tax base,
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
   (B)   These flood losses may be caused by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in special flood hazard areas which increase flood heights and
velocities and, when inadequately anchored, cause damage in other areas. Uses
that are inadequately flood-proofed, elevated or otherwise protected from flood
damage, also contribute to flood loss.
(Ord. 18-09, passed 7-24-2018)
§ 153.03 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote public health, safety and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
   (A)   Protect human life and health;
   (B)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
   (C)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (D)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   (E)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located
in special flood hazard areas;
   (F)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of special flood hazard areas so as to minimize blight areas caused
by flooding;
   (G)   Notify potential buyers that the property is in a special flood hazard
area;
   (H)   Notify those who occupy special flood hazard areas that they assume
responsibility for their actions; and
   (I)   Participate in and maintain eligibility for flood insurance and
disaster relief.
(Ord. 18-09, passed 7-24-2018)
§ 153.04 METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES.
   In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions to:
   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and
property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases
in erosion, flood heights or velocities;
   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters;
   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase flood damage; and
   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in other
areas.
(Ord. 18-09, passed 7-24-2018)
§ 153.05 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A structure that is on the same parcel of property as a
principal structure, the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal
structure.
   APPEAL. A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator’s
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated Zone AO, AH, AR/AO or AR/AH on a
community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a 1% or greater annual chance
of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined
channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where
velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or
sheet flow.
   BASE FLOOD. A flood which has a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in
any given year.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The computed elevation to which flood water is
anticipated to rise during the base flood.
   BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor sub-grade (i.e., below
ground level) on all sides.
   BUILDING. See STRUCTURE.
   COMMUNITY. Any state, area or political subdivision thereof, or any Indian
tribe or authorized tribal organization or authorized native organization,
which has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations for
the areas within its jurisdiction.
   CRITICAL FACILITIES. A Structure or other improvement that, because of its
function, size, service area or uniqueness, has the potential to cause serious
bodily harm, extensive property damage, or disruption of vital socioeconomic
activities if it is destroyed or damaged or if its functionality is impaired.
CRITICAL FACILITIES include health and safety facilities, utilities, government
facilities and hazardous materials facilities.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
   ELEVATION CERTIFICATE. An administrative tool of the National Flood
Insurance Program (NFIP) that is used to provide elevation information
necessary to ensure compliance with community floodplain management ordinances,
to determine the proper insurance premium rate, and to support a request for a
Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA) or Letter of Map Revision based on fill (LOMR-
F).
   ENCROACHMENT. The advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill,
excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain,
which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.
   EROSION. The process of the gradual wearing away of land masses. This peril
is not, per se, covered under the National Flood Insurance Program.
   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      (1)   The overflow of flood waters;
      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source; and/or
      (3)   The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or
other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or
currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by
an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a
severe storm or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an
abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event
which results in flooding as defined in this definition.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). The official map of a community, on which
the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the special flood
hazard areas (SFHAs) and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). The official report provided by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, Flood Insurance Rate
Maps and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
   FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA. Any land area susceptible to being inundated
by water from any source. See FLOOD or FLOODING.
   FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR. The community official designated by title to
administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations.
   FLOODPLAIN BOARD. The Town Council of the Town of Quartzsite, at such times
as it is engaged in the enforcement of this chapter.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing,
where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including, but not limited
to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management
regulations and open space plans.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. The ordinance and other zoning
ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations,
special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and other
application of police power which control development in flood-prone areas.
This term describes federal, state or local regulations in any combination
thereof, which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and
damage.
   FLOOD-PROOFING. Any combination of structural and non-structural additions,
changes or adjustments to non-residential structures which reduce or eliminate
risk of flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and
sanitary facilities, structures and their contents by means other than
elevation.
   FLOOD-RELATED EROSION. The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of
a lake or other body of water as a result of undermining caused by waves or
currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by
an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a
severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood or
an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event
which results in flooding.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated
height. Also referred to as REGULATORY FLOODWAY.
   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term
includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair
facilities, and does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing
facilities.
   GOVERNING BODY. The local governing unit (i.e., county or municipality) that
is empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public
health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry.
   HARDSHIP. As related to §
153.33 of this chapter, meaning the exceptional hardship that would result from
a failure to grant the requested variance. The Town Council requires that the
variance be exceptional, unusual and peculiar to the property involved. Mere
economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience,
aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences or the
disapproval of one’s neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an
exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means
without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or
requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different
use than originally intended.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of Interior; or
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:
         (a)   By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
         (b)   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including the
basement. See BASEMENT. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable
solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other
than a basement area is not considered a building’s LOWEST FLOOR; provided
that, such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of
the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a “recreational vehicle”.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MARKET VALUE. Replacement cost of a structure less depreciation since
construction.
   MEAN SEA LEVEL. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum
(NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which Base Flood Elevations shown on a
community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. For the purposes of determining insurance rates,
structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the
effective date of an initial Flood Insurance Rate Map or after 12-31-1974,
whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures. For floodplain management purposes, NEW CONSTRUCTION means
structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the
effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and
includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
   OBSTRUCTION. Including, but not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf,
embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation,
channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel,
refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or
projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the
direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its
propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its
likelihood of being carried downstream.
   PERSON. An individual or the individual’s agent, a firm, partnership,
association or corporation, or an agent of the aforementioned groups, or this
state or its agencies or political subdivisions.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
   REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION (RFE). An elevation one foot above the base flood
elevation.
   REGULATORY FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height.
   RIVERINE. Relating to, formed by or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook and the like.
   SHEET FLOW AREA. See AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). An area in the floodplain subject to a 1%
or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on a Flood
Insurance Rate Map as Zone A, AO, AE, AH or A99.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement and other proposed
new development and means the date the building permit was issued; provided,
the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, placement or other improvement was within 180 days from the date of
the permit. The actual START means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings,
the installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the
stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement footings, piers or
foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building that is principally above ground;
this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal
or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or
other improvement to a structure, the total cost of which equals or exceeds 50%
of the market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial
damage”, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not
however, include either:
      (1)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
      (2)   Any alteration of a “historic structure”; provided that, the
alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
“historic structure”.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which
permits construction or other uses of property in a manner that would otherwise
be prohibited by this chapter.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications or
other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in
VIOLATION until such time as that documentation is provided.
   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION. The height in relation to the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or
other datum, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains
of coastal or riverine areas.
   WATERCOURSE. A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other
topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
WATERCOURSE includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur.
   ZONE A. No base flood elevations determined.
   ZONE AE. Base flood elevations determined.
   ZONE AH. Flood depths of one to three feet (usually areas of ponding); base
flood elevations determined.
   ZONE AO. Flood depths of one to three feet (usually sheet flow on sloping
terrain); average depths determined. For areas of alluvial fan flooding,
velocities also determined.
   ZONE AR. Special flood hazard area formerly protected from the 1% annual
chance flood by a flood control system that was subsequently decertified. ZONE
AR indicates that the former flood control system is being restored to provide
protection from the 1% annual chance or greater flood.
   ZONE A99. Area to be protected from 1 % annual chance flood by a federal
flood protection system under construction; no base flood elevations
determined.
   ZONE D. Areas in which flood hazards are undetermined, but possible.
   ZONE X (SHADED). Areas of 0.2% annual chance flood; areas of 1% annual
chance flood with average depths of less than one foot or with drainage areas
less than one square mile; and areas protected by levees from 1% annual chance
flood.
   ZONE X (UNSHADED). Areas determined to be outside the 0.2% annual chance
floodplain.
(Ord. 18-09, passed 7-24-2018)
§ 153.06 LANDS TO WHICH CHAPTER APPLIES.
   This chapter shall apply to all special flood hazard areas within the
corporate limits of the town.
(Ord. 18-09, passed 7-24-2018)
§ 153.07 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS.
   The special flood hazard areas identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled “The Flood
Insurance Study for La Paz County and incorporated areas, (FIS) dated August
28, 2008”, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) dated 8-28-2008,
and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are hereby adopted by reference
and declared to be a part of this chapter. This FIS and attendant mapping is
the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by
studies for other areas which allow implementation of this chapter and which
are recommended to the Floodplain Board by the Floodplain Administrator. The
Floodplain Board, within its area of jurisdiction, shall delineate (or may, by
rule, require developers of land to delineate) for areas where development is
ongoing or imminent, and thereafter as development becomes imminent,
floodplains consistent with the criteria developed by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency and the Director of the state’s Department of Water
Resources. The FIS and FIRM panels are on file at 465 N. Plymouth Avenue,
Quartzsite, AZ.
(Ord. 18-09, passed 7-24-2018)
§ 153.08 COMPLIANCE.
   All development of land, construction of residential, commercial or
industrial structures, or future development within delineated floodplain areas
is subject to the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations.
(Ord. 18-09, passed 7-24-2018)
§ 153.09 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(Ord. 18-09, passed 7-24-2018)
§ 153.10 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall
be:
   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (C)   Deemed neither to limit, nor repeal, any other powers granted under
state statutes.
(Ord. 18-09, passed 7-24-2018)
§ 153.11 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood
heights may be increased by human-made or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside the special flood hazard areas or uses permitted within
such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall hot
create liability on the part of the town any officer or employee thereof, the
state or the Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that
result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully
made hereunder.
(Ord. 18-09, passed 7-24-2018)
§ 153.12 STATUTORY EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   In accordance with A.R.S. § 48-3609(H), unless expressly provided,
this and any regulation adopted pursuant to this chapter do not affect:
      (1)   Existing legal uses of property or the right to continuation of
such legal use. However, if a non-conforming use of land or a building or
structure is discontinued for 12 months, or destroyed to the extent of 50% of
its market value as determined by a competent appraiser, any further use shall
comply with this chapter and regulations of the town;
      (2)   Reasonable repair or alteration of property for the purposes for
which the property was legally used on 8-3-1984, or on the date any regulations
affecting such property takes effect; except that, any alteration, addition or
repair to a non-conforming building or structure which would result in
increasing its flood damage potential by 50% or more shall be either flood-
proofed or elevated to or above the regulatory flood elevation;
      (3)   Reasonable repair of structures constructed with the written
authorization required by A.R.S. § 48-3613;
      (4)   Facilities constructed or installed pursuant to a certificate of
environmental compatibility issued pursuant to A.R.S. Title 40, Ch. 2, Art.
6.2; and
      (5)   In accordance with A.R.S. § 48-3613(D), in addition to other
penalties or remedies otherwise provided by law, the state, a political
subdivision or a person who may be damaged or has been damaged as a result of
the unauthorized diversion, retardation or obstruction of a watercourse has the
right to commence, maintain and prosecute any appropriate action or pursue any
remedy to enjoin, abate or otherwise prevent any person from violating or
continuing to violate this section or regulations adopted pursuant to A.R.S.
Title 48, Ch. 21, Art. I. If a person is found to be in violation of this
section, the court shall require the violator to either comply with this
section if authorized by the Floodplain Board or remove the obstruction and
restore the watercourse to its original state. The court may also award such
monetary damages as are appropriate to the injured parties resulting from the
violation including reasonable costs and attorney fees.
   (B)   Before the following types of construction authorized by A.R.S. § 48-
3613(B) begin, the responsible person must submit plans for the construction to
the Floodplain Board for review and comment pursuant to A.R.S. § 48-3613(C):
      (1)   The construction of bridges, culverts, dikes and other structures
necessary to the construction of public highways, roads and streets
intersecting or crossing a watercourse;
      (2)   The construction of storage dams for watering livestock or
wildlife, structures on banks of a watercourse to prevent erosion of or damage
to adjoining land if the structure will not divert, retard or obstruct the
natural channel of the watercourse or dams for the conservation of flood waters
as permitted by A.R.S. Title 45, Ch. 6;
      (3)   Construction of tailing dams and waste disposal areas for use in
connection with mining and metallurgical operations. This paragraph does not
exempt those sand and gravel operations that will divert, retard or obstruct
the flow of waters in any watercourse from complying with and acquiring
authorization from the Floodplain Board pursuant to regulations adopted by the
Floodplain Board under this chapter;
      (4)   Other construction upon determination by the Floodplain Board that
written authorization is unnecessary;
      (5)   Any flood control district, county, city, town or other political
subdivision from exercising powers granted to it under A.R.S. Title 48, Ch. 21,
Art. 1;
      (6)   The construction of streams, waterways, lakes and other auxiliary
facilities in conjunction with development of public parks and recreation
facilities by a public agency or political subdivision; and
      (7)   The construction and erection of poles, towers, foundations,
support structures, guy wires and other facilities related to power
transmission as constructed by any utility whether a public service corporation
or a political subdivision.
(Ord. 18-09, passed 7-24-2018)
§ 153.13 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for a person to engage in any development or to divert,
retard or obstruct the flow of waters in a watercourse if it creates a hazard
to life or property without securing the written authorization required by
A.R.S. § 48-3613. Where the watercourse is a delineated floodplain, it is
unlawful to engage in any development affecting the flow of waters without
securing written authorization required by A.R.S. § 48-3613.
   (B)   Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day that a violation continues shall be
a separate offense punishable as hereinabove described.
(Ord. 18-09, passed 7-24-2018) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.14 DECLARATION OF PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   All development located or maintained within any special flood hazard area
after 8-8-1973, in violation of this chapter, is a public nuisance per se and
may be abated, prevented or restrained by action of this political subdivision.
(Ord. 18-09, passed 7-24-2018)
§ 153.15 ABATEMENT OF VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Within 30 to 45 days of discovery of a violation of this chapter, the
Floodplain Administrator shall submit a report to the Floodplain Board which
shall include all information available to the Floodplain Administrator which
is pertinent to said violation.
   (B)   Within 30 to 45 days of receipt of this report, the Floodplain Board
shall either:
      (1)   Take any necessary action to effect the abatement of such
violation;
      (2)   Issue a variance to this chapter in accordance with the provisions
of §
153.33 of this chapter;
      (3)   Order the owner of the property upon which the violation exists to
provide whatever additional information may be required for its determination.
Such information must be provided to the Floodplain Administrator within 30
days of such order and the Floodplain Administrator shall submit an amended
report to the Floodplain Board within 20 days. At the next regularly scheduled
public meeting, the Floodplain Board shall either order the abatement of said
violation or they shall grant a variance in accordance with the provisions of
§§
153.33 and
153.34 of this chapter; or
      (4)   Submit to the Federal Emergency Management Agency a declaration for
denial of insurance, stating that the property is in violation of a cited state
or local law, regulation or ordinance, pursuant to § 1316 of the National Flood
Insurance Act of 1968, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 4001 et seq., as amended.
(Ord. 18-09, passed 7-24-2018)
§ 153.16 SEVERABILITY.
   This chapter and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be
severable. Should any section of this chapter be declared by the courts to be
unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
chapter as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared
to be unconstitutional or invalid.
(Ord. 18-09, passed 7-24-2018)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 153.30 FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   The Town Manager is hereby appointed to administer, implement and
enforce this chapter by granting or denying development permits in accordance
with its provisions.
   (B)   Duties of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be
limited to:
      (1)   Permit review.
         (a)   Review all development permits to determine that:
            1.   The permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;
            2.   All other required state and federal permits have been
obtained;
            3.   The site is reasonably safe from flooding; and
            4.   In areas where a floodway has not been designated, the
proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of areas
where base flood elevations have been determined, but a floodway has not been
designated.
         (b)   For the purposes of this chapter, ADVERSELY AFFECT means that
the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point.
      (2)   Substantial improvement and substantial damage assessments. Review
all development permits for improvements and/or damages to existing structures
to determine if the application of the substantia] improvement rules apply,
including establishing a definition of market value determination and verifying
that the estimated improvement and/or repair costs are less than 50% of the
market value of the structure;
      (3)   Use of other base flood data. When Base Flood Elevation data has
not been provided in accordance with §
153.07 of this chapter, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review and
reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data available from a federal,
state or other source, in order to administer §§
153.45 through
153.51 of this chapter. Any such information shall be consistent with the
requirements of the Federal Emergency Management Agency and the Director of the
state’s Department of Water Resources and may be submitted to the Floodplain
Board for adoption;
      (4)   Obtain and maintain for public inspection. Obtain and maintain the
following for public inspection and make available as needed:
         (a)   Certification required by §§
153.45(C)(1) and
153.49 of this chapter (lowest floor elevations, bottom of the structural frame
and utilities);
         (b)   Certification required by §
153.45(C)(2) of this chapter (lowest floor elevations or flood-proofing of non-
residential structures and utilities;
         (c)   Certification required by §
153.45(C)(5) of this chapter (flood vents);
         (d)   Certification of elevation required by §
153.48(A)(2) of this chapter (subdivisions and other proposed development
standards);
         (e)   Certification required by §
153.51 of this chapter (floodway encroachments);
         (f)   Records of all variance actions, including justification for
their issuance; and
         (g)   Obtain and maintain improvement and damage calculations required
in division (B)(2) above.
      (5)   Notification to other entities.
         (a)   Whenever a watercourse is to be altered or relocated:
            1.   Notify adjacent communities and the state’s Department of
Water Resources prior to such alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and
submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency
through appropriate notification means; and
            2.   Assure that the flood carrying capacity of the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse be maintained.
         (b)   Base flood elevation and rate of flow due to physical
alterations:
            1.   Base flood elevations may increase or decrease resulting from
physical changes affecting flooding conditions. As soon as practicable, but not
later than six months after the date such information becomes available, the
Floodplain Administrator shall notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency
of the changes by submitting technical or scientific data in accordance with 44
C.F.R. § 65.3. Such a submission is necessary so that upon confirmation of
those physical changes affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and
floodplain management requirements will be based upon current data.
            2.   Within 120 days after completion of construction of any flood-
control protective works which changes the rate of flow during the base flood
or the configuration of the floodplain upstream or downstream from or adjacent
to the project, the person or agency responsible for installation of the
project shall provide to the governing bodies of all jurisdictions affected by
the project a new delineation of all floodplains affected by the project The
new delineation shall be done according to the criteria adopted by the Director
of the state’s Department of Water Resources.
         (c)   Corporate boundary changes. Notify the Federal Emergency
Management Agency of acquisition by means of annexation, incorporation or
otherwise, of additional areas of jurisdiction.
      (6)   Map determinations. Make interpretations, where needed, as to the
exact location of the boundaries of the special flood hazard areas (e.g., where
there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given
a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in §§
153.33 and
153.34 of this chapter.
      (7)   Remedial actions. Take actions on violations of this chapter as
required in §
153.15 of this chapter.
(Ord. 18-09, passed 7-24-2018)
§ 153.31 DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   (A)   A development permit shall be obtained before construction or
development begins, including placement of manufactured homes, within any
special flood hazard area established in §
153.07 of this chapter. Application for a development permit shall be made on
forms furnished by the Floodplain Administrator and may include, but not be
limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location,
dimensions and elevation of the area in question, existing or proposed
structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities and the location of
the foregoing.
   (B)   Specifically, the following information is required:
      (1)   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest
floor (including basement) of all structures. In Zone AO, elevation of existing
highest adjacent grade and proposed elevation of lowest floor of all
structures;
      (2)   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-
residential structure will be flood-proofed;
      (3)   Certification by a registered professional engineer, architect or
depending on type of project requirements and approval from the Administrator a
registered land surveyor that the flood-proofing methods or elevations for any
non-residential structure meet the flood-proofing criteria in §
153.45(C)(2) of this chapter;
      (4)   Base flood elevation data for subdivision proposals or other
development greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser; and
      (5)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development.
(Ord. 18-09, passed 7-24-2018)
§ 153.32 CRITICAL FACILITIES PLANNING.
   (A)   In an effort to provide for critical facilities planning (CFP), the
town has identified the necessity to develop a list of critical facilities that
are critical to the flood response if and when the need arises. A critical
facility is a structure or site that, if flooded, would result in severe
consequences to public health and safety. Providing these identified facilities
with preparedness and early warning are essential for public safety during
emergency situations.
   (B)   The identified critical facilities are as follows:
      (1)   Town police station;
      (2)   Town fire stations;
      (3)   The town hospital and medical center; and
      (4)   The town water and wastewater treatment and distribution
facilities.
(Ord. 18-09, passed 7-24-2018)
§ 153.33 VARIANCES; CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Nature of variances.
      (1)   The variance criteria set forth in this section are based on the
general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property
and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of
property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the
requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the
applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be
unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique
characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its
inhabitants or the property owners.
      (2)   It is the duty of the Town Council to help protect its citizens
from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of
insuring a structure built below the regulatory flood elevation are so serious
that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in the flood
ordinance are quite rare. The long-term goal of preventing and reducing flood
loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore,
the variance guidelines provided in this chapter are more detailed and contain
multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted.
The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives
other than a variance are more appropriate.
   (B)   Conditions for variances.
      (1)   Variances shall only be issued:
         (a)   Upon a determination that the granting of a variance will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization
of the public or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances;
         (b)   For the repair, rehabilitation or restoration of structures
listed in the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of
Historic Places, upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structures’ continued designation as a
historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the
historic character and design of the structure;
         (c)   Upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary,
considering the flood hazard, to afford relief;
         (d)   Upon a showing of good and sufficient cause;
         (e)   Upon a determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship to the applicant;
         (f)   Upon a showing that the use cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. This includes
only facilities defined in §
153.05 of this chapter in the definition of “functionally dependent use”.
      (2)   Variances shall not be issued within any floodway if any increase
in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
      (3)   Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in
size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed
below the regulatory flood elevation; provided, the procedures of §§
153.30 through
153.32 and
153.45 through
153.51 of this chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size increases
beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the
variance increases.
(Ord. 18-09, passed 7-24-2018)
§ 153.34 FLOODPLAIN REVIEW BOARD.
   (A)   The Town Council may establish a board of review, which may be the
advisory board or a committee of the advisory board to sit in review and make
decisions.
   (B)   The Floodplain Review Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by
the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this
chapter.
   (C)   In considering such applications, the Floodplain Review Board shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified
in other sections of this chapter, and:
      (1)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      (2)   The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      (3)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      (4)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community:
      (5)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
      (6)   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use,
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
      (7)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      (8)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area;
      (9)   The safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      (10)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and
      (11)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, water system and streets and
bridges.
   (D)   Upon consideration of the factors of division (C) above and the
purposes of this chapter, the Floodplain Review Board may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the
purposes of this chapter.
   (E)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice over the signature of a community official that:
      (1)   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the
regulatory flood elevation will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage;
      (2)   Such construction below the regulatory flood elevation increases
risks to life and property; and
      (3)   The land upon which the variance is granted shall be ineligible for
exchange of state land pursuant to the flood relocation and land exchange
program provided by A.R.S. § 37-610. A copy of the notice shall be recorded in
the office of the County Recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it
appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land.
   (F)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of ail variance
actions, including justification for their issuance.
   (G)   A person aggrieved in any manner by an action of the Floodplain Review
Board may within 30 days appeal to the Floodplain Board.
(Ord. 18-09, passed 7-24-2018)
FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
§ 153.45 CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   In all special flood hazard areas, the following standards are required.
   (A)   Anchoring.
      (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored
to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting
from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
      (2)   All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring standards of §
153.49(B) of this chapter.
   (B)   Construction materials and methods.
      (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
      (2)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
      (3)   Within Zones AH or AO, adequate drainage paths shall be constructed
around structures on slopes to guide flood waters around and away from proposed
structures.
   (C)   Elevation and flood-proofing.
      (1)   Residential construction.
         (a)   Residential construction, new or substantial improvement, shall
have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the regulatory
flood elevation.
            1.   In a Zone AO, the base flood elevation is determined from the
FIRM panel. If unspecified, the required elevation is at minimum two feet above
highest adjacent grade.
            2.   In a Zone A where the base flood elevation has not been
determined, the base flood elevation is determined locally by the criteria set
out in §
153.30(B)(3) of this chapter.
            3.   In Zones AE and AH, the base flood elevation is determined
from the FIS and/or FIRM.
            4.   A garage attached to a residential structure, constructed with
the garage floor slab below the regulatory flood elevation, must be designed to
allow for the automatic entry and exit of flood waters. See divisions (C)(5)(a)
or (C)(5)(b) below.
         (b)   Upon completion of the structure, certification by a registered
professional engineer or surveyor that the elevation requirements of the lowest
floor, including basement, of this section have been satisfied shall be
provided to the Floodplain Administrator for verification.
      (2)   Non-residential construction.
         (a)   Non-residential construction, new or substantial improvement,
shall have the lowest floor either elevated to conform with division divisions
(C)(1)(a)1., (C)(1)(a)2. or (C)(1)(a)3. above, as appropriate, or together with
attendant utility and sanitary facilities:
            1.   Be flood-proofed below the elevation recommended under
divisions (C)(1)(a)1., (C)(1)(a)2. or (C)(1)(a)3. above, as appropriate, so
that the structure is water-tight with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water; and
            2.   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
         (b)   Upon completion of the structure, certification by a registered
professional engineer or surveyor that the elevation requirements of the lowest
floor, including basement, of this section have been satisfied shall be
provided to the Floodplain Administrator for verification; or certification by
a registered professional engineer or architect that the flood-proofing
standards of this section are satisfied shall be provided to the Floodplain
Administrator for verification.
      (3)   Manufactured homes. Manufactured homes shall meet the standards in
§
153.49 of this chapter.
      (4)   Accessory structures (detached garages and storage structures).
Accessory structures used solely for parking of vehicles or storage may be
constructed such that the floor is below the regulatory flood elevation;
provided, the structure is designed and constructed in accordance with the
following requirements.
         (a)   Use of the accessory structure must be limited to parking of
vehicles or storage.
         (b)   The portions of the accessory structure located below the
regulatory flood elevation must be built using flood resistant materials.
         (c)   The accessory structure must be adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
         (d)   Any machinery or equipment servicing the accessory structure
must be elevated or flood-proofed to or above the regulatory flood elevation.
         (e)   The accessory structure must comply with floodway encroachment
provisions in §
153.51 of this chapter.
         (f)   The accessory structure must be designed to allow for the
automatic entry and exit of flood waters in accordance with divisions (C)(5)(a)
or (C)(5)(b) below.
         (g)   Detached garages, storage structures and other accessory
structures not meeting the above standards must be constructed in accordance
with all applicable standards in divisions (C)(1)(a)1., (C)(1)(a)2. or (C)(1)
(a)3. above, as appropriate.
         (h)   Upon completion of the structure, certification by a registered
professional engineer, surveyor or local official that the requirements of this
section have been satisfied shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator
for verification.
      (5)   Flood openings.
         (a)   All new construction and substantial improvement with fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable
solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage and which are
subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic
flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of
flood water.
         (b)   Designs for meeting this requirement must meet or exceed the
following criteria for non-engineered openings:
            1.   Have a minimum of two openings, on different sides of each
enclosed area, having a total net area of not less than one square inch for
every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
            2.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade;
            3.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or
other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and
exit of flood water; or
            4.   Alternatively, a registered engineer or architect may design
and certify engineered openings.
      (6)   Machinery and service equipment. All new construction, substantial
improvement and other proposed new development shall be constructed with
electrical, hearing, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and
other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding.
      (7)   Critical facilities construction. All new construction or
substantial improvements of critical facilities shall have the lowest floor
elevation either protected or elevated to protect the facility against the
flood elevations of a 500-year flood event.
(Ord. 18-09, passed 7-24-2018)
§ 153.46 STORAGE OF MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   The storage or processing of materials that could be injurious to
human, animal or plant life if released due to damage from flooding is
prohibited in special flood hazard areas.
   (B)   Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if not subject
to damage by floods and if firmly anchored to prevent flotation, or if readily
removable from the area within the time available after flood warning.
(Ord. 18-09, passed 7-24-2018)
§ 153.47 WATER SUPPLY AND WASTE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS.
   (A)   All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall
be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the
system and discharge from systems into flood waters.
   (B)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
them or contamination from them during flooding.
   (C)   Waste disposal systems shall not be installed wholly or partially in a
regulatory floodway.
(Ord. 18-09, passed 7-24-2018)
§ 153.48 ADDITIONAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS, INCLUDING SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   All new subdivision proposals and other proposed development
(including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions), greater
than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser, shall:
      (1)   Identify the special flood hazard area and the elevation of the
base flood; and
      (2)   Identify on the final plans the elevation(s) of the proposed
structure(s) and pads. If the site is filled above the base flood elevation,
the final lowest floor and grade elevations shall be certified by a registered
professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the Floodplain Administrator.
   (B)   All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall be
consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
   (C)   All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall have
public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
   (D)   All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall provide
adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
(Ord. 18-09, passed 7-24-2018)
§ 153.49 MANUFACTURED HOMES.
   (A)   All manufactured homes that are placed on site or substantially
improved shall:
      (1)   Be elevated to conform with divisions (C)(1)(a)1., (C)(1)(a)2. or
(C)(1)(a)3. above, as appropriate, so that the bottom of the structural frame
or the lowest point of any attached appliances, whichever is lower, is to or
above the regulatory flood elevation; and
      (2)   Be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to
resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may
include, but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to
ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local
anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
   (B)   Upon completion of installation of the manufactured home,
certification by a registered professional engineer or surveyor that the
elevation requirements of this section have been satisfied shall be provided to
the Floodplain Administrator for verification.
(Ord. 18-09, passed 7-24-2018)
§ 153.50 RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.
   All recreational vehicles placed on site shall:
   (A)   Be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
   (B)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is
ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to
the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and has
no permanently attached additions; or
   (C)   Meet the permit requirements of §§
153.30 through
153.32 of this chapter and the elevation and anchoring requirements for
manufactured homes in §
153.49 of this chapter.
(Ord. 18-09, passed 7-24-2018)
§ 153.51 FLOODWAYS.
   (A)   Located within the special flood hazard areas established in §
153.07 of this chapter are areas designated as floodways.
   (B)   Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity
of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion
potential, the following provisions apply:
      (1)   Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements and other development, unless certification by a
registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that
encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge; and
      (2)   If this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction
provisions of §§
153.45 through
153.51 of this chapter.
(Ord. 18-09, passed 7-24-2018)
CHAPTER 154: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
154.001   Short title
   
154.002   Purpose and intent
   
154.003   Adoption of exhibits
   
154.004   Authority
   
154.005   Jurisdiction
   
154.006   Definitions
Administration
   
154.015   Administration
   
154.016   Compliance required
   
154.017   Conflicting regulations
   
154.018   Processing fee
   
154.019   Prohibition of circumvention
   
154.020   Modifications
   
154.021   Vacation of plats
Platting Procedures and Requirements
   
154.030   Outline of procedures and requirements
   
154.031   Stage 1 - Pre-application conference
   
154.032   Stage 2 - Preliminary plat application
   
154.033   Stage 2A - Preliminary plat review and recommendation
   
154.034   Stage 2B - Preliminary plat approval
   
154.035   Stage 3 - Final plat application
   
154.036   Stage 3A - Final plat and improvement plan review and recommendation
   
154.037   Stage 3B - Final plat approval
   
154.038   Stage 4 - Recordation of plat
   
154.039   Replats (re-subdivision final plat)
   
154.040   Abandonment of recorded subdivision (reversion to acreage map)
   
154.041   Failure to proceed
   
154.042   Condominium subdivisions
Assurance for Completion and Maintenance of Improvement
   
154.050   Assurance for completion of improvements
   
154.051   Duration
   
154.052   Default
   
154.053   Inspection of improvement
   
154.054   Acceptance of improvements
   
154.055   Warranty period on public improvements
Standards of Subdivision Design
   
154.065   Purpose
   
154.066   General provisions
   
154.067   Street location and arrangement
   
154.068   Street design
   
154.069   Pedestrian circulation systems
   
154.070   Blocks
   
154.071   Lots
   
154.072   Lot improvements
   
154.073   Lot dimensions
   
154.074   Lot drainage
   
154.075   Double frontage lots
   
154.076   Lot divided by boundary line
   
154.077   Public service installation
   
154.078   Fire protection
   
154.079   Utilities
   
154.080   Dangerous areas
   
154.081   Exclusions
   
154.082   Permanent access to subdivision
   
154.083   Flood control facilities
   
154.084   Subdivision perimeter wall standards
   
154.085   Protective fence
   
154.086   Subdivision monuments
   
154.087   Flood hazard areas
   
154.088   Sidewalks
   
154.089   Signage
Storm Water Runoff
   
154.100   Purpose
   
154.101   Definitions
   
154.102   Methods of handling storm water
   
154.103   Design standards for handling water
   
154.104   Building floor elevations
   
154.105   Approval
   
154.106   Drainage report
Minor Land Divisions
   
154.120   Applicability
   
154.121   General provisions and exceptions
   
154.122   Procedure for approval of minor land divisions
 
   
154.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Floodplain Management, see
Chapter 153
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.001 SHORT TITLE.
   For the purpose of identification, the official title of this chapter shall
be the "Town of Quartzsite Subdivision Ordinance," hereinafter referred to as
the "Subdivision Ordinance."
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 154.002 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   The purpose of this section is to provide for the public health,
safety, and general welfare of the town by regulating the subdivision of land:
to insure adequate traffic circulation through coordinated street systems with
relation to major thoroughfares, adjoining subdivisions and public facilities;
to achieve individual property lots of reasonable utility and livability; to
secure adequate provisions for water supply and distribution, drainage and
flood control, sanitary sewerage, and other health requirements; to insure and
facilitate reservation of sites for schools, recreation facilities, and other
public purposes; to promote conveyance of land by accurate legal description;
and to provide practical procedures for the achievement of this purpose.
   (B)   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, it is intended
that a common ground of understanding, and a sound and equitable working
relationship exist between the public and private interests and to this end,
the independent and mutual objectives of the public and private interests can
be achieved in the subdivision of land.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 154.003 ADOPTION OF EXHIBITS.
   All exhibits and/or maps within Ordinance No. 21-11 are hereby adopted and
shall be incorporated herein as a part of this chapter.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 154.004 AUTHORITY.
   The Town of Quartzsite Subdivision Ordinance is authorized by A.R.S. § 9-
463.01.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 154.005 JURISDICTION.
   These regulations shall govern the subdivision of all land in the Town of
Quartzsite.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 154.006 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Rules of language. For the purpose of these regulations, and when not
inconsistent with the context:
      (1)   Words used in the present tense include the future;
      (2)   Words used in the singular include the plural;
      (3)   Words in the plural include the singular;
      (4)   The masculine includes the feminine;
      (5)   The word "shall" is mandatory and not directory;
      (6)   The word "may" is permissive;
      (7)   The particular controls the general.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ALLEY. A public dedicated right-of-way used primarily as a service or
secondary means of ingress and egress to the service side of abutting property.
      ACCESS STREET or SERVICE ROAD. A street or road which is parallel to, and
adjacent to a major arterial street and provides a means of direct ingress and
egress to abutting property.
      BLOCK. A piece or parcel of land, or group of lots entirely surrounded by
public rights-of-way, streams, railroads or parks, or a combination thereof.
      CUL-DE-SAC. A street or road having a traffic outlet on one end and only
having at the other end facilities for the turning around of vehicular traffic.
      COMMISSION. The Town of Quartzsite Planning and Zoning Commission, as
defined in Ordinance No. 13-02, Section 2, as provided by A.R.S. § 9-462.02.
      CONDITIONAL APPROVAL. An affirmative action by the Commission or the
Council indicating that approval will be forthcoming upon satisfaction of
certain specified stipulations.
      COUNCIL. The Town Council of the Town of Quartzsite, Arizona.
      DEAD-END STREET. A street or road having a traffic outlet on one end only
and terminated on the other end by undeveloped property.
      DETENTION BASIN. A storage facility for temporary storage of storm water
runoff with metered discharge.
      DETENTION SYSTEM. A type of flood control system which delays the
downstream progress of flood water in a controlled manner, generally through
the combined use of a temporary storage area and a metered outlet device which
causes a lengthening of the duration of flow and thereby reduces downstream
flood peaks.
      DEVELOPMENT REVIEW COMMITTEE. The selected group of technically qualified
individuals made up of town staff and other public or private agencies and
utilities responsible to ensure compliance with ordinances, codes, regulations,
etc. as they relate to the subdivision process.
      EXCEPTION. Means any parcel of land which is within the boundaries of the
subdivision, but which is not owned by the subdivider.
      FINAL APPROVAL. Approval of the final plat by the Council, as evidenced
by certification on the plat by the Mayor of the town, constitutes
authorization to record a plat.
      GENERAL PLAN. A comprehensive plan, or parts thereof, providing for the
future growth and improvement of the town and for the general location and
coordination of streets and highways, schools and recreation areas, public
building sites, and other physical development, which shall have been duly
adopted by the Town Council.
      GRADE. The lowest point of elevation of the finished surfaces of the
ground, paving or sidewalks within the area between the building and the
property line, or when the property line is more than five feet from the
building between the building and a line five feet from the building.
      GRADE FINISHED. The final elevation of the ground surface after
development.
      IMPROVEMENT PLANS. A set of plans setting forth the profiles, cross-
sections, details, specifications, and instructions and procedures to be
followed in the construction of public or private improvements in the town,
that are prepared and bear the seal of an Arizona registered Land surveyor,
engineer, architect or landscape architect in accordance with the approved
preliminary plat and zoning stipulations, and in compliance with standards of
design and construction that are to be approved by the Public Works Director,
other departments, the county departments and all applicable utilities.
      IMPROVEMENTS. Required installations, pursuant to this chapter and zoning
stipulations, including but not limited to: grading, sewer, water, utilities,
street curbs, gutters, sidewalks, trails, alleys, street lights, control
devices and landscaping; as a condition to the approval and signing of the
final plat, precedent to recordation.
      LAND SPLITS. The division of improved or unimproved land whose area is
two and one- half acres or less into two or three tracts or parcels of land for
the purpose of sale or lease or as defined in A.R.S. § 9-463.
      LOCAL ROADWAYS. The local roadways consist of traffic movement between
collectors and adjacent lands involving relatively short distances.
      LOT. A single piece of property located in a recorded subdivision, having
frontage on a publicly dedicated and accepted street or a private road approved
by the town, which is described and denoted as such.
         (a)   CORNER LOT. A lot abutting on two or more intersecting streets
where the interior angle of intersection does not exceed 135 degrees.
         (b)   INTERIOR LOT. A lot having but one side abutting a street.
         (c)   THROUGH LOT. A lot abutting two parallel or approximately
parallel streets.
      LOT WIDTH. The width a lot shall be:
         (a)   If the side lines are parallel, the shortest distance between
these sidelines;
         (b)   If the side property lines are not parallel, the width of the
lot shall be the length of a line at right angles to the axis of the lot at a
distance equal to the required front or rear building setback line; whichever
is the lesser, for the district in which the lot is located. The axis of a lot
shall be a line joining the midpoints of the front and rear property lines.
      MAJOR ARTERIAL. The principal arterial is capable of carrying large
traffic volumes and for the primary roadway network within and throughout the
region. They provide a continuous road system that distributes traffic between
neighborhoods and central business districts. They also handle significant
levels of urban travel between central business districts, outlying residential
area and major inner-city communities and major suburban centers.
      MAJOR COLLECTOR. The major collector provides traffic circulation within
lower density areas and can provide direct access to arterials. MAJOR
COLLECTORS carry a higher traffic volume than minor collectors, minor
collectors usually experience low fiction traffic and are striped for one lane
in each direction. Developments may front directly on a MAJOR COLLECTOR.
      MINOR ARTERIAL. The minor arterial system connects with the major
arterials and provides trips of moderate length that distribute vehicular
collectors. Traffic movements are at high speeds and the arterials do not
penetrate residential neighborhoods. MINOR ARTERIALS are typically spaced at
one mile intervals and should provide adequate connection to major arterial.
      MINOR COLLECTOR. Minor collectors are usually located on a quarter
section line and are intended to carry high-volume traffic through a
residential neighborhood. On-street parking is usually prohibited, and homes do
not front on the collector
      MULTI-USE PATH. A paved pathway physically separated from on-street
motorized vehicular traffic by an open space or barrier (e.g., landscaping) and
designated for the exclusive use by non-motorized traffic.
      OPEN SPACE. Any parcel or area of land unimproved or improved and set
aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for the public or private use and
enjoyment.
      PEDESTRIAN WAY. A public walk dedicated entirely through a block from
street to street or providing access to school, park, transit stop, multi-use
path, recreation area or shopping center.
      PLAT. A map of a subdivision.
         (a)   PRELIMINARY PLAT. A preliminary map, including supporting data,
indicating a proposed subdivision development.
         (b)   FINAL PLAT. A map of all or part of a subdivision providing
substantial conformance to an approved preliminary plat, prepared by a
registered land surveyor.
         (c)   RECORDED PLAT. A final plat bearing all of the certificates of
approval required and duly recorded in the La Paz County Recorder's Office.
      PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE. An initial meeting between the subdivider and
municipal representative which affords the subdivider the opportunity to
present their proposals informally and discuss the project and address any
items of controversy or requirements before the preliminary plat is submitted.
      PRELIMINARY APPROVAL. Approval of the preliminary plat by the Commission
or Council and constitutes authorization to proceed with the final engineering
plans and a final plat preparation.
      PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS. A set of regulations setting forth the
details, specifications and instructions to be followed in the planning,
design, and construction of certain public improvements in the town, formulated
by the Public Works Director, the County Health department and other town
departments and as approved by the Council.
      RETENTION BASIN. A drainage basin which contains floodwater channels,
natural or manmade and/or flood control structure that are adequate to contain
existing runoff from the base storm produced by the basin; but in which
additional runoff cannot be safely contained by said channels or structures.
      STREET, ARTERIAL. Street designated on the Traffic Transportation Plan
whose primary function is to carry traffic between and through major traffic
generators.
      STREET, COLLECTOR. Street designated on the Traffic Transportation Plan
whose primary function is to carry traffic from local streets to arterial
streets and whose secondary function is to provide access to abutting
properties.
      STREET, CUL-DE-SAC. Street with only one outlet for purposes of ingress
and egress and having a turnaround at the other end for the reversal of traffic
movement.
      STREET, LOCAL. Street serving the primary function of providing access to
abutting property and intercepts collector streets.
      SUBDIVIDER. Those persons or entities as defined by A.R.S. § 9-463, as it
may be amended from time to time.
      SUBDIVISION. Improved or unimproved land or lands divided for the purpose
of financing, sale or lease, whether immediate or future, into six or more
lots, tracts or parcels of land; if a new street is involved, any such property
which is divided into two or more lots, tracts or parcels of land; or any such
property, the boundaries of which have been fixed by a recorded plat, which is
divided into more than two parts. SUBDIVISION also includes any condominium,
cooperative, community apartment or similar project containing six or more
parcels, in which an undivided interest in the land is coupled with the right
of exclusive occupancy of any unit located thereon, but plats of such projects
need not show the buildings or the manner in which the buildings or airspace
above the property shown on the plat, are going to be divided or as defined in
A.R.S. § 9-463.02, as it may be amended from time to time.
      TENTATIVE PLAT. That portion of a preliminary plan or any separate
drawing of a parcel of land that conforms with the requirements of the
subdivision regulations.
      TRANSIT FACILITIES. Bus bays, transit stops, transit shelters and
furniture, transit dedicated lanes, railroad tracks, rights-of-way, easement
and other allied equipment necessary for the safe operation of the transit
system and well-being of passengers.
      UTILITIES. Installations or facilities, underground or overhead,
furnishing for the use of the public: electricity, gas, steam, communications,
water, drainage, sewage disposal, or flood control, owned and operated by any
person, firm, corporation, municipal department, or board duly authorized by
state or municipal regulations.
      VICINITY MAP. A simple drawing of the subdivision showing its location in
relation to established town, county, state of interstate highways drawn to a
legible scale.
      WATER SUPPLY ASSURANCE (100 YEARS). Subdivision proposal must include
evidence of meeting Arizona Department of Water Resources requirements for 100
years supply.
      ZONE. A district classification established by the Zoning Ordinance for
the town, which limits or permits various and specific uses.
      ZONING CLEARANCE. The approval by the Community Development Director or
the Zoning Administrator of a plan that is in conformance with the Zoning
Ordinance for the town.
      ZONING DISTRICT. A zone area in which the same zoning regulations apply
throughout the district.
      ZONING ORDINANCE. The Zoning Ordinance for the Town of Quartzsite.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 154.015 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The Planning and Zoning Commission is hereby authorized to receive,
process and otherwise act upon application of preliminary subdivision plats in
accordance with these regulations. The Development Review Committee and the
Zoning Administrator are hereby designated to advise the Commission and the
Town Council and charged with the duty of investigating and reporting upon
matters referred to them in accordance with these regulations.
   (B)   No final plat of subdivision shall be received by the Planning and
Zoning Commission and accepted by the Town Council unless it conforms to the
provisions of these regulations and to the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.
   (C)   All applications for action under this chapter shall be filed
initially with the Community Development Department or Zoning Administrator for
processing in accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 154.016 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   (A)   The division of land, whether by subdivision plat, minor land
division, and/or lot split, shall comply with this chapter; the Zoning
Ordinance; any zoning conditions attached to the property being divided; any
development agreements; the goals and objectives of the town's adopted General
Plan; the engineering standards; requirements set forth in the Town of
Quartzsite Code of Ordinances; and all other applicable federal, state, and/or
local laws, ordinances, codes, rules, regulations, policies and/or guidelines.
   (B)   Concurrent processing. If a proposed preliminary plat is inconsistent
with the requirements for the zoning district in which the property is located
and/or any zoning conditions or stipulations attached to the property
("zoning"), the town will concurrently process the application for the proposed
preliminary plat and an application to amend the zoning (rezone) as generally
described herein and as further described in the Zoning Ordinance. The
Department shall not accept the submission of the preliminary plat until an
application to amend the zoning on the property being platted has been
submitted by the property owner or an authorized agent of the property owner.
If the ordinance amending the zoning on the property has not been enacted or
taken effect prior to the expiration of the substantive review time frame
adopted for the review of preliminary plat applications, the application shall
be denied prior to the expiration of the substantive review time frame. No pre-
development activity for a subdivision that occurs while an application for
zoning amendment is pending, including, but not limited to, the processing of a
preliminary plat, shall be construed as having been undertaken in reliance on a
favorable determination of such zoning application.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 154.017 CONFLICTING REGULATIONS.
   Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon land utilization, land
improvement or development, and land use than is imposed by existing provisions
of law, ordinance, contract or deed, this chapter shall control.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 154.018 PROCESSING FEE.
   The subdivider shall, at the time of filing, pay to the town the subdivision
application fees for water, sewer, and all other applicable fees as established
by the Town Council by resolution.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 154.019 PROHIBITION OF CIRCUMVENTION.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to offer to sell or lease, to contract
to sell or lease or to sell or lease any subdivision or part thereof until a
final plat thereof in full compliance with provisions of this section and of
any subdivision regulations which have been duly recorded in the office of the
County Recorder, is recorded in the office of the Recorder, except that this
shall not apply to any parcel or parcels of a subdivision offered for sale or
lease, contracted for sale or lease or sold or leased in compliance with any
law or subdivision regulation regulating the subdivision plat design and
improvement of subdivisions in effect at the time the subdivision was
established. The County Recorder shall not record a plat unless the plat has
been approved by the Council.
   (B)   No person, firm or corporation shall divide any lot, piece or parcel
of land for the purpose of financing, or sell or lease, or offer for sale or
lease which:
      (1)   Is within a subdivision as defined in this chapter without first
having recorded a plat thereof in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter; or
      (2)   Is not within a subdivision as defined in this chapter without
first having obtained approval by the Community Development Director as
provided in this chapter.
   (C)   No building permit shall be issued for construction on any lot, piece
or parcel of land which is not a part of a recorded subdivision plat or has not
been approved by the Community Development Director in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 154.020 MODIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Where, in the opinion of the Council, there exists extraordinary
conditions of topography, land ownership or adjacent development or other
circumstances not provided for in this chapter, the Council may modify these
regulations in such manner and to such extent as it may deem appropriate to the
public interest.
   (B)   In the case of a plan and program for a complete community or a
complete neighborhood, the Council may modify these regulations in such manner
as appears necessary and desirable to provide adequate space and improvements
for the circulation, recreation, light, air and service needs of the tract when
fully developed and populated and may require stipulations to assure
conformance with the achievement of the plan.
   (C)   In modifying the standards or requirements of these provisions as
outlined in this section, the Council may make such additional requirements as
appear necessary, in its judgment, to secure substantially the objectives of
the standards or requirements so modified.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 154.021 VACATION OF PLATS.
   (A)   Any plat or any part of any plat may be vacated by the owner of the
premises at any time before the sale of any lot therein by a Council
resolution, to which a copy of such plat shall be attached, declaring the same
to be vacated.
   (B)   If no lots in a subdivision, for which a final plat has been approved
and recorded, have been sold within five years from the date of recordation, or
if none of the improvements have been made in accordance with the assurance for
completion of improvements, the Council may on its own motion hold a public
hearing after notice to determine whether the approval of such final plat
should be revoked. Such revocation shall be effective upon recordation of a
certified copy of such resolutions; and thereupon, all streets, rights-of-way
and easements dedicated or offer for dedication by such plat shall be of no
further force or effect.
   (C)   When lots have been sold, the plat may be vacated in the manner herein
provided by all the owners of lots in such plat, by petitioning the Council for
consideration of the revocation of all or portions of the plat.
   (D)   Any action considered by the Council relating to the revocation of all
or part of a subdivision plat, whether lots or lots and rights-of-way, shall be
referred to the Planning and Zoning Commission for evaluation of at least the
following:
      (1)   Correlation of the Town General Plan;
      (2)   Correlation with proposed development in adjacent areas;
      (3)   Recommendation as to whether or not zoning changes should accompany
such action;
      (4)   Effect of such action on existing development in areas affected by
the proposed reversion or abandonment;
      (5)   Effect of such action on existing or proposed public utilities.
   (E)   Any action taken by the Council on the revocation of a plat or any
part thereof shall be documented by resolution, and said resolution shall be
recorded in the Office of the La Paz County Recorder. The recordation of this
resolution shall operate to destroy the force and effect of the recording of
the plat so vacated, and to divest all public rights in the streets, alleys,
and public grounds, and all dedications or easements laid out or described in
such plat except as specifically identified in the resolution.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
PLATTING PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS
§ 154.030 OUTLINE OF PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The preparation, submittal, review, and approval of all subdivision
plats located inside the limits of the Town of Quartzsite shall proceed through
the following progressive stages.
      (1)   Stage 1 - Pre-application conference;
      (2)   Stage 2 - Preliminary plat application;
      (3)   Stage 2a - Preliminary plat review and recommendation;
      (4)   Stage 2b - Preliminary plat approval;
      (5)   Stage 3 - Final plat application;
      (6)   Stage 3a - Final plat review and recommendation;
      (7)   Stage 3b - Final plat approval;
      (8)   Stage 4 - Recordation of plat.
   (B)   This procedure may be modified by the town based on unique or
extraordinary circumstances. The following sections depict the different stages
of the process and the necessary actions to be taken with each stage.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 154.031 STAGE 1 - PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE.
   The pre-application conference stage of the subdivision process is an
investigatory period that affords the subdivider the opportunity to present
their development intentions and obtain preliminary advice and assistance from
the appropriate town departments prior to the expense of preparing a
preliminary plat. It also affords the town the opportunity to conduct a cursory
review of the proposed subdivision and give preliminary guidance at a time when
potential land development points of conflict can be most easily resolved,
subsequent relations improved, official action simplified, and undue expense
and delay saved by the subdivider.
   (A)   In carrying out the pre-application stage, the subdivider and the
department shall be responsible for the following actions:
      (1)   Actions by the subdivider. The subdivider shall request a pre-
application conference by submitting a completed pre-application form to the
Community Development Department. Applicants shall submit their completed pre-
application form at least 14 days prior to the desired pre-application meeting
date. In addition to the pre-application form, the subdivider shall provide a
general outline of his proposal, including, but not limited to:
         (a)   Sketch plans and ideas regarding land use, street and lot
arrangement, tentative lot sizes;
         (b)   Tentative proposals regarding water supply, sewage disposal,
surface drainage and street improvements.
      (2)   Actions by the Department. Prior to the scheduled pre-application
meeting the Department will review the submitted preliminary application
material and, depending upon the scope of the proposed development, will
proceed with the following investigations:
         (a)   Check existing zoning of the tract and make recommendations if a
zoning change is necessary or desirable;
         (b)   Determine the adequacy of existing proposed schools, parks and
other public spaces;
         (c)   Inspect the site or otherwise determine its relationship to
major streets, transit services, bicycle and pedestrian facilities, utility
systems, and adjacent land uses and to determine any unusual problems, such as
topography, utilities, flooding, etc.
   (B)   During the pre-application conference the Department will then discuss
the proposal with the subdivider; provide advice on procedural steps, design
and improvement standards, general plat requirements; and discuss tentative
timetables for the project.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 154.032 STAGE 2 - PRELIMINARY PLAT APPLICATION.
   The preliminary plat stage of land and airspace subdivision includes
detailed planning, submittal, review, and approval of the preliminary plat.
This stage is intended to resolve all major issues pertinent to the land
development according to the town's policies, standards and requirements. To
avoid delay in processing the application, the subdivider shall provide the
town with all essential information in accordance with the procedures generally
described herein.
   (A)   Submittal requirements. The following information is required as part
of the preliminary plat submittal and shall be shown graphically on the plans,
by notes on the plans, or by supporting documentation supplied as part of the
plan submittal, and may comprise several sheets showing various elements of
required data. All mapped data for the same plat shall be drawn to a 40, 50,
60, 80 or 100 feet to the inch scale, whichever is most appropriate to clearly
present necessary details, adjusted to produce an overall drawing measuring 24
inches by 36 inches and in conformance with requirements contained in this
chapter and by the Town Public Works Director and other reviewing agencies.
      (1)   Five copies/sets of the proposed preliminary plat prepared in
accordance with requirements set forth in this chapter shall be filed with the
Community Development Director. Submission shall include applicable application
form, a statement identifying the type of assurance that will be made for the
completion of improvements and fees as established in the town fee schedule.
Copies of the preliminary plat shall be reproduced in the form of black line
prints on a white background. Scheduling of the case for Development Review
Committee (DRC) meeting shall be dependent upon adequacy of data presented and
completion of processing;
         (a)   All preliminary plat submittals shall provide "identification
and descriptive data", "existing conditions data", "proposed conditions data",
and "proposed utility methods" information by graphic representation or note as
further outlined in division (B).
      (2)   If the proposed preliminary plat is within a planned development
(PD), ten copies of the approved PD site plan shall also be submitted as
supporting documentation;
      (3)   Submit two copies of the preliminary drainage report in a separate
bound folder, prepared in compliance with La Paz County Design and Construction
Manual;
      (4)   Submit two copies each of the preliminary water and sewer report in
separate bound folders, prepared in compliance with the Town of Quartzsite
Standards, La Paz County Environmental Programs Division and the Arizona
Department of Environmental Quality;
      (5)   Submit two copies of the preliminary landscape plan for all off
site, open space, trails, and retention area landscaping, prepared in
compliance with Article XVI, Landscape and Buffering of the Zoning Ordinance;
      (6)   Submit two copies of the preliminary Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA)
report, as required by the town due to the volume of traffic or other traffic
related issues generated by the proposed project, prepared in compliance with
La Paz County Public Works Design and Construction Manual;
      (7)   Submit two copies of the preliminary geotechnical report, as
required by the town, in a separate bound folder, prepared in compliance with
Town of Quartzsite Standards and the La Paz County Public Works Design and
Construction Manual;
      (8)   Submit two copies of the environmental site assessment, as required
by the town to identify the presence of any hazardous waste sites on the
subject property and evaluate the future use of the site, prepared in
compliance with the Town of Quartzsite Standards, La Paz County Environmental
Programs Division and the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality;
      (9)   As required by the town, submit documentation that a site records
check, for potential cultural resources, has been conducted in conjunction with
the State Historic Preservation Office;
      (10)   One CD containing electronic PDF copies of all submittal
information.
   (B)   Preliminary plat preparation. The following information shall be
delineated on the preliminary plat except those items determined by the staff
as not being pertinent to a particular parcel/tract.
      (1)   Identification and descriptive data.
         (a)   The proposed name of the subdivision shall be clearly indicated
and include the location by section, township and range with reference by
dimension and bearing to two section or quarter section corners. Basis of
bearings and elevation must be stated on the plat;
         (b)   Name, address, phone number, and seal of registered land
surveyor preparing the preliminary plat and the registered civil engineer
preparing the improvements;
         (c)   Name, address, and phone number of developer and/or subdivider;
         (d)   Scale, north point (pointing up or to the right), and date of
preparation including any subsequent revision dates;
         (e)   Location map at 1 inch = 1,000 feet or 1 inch = 2,000 feet which
shall show the relationship of the proposed subdivision to arterial and
collector streets;
         (f)   A surveyed boundary (i.e., legal description), including
distances, lengths and bearings and the total size (acreage) of the proposed
subdivision.
      (2)   Existing conditions data.
         (a)   Contours with maximum interval as follows in Table 1: Slope
Interval. Contours shall be shown extending a minimum of 50 feet from the
external boundaries of the proposed development so to adequately reflect the
character and drainage of the land. Copies of USGS Maps are not acceptable;
   Table 1: Slope Interval
 
Slope Interval
1-2%  2 ft.
3-9%  5 ft.
10+%  10 ft.
 
         (b)   Location of fences, existing structures, wells, canals,
irrigation materials, private ditches (open or covered), washes, stock ponds or
other water features and characteristics that could have a bearing on the
review;
         (c)   Location, direction of flow, and extent of areas subject to
flooding or storm runoff must be defined, whether such inundation is frequent,
periodic, or occasional;
         (d)   Location, widths and type of any and all easements (public and
private) of public record of all private and public streets of public record
that may exist around the perimeter of the site, through or across it. Show any
permanent structures that are to remain, including water wells and public or
private utility lines within, adjacent to, or extending from the proposed
development;
         (e)   Show all driveways, streets and median openings within 325 feet
of any proposed driveway or street intersection on the opposite side of the
perimeter streets;
         (f)   Name, book, and page numbers of any recorded subdivision
adjacent to or having common boundaries with the proposed development;
         (g)   The existing base zone of the subject and adjacent parcel(s),
the zoning case number, if any, and the case number of the approved PD of which
the proposed development is a part, if applicable;
         (h)   The gross acreage of the subject parcel(s). Do not include
previously dedicated rights of way in this figure;
         (i)   Boundaries and dimensions of the parcel(s) to be subdivided
shall be fully dimensioned;
         (j)   Engineer's calculations for each tributary area of the runoff
for ten-year, 50- year and 100-year frequency storms. The values to be
indicated along the boundary of the parcel for all points of drainage entering
and exiting the property.
      (3)   Proposed conditions data.
         (a)   Street layout, including design cross section, preliminary curve
data, curve lengths, proposed street names based on existing projected
alignments wherever possible, and pedestrian connections to adjoining
developments;
         (b)   Typical lot dimensions (scaled), dimensions of all corner lots,
lots on curvilinear sections of streets, and all lots where the number of sides
exceed four. Each lot shall be numbered individually and the total number of
lots or dwelling units provided. Where plats will consist of a number of units/
phases, utilizing the same subdivision name, the lot numbering shall be
consecutive through the total number of lots or units;
         (c)   Submit a lot statistical table;
         (d)   Designation of all land to be dedicated or reserved for open
space, parks, schools, well sites, or other public or private use with use
indicated;
         (e)   If multiple uses are planned (multiple residential, commercial,
industrial, or office), such areas shall be clearly designated, together with
existing zoning classification and status of zoning change, if any;
         (f)   If the subdivision is larger than 40 acres or the developer is
planning to plat the proposed development in phases, development phasing plans
must be so indicated. If the developer later decides to phase the development,
it will be necessary to resubmit for a second review;
         (g)   Show minimum setback lines. Where there are lots with more than
four sides or whose shape may be considered atypical, show all setbacks;
         (h)   Submit subdivision fencing detail, if applicable, depicting the
type of fencing being proposed; including elevations, and general locations;
         (i)   Proposed storm water disposal system, preliminary calculations,
and layout of proposed drainage system; the direction of proposed street
drainage to be indicated by arrows on the plat; and, if required by the town, a
proposal to provide for the retention of storm water generated on the property.
Retention of storm water to comply with La Paz County Public Works Design and
Construction Manual requirements and the design standards of this chapter;
         (j)   Compliance with rules as may be established by the state
department of environmental quality and/or state department of water resources
relating to the provision of domestic water supply and sanitary sewerage
disposal.
      (4)   Proposed utility methods.
         (a)   Sewage disposal. A statement as to the type of facilities
proposed shall appear on the preliminary plat. Also show the preliminary sewer
layout indicating line sizes and manhole and cleanout locations.
         (b)   Water supply. A statement as to the assured water supply for the
development shall appear on the preliminary plat. Subdivisions having lots less
than one net acre in area shall be provided with a complete water distribution
system which will adequately serve the subdivision in the opinion of the
political entity and agencies having jurisdiction. The preliminary layout of
the water system shall be shown, indicating fire hydrants, valves, meter
vaults, water line sizes and locations.
         (c)   Electric supply. A statement as to the electric supply for the
development shall appear on the preliminary plat. Any necessary easements shall
be shown on the preliminary plat.
         (d)   Gas supply. A statement as to the gas supply for the development
shall appear on the preliminary plat. Any necessary easements shall be shown on
the preliminary plat.
         (e)   Telephone service. A statement as to the telephone service for
the development shall appear on the preliminary plat. Any necessary easements
shall be shown on the preliminary plat.
         (f)   Garbage service. A statement as to the garbage service for the
development shall appear on the preliminary plat.
         (g)   Cable television. If applicable, a statement as to the cable
television service for the development shall appear on the preliminary plat.
   (C)   Preliminary plat filing fee. The subdivider shall, at the time of
filing, pay to the Community Development Department the preliminary plat
application fee(s) as specified on a separate fee schedule adopted by the Town
Council.
   (D)   Date of filing. The date of filing a preliminary plat shall be fixed
as the date on which all of the maps and information required by this chapter
have been filed, as determined by the staff and the required fees have been
paid.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 154.033 STAGE 2A - PRELIMINARY PLAT REVIEW AND RECOMMENDATION.
   The Development Review Committee (DRC) shall review the preliminary plat and
supporting documentation for compliance with the applicable requirements in
accordance with the procedures generally described herein.
   (A)   Completeness review. The submittal shall be checked by the town for
completeness and assigned a case number; if incomplete as to those requirements
set forth in this chapter, the submittal shall be rejected and the subdivider
notified within 15 days of the date the application was received.
   (B)   Preliminary plat distribution. Upon receipt of a complete preliminary
plat application, the town shall forward one copy and/or digital file of the
preliminary plat to each of the following, as applicable to obtain additional
comments: each member of the DRC, any adjacent municipality, community
services, school or other duly authorized district, and to any utility company
serving the area within its facilities. The staff may change the reviewing
agencies and number of copies required to be filed as may be necessary.
   (C)   Preliminary plat review and recommendation.
      (1)   The DRC and all other notified agencies shall review the plat for
matters within their jurisdiction and promptly report their recommendations in
writing to the Community Development Director who shall check the plat for
conformity to this chapter. If additional questions about the plat are
presented by any reviewing agency, staff may arrange a project review meeting
with that agency to discuss said questions with the applicant or applicant
representative.
      (2)   The failure of any officer, department, municipality, district or
agency to report to the Commission in writing within 30 days after transmittal
of the preliminary plat shall be deemed as an approval; except that an
additional five days shall be granted upon the written request of any duly
authorized person or agency.
      (3)   When all replies have been received, or the specified date of reply
reached, the Community Development Director shall prepare a correlated report,
including all comments from each reviewing agency and forward a copy to the
subdivider and/or authorized agent. The Department's comments shall identify
areas in which the preliminary plat submission, which includes the preliminary
plat and all required supporting documentation, requires revision in order to
comply with applicable requirements.
      (4)   The subdivider shall be responsible for revising the preliminary
plat submission in accordance with the comments provided by the Department. The
response to the Department's comments shall be in writing and in the manner and
format requested by the Department.
      (5)   Once preliminary plat is in conformance with these regulations, the
Community Development Director shall schedule the review of the preliminary
plat by the Planning and Zoning Commission at their next regularly scheduled
public meeting.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 154.034 STAGE 2B - PRELIMINARY PLAT APPROVAL.
   (A)   Review by Planning and Zoning Commission. The Commission shall hold a
public hearing to review the preliminary plat and recommend to approve, approve
with conditions, or deny said plat.
   (B)   Town Council review and action. The Council shall hold a public
hearing to review the preliminary plat and approve, approve with conditions or
deny said plat.
   (C)   Conditions of preliminary approval.
      (1)   The subdivider or his or her agent and his or her engineer shall be
present at each meeting. The subdividers engineer may act as agent.
      (2)   The Council may impose conditions on the approval of the
preliminary plat and/or on the approval of any extension of a preliminary plat
approval as the Council deems necessary to implement the requirements of any
federal, state, and/or local law, ordinance, code, rule, regulation, policy
and/or guideline; to protect the public from potential adverse impacts from the
proposed development; or to fulfill an identified need for public services.
      (3)   When in the opinion of the Council the location of the proposed
subdivision is such that a significant impact may develop between future
residents of the subdivision and existing land uses in the vicinity,
appropriate special easements dedicated to adjacent property owners may be
required of the subdivider prior to recording of the final map. These easements
may provide for the continued occasional generation of smoke, odors, noise,
dust and spraying of pesticides as necessary.
      (4)   The action of the Town Council shall be communicated in writing to
the subdivider. Conditions of approval or disapproval shall be noted in the
Council meeting minutes and in a written correspondence provided to the
subdivider.
   (D)   Significance of preliminary approval. Preliminary plat approval
constitutes authorization for the subdivider to submit the final plat and the
improvement plans and specifications for the proposed project. Preliminary
approval is based on the following terms:
      (1)   The basic conditions under which preliminary approval of the
preliminary plat is granted will not be substantially changed prior to the
expiration date.
      (2)   After approval of the preliminary plat by the Council, the
subdivider shall, within one year, cause a final plat of the subdivision or any
part thereof to be prepared in accordance with a complete survey of the
subdivision and in compliance with the approved preliminary plat within the
provisions of this chapter.
         (a)   Upon application by the subdivider, the Council may grant an
extension for submission of the final plat of one year. In the event the
Council denies a subdivider’s application for extension, the decision shall be
final.
         (b)   If the subdivider fails to record a final plat for any phase of
the preliminary plat within one year, the preliminary plat approval will expire
unless the subdivider applies for and receives an extension from either the
Town Council.
         (c)   Any application of a subdivider for such extension of time for
the recording of a final plat tract map shall be made in writing to the Council
not less than 30 days prior to the expiration of the time allowed.
      (3)   Conditional approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute
approval of the final plat. Rather, it shall be deemed an expression of
approval to the layout submitted on the preliminary plat as a guide to the
preparation of the final plat which will be submitted for approval of the Town
Council upon fulfillment of the requirements of these regulations and the
conditions of the conditional approval.
   (E)   Appeals.
      (1)   The decision of the Council to approve, approve with conditions or
deny the preliminary plat shall be final.
      (2)   Whenever standards of subdivision design or subdivision improvement
standards are requested to be modified or altered, application shall be made in
writing on a form provided by the Community Development Department, stating
fully the reasons for the application and the facts relied upon by the
subdivider. The Town Council may, after receiving a recommendation from the
Community Development Director and Public Works Director, allow a modification
from the subdivision regulations, provided facts are presented to the
satisfaction of the Council, that the modifications will not be detrimental to
the public welfare or injurious to other property in the vicinity.
   (F)   Preliminary plat required re-subdivision. A preliminary plat showing
data and information required by this section shall be required when the re-
subdivision of a lot, lots, tracts, or parcels previously recorded as a
subdivision or portion of a subdivision results in three or more additional
lots, tracts or parcels.
   (G)   Re-filing following disapproval. In the event that a preliminary plat
is disapproved by the Council, a new preliminary plat of the same area or
portion thereof may only be filed, within six months of the date of
disapproval, if the re-submittal is not in substantial conformance to the
original application. The applicant shall be required to submit a new
preliminary plat application, including fees and shall adhere to the same
review process.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 154.035 STAGE 3 - FINAL PLAT APPLICATION.
   This stage includes the final design of the subdivision, engineering of the
public improvements, and submittal by the subdivider of the final reports and
plans for all of the required subdivision improvements to the town for
approval, including the submittal of the final plat for review and action by
the Town Council.
   (A)   Submittal requirements. The final plat shall be presented in
accordance with requirements set forth in this section, and shall substantially
conform to the approved preliminary plat and any other applicable federal,
state, and/or local law, ordinance, code, rule, regulation, policy and/or
guideline. The following required information shall be shown graphically on the
plans, by notes on the plans, or by supporting documentation supplied as part
of the plan submittal, and may comprise several sheets showing various elements
of required data. All mapped data for the same plat shall be drawn at a scale
no smaller than 100 feet to the inch (80 feet to the inch is preferred),
adjusted to produce an overall drawing measuring 24 inches by 36 inches. The
Department may request additional information and may, during the final plat
review process, modify or waive submission requirements as deemed appropriate
to the size or nature of the subdivision.
      (1)   Final plat. The subdivider shall file with the town the original
and three full size (24 inches by 36 inches) black line copies of the final
plat along with copies of the approved PD (if applicable) for final review by
the town, together with a letter of transmittal, indicating "Final Plat Review
Requested".
         (a)   All final plat submittals shall provide "identification data",
"survey data", "descriptive data", and "dedication and acknowledgement"
information by graphic representation or note as further outlined in division
(B).
         (b)   If the developer is planning to construct the proposed
development in phases, the developer must submit separate final plats for each
phase of the project. Project phases shall be consistent with the development
phasing plans approved with the preliminary plat.
      (2)   Improvement plans. Improvement plans, reports and other documents,
shall be prepared and submitted, both in hardcopy and electronic PDF format, in
accordance with the procedures and standards outlined below and in compliance
with the La Paz County Public Works Design and Construction Manual.
         (a)   Grading and drainage plans and report. Original and four prints
and a narrative report that details the proposed street grades, proposed storm
water retention system, street sectional details, and storm water calculations
designed in compliance with this chapter and all applicable town, state, and
county regulations.
         (b)   Paving plans. Original and four prints of a map showing the plan
view and profile of the proposed on- and off-site street improvements and
pavement cross section designed in compliance with this chapter and all
applicable town, state, and county regulations.
         (c)   Water and sewer plans and report. Original and four prints of a
map and a narrative report that details the proposed water and sewer
distribution system designed in compliance with this chapter and all applicable
town, state, and county regulations.
         (d)   Landscape plans. Original and one print of the final landscape
plans that detail the proposed landscape design in compliance with this chapter
and all applicable town, state, and county regulations.
      (3)   Development agreement.
         (a)   Following preliminary plat approval and prior to construction of
any infrastructure within any development to which these regulations are
applicable, the Town Manager may require an applicant to enter into a
development agreement with the town that shall govern the subdivision if there
are any public improvements, pro rata payments, escrow deposits or other future
considerations, or if the town participates in the cost of any public
improvements, there are nonstandard development regulations or for any other
reason he considers applicable.
         (b)   The Town Manager shall prescribe the application form,
documents, notice and approval process required for the preparation and
implementation of each development agreement.
      (4)   Dedications. All streets, highways, alleys and parcels of land
shown on the final plat and intended for any public use shall be offered for
dedication. Such dedications shall be free of all and any encumbrances incurred
subsequent to the date of filing of a final plat.
      (5)   Deed restrictions. The subdivision covenants, conditions and
restrictions (CC&Rs) shall be submitted to the town for review as part of the
final plat and improvement plan submittal package. Said covenants shall provide
the method of assurance that the proposed streets, landscaping, storm drainage
facilities and other assets of the subdivision will be maintained in
perpetuity. This includes the raising and, expenditure of funds necessary for
the maintenance of any private streets shown on the map. Said covenants shall
also provide for the enforcement of yard and private land use regulations
proposed to be established and for their amendment.
      (6)   Title report. Evidence of title, which shall be in the form of a
certificate of title, a Preliminary I Title Report or a Policy of Title
Insurance issued by a title company authorized by the laws of the State of
Arizona to write the same, showing the names of persons having any interest and
any record title interest in the land to be subdivided, together with the
nature of their respective interests therein. In the event that any dedication
is to be made for public use of any property shown on such final map of land,
the said certificates of title or policy of title insurance shall be presently
defined in A.R.S. § 20-1562, as amended.
      (7)   Final plat and improvement plan filing fee. The subdivider shall,
at the time of filing the application(s) for the final plat and improvement
plans, pay the town the final plat application fee and improvement plan review
fee in accordance with a separate fee schedule adopted by the Town Council.
   (B)   Final plat preparation. The following information shall be required as
part of the final plat submittal.
      (1)   Identification data.
         (a)   A title which includes the name of the subdivision and its
location by number of section, township, range, and county;
         (b)   Name, address and seal of the Arizona-registered land surveyor
preparing the final plat;
         (c)   Scale, north arrow and date of final plat preparation;
         (d)   Sheet number in relation to total sheet count;
         (e)   The name, address and telephone number of the property owner;
         (f)   Name, address and seal of the Arizona-registered civil engineer
responsible for the engineering of the proposed subdivision.
      (2)   Survey data.
         (a)   The corners of the plat shall be located on the monument lines
of abutting streets; boundaries of the parcel(s) to be subdivided fully
balanced and closed, showing all bearings and distances, determined by an
accurate survey in the field. The surveyor of record shall also provide a copy
of the computer closure, properly stamped and signed showing registration
number. All dimensions shall be expressed in feet and decimals thereof;
         (b)   Any excepted parcel(s) within or surrounded by the plat
boundaries shall be noted as "Not a Part of This Subdivision" and show all
bearings and distances of the excepted parcel as determined by an accurate
survey in the field. All dimensions shall be expressed in feet and decimals
thereof;
         (c)   Location and description of cardinal points to which all
dimensions, angles, bearings and similar data on the plat shall be referenced.
Each of two separate corners of the subdivision traverse shall be tied by
course and distance to separate section corners or quarter-section corners. All
subdivision survey data including boundary bearings and distances and lot
closure and area calculations shall be submitted to the town by an Arizona-
registered land surveyor;
         (d)   A statement labeled "Map Notes" shall be shown on one sheet of
the final plat. Such statements shall include the basis of bearings, what
monuments were found, what monuments and pints were set, a key to symbols and
abbreviation and such other information deemed by the Public Works Director to
be necessary;
         (e)   Location of all physical encroachments upon the boundaries of
the tract;
         (f)   Total subdivision gross acres, benchmark information and basis
of bearing information;
         (g)   Total number of lots, tracts and parcels, and the size, in
square feet, of each lot, tract or parcel. The size of lots, tracts or parcels
greater than ten acres in size may be expressed in acres.
      (3)   Descriptive data.
         (a)   Names, centerlines, right of way lines, courses, length and
width of all public streets, alleys, pedestrian ways, and utility easements;
radii, point of tangency, curve lengths, and central angles of all curvilinear
streets, and alleys, radii of all rounded street line intersections shall be
shown on the plat;
         (b)   Centerline data, width, sidelines and purpose of all easements
to which the subdivision is subject shall be noted. Distances and bearings on
the sidelines of lots which are cut by an easement shall be so shown as to
indicate clearly the actual lengths of the lot lines. The width of the
easements and the lengths and bearings of the lines thereof and sufficient ties
to locate the easements definitely with respect to the subdivision shall be
shown. The easement shall be clearly labeled and identified, and if already of
record, proper reference to the records given. Easements being dedicated shall
be so indicated in the certificate of dedication. Easements shall be shown on
the map by broken lines;
         (c)   All drainage easements and/or tracts shall be shown on all
residential plats. No structure shall be allowed in these easements that will
obstruct drainage. All major drainage ways shall be dedicated drainage
easements, right-of-way or tracts as determined by the Public Works Director.
Commercial and industrial plats which provide self-contained and privately
owned underground drainage systems and structures shall be required to provide
private drainage easements within their sites. Public drainage easements shall
be required for all retention basins which accept drainage from a public
street. Any channel or wash within a residential or commercial project site
that has a Q100 storm event flow of 100 CFS or greater shall be contained
within a drainage easement designated as a tract;
         (d)   All lots shall be numbered by consecutive numbers throughout the
plat with no omissions or duplications. Each lot shall be shown in its entirety
on one sheet. All "tracts" and "parcels" shall be designated, lettered, or
named and clearly dimensioned; parcels which are not part of the subdivision
shall be so designated. Ownership and maintenance responsibility for common
open space areas and tracts shall be indicated on the plat;
         (e)   Intersecting lot lines, parcel numbers and current zoning of all
adjacent property. Location of all adjoining town and county boundaries as well
as subdivisions with name, date, book, and page number of recordation noted, or
if unrecorded, so noted;
         (f)   Any proposed private deed restrictions to be imposed upon the
plat or any part or parts thereof pertaining to the intended use of the land,
and to be recognized by the town, shall be noted on the plat.
      (4)   Dedication and acknowledgment.
         (a)   Dedication. There shall be required as part of the final plat
submittal a statement of dedication of all streets, alleys, drainage ways and
drainage detention/retention basins, pedestrian/bicycle ways, equestrian trails
and easements, and other easements for public use, including sanitation,
utility, fire and other emergency related vehicles, executed by the person or
persons holding title of record, by persons holding titles as vendees under
land contract, by the spouse(s) of said parties, lien holders and all other
parties having an interest in the property. If lands dedicated are liened, the
lien holder shall also sign the plat. Dedication shall include a written
location by section, township and range, of the tract. If the plat contains
private streets, a public easement shall be reserved which shall include the
right to install and maintain utilities in any approved private street,
including refuse collection, fire and other emergency services.
         (b)   Acknowledgment of dedication. Execution of dedication shall be
acknowledged and certified by a notary public.
   (C)   Final plat distribution. Upon receipt of a complete final plat
application, the town shall forward one copy and/or digital file of the final
plat and improvement plans to each of the following, as applicable to obtain
additional comments: each member of the DRC, any adjacent municipality,
community services, school or other duly authorized district, and to any
utility company serving the area within its facilities. The staff may change
the reviewing agencies and number of copies required to be filed as may be
necessary.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 154.036 STAGE 3A - FINAL PLAT AND IMPROVEMENT PLAN REVIEW AND RECOMMENDATION.
   After issuance of a receipt for the final plat, improvement plans,
accompanying supplementary data, and filing fee, the Community Development
Director shall review the plat for substantial conformity to the approved
preliminary plat, Subdivision Ordinance and Town of Quartzsite Standards. If
the submittal is complete, the Director shall distribute sets of the plans to
the appropriate reviewing departments, agencies and utility companies as
follows:
   (A)   The Public Works Director, Development Review Committee and any
appropriate agency or utility company shall conduct a plan check, an internal
review of the final plat and improvement plans and if necessary, examine and
approve any revisions required of the developer before forwarding the final
plat and improvement plans and any review comments to the Community Development
Director. If additional questions about the plat or improvement plans are
presented by any reviewing agency, staff may arrange a project review meeting
with that agency to discuss said questions with the applicant or applicant
representative.
   (B)   When all comments have been received the Community Development
Director shall prepare a correlated report (if necessary), including all
comments from each reviewing agency, and forward a copy to the subdivider and/
or authorized agent. The Department's comments shall identify areas in which
the final plat submission, which includes the final plat, improvement plans and
all required supporting documentation, requires revision in order to comply
with applicable requirements.
   (C)   The subdivider shall be responsible for revising the final plat
submission and all improvement plans in accordance with the comments provided
by the Department. The response to the Department's comments shall be in
writing and in the manner and format requested by the Department.
   (D)   No final plat shall be forwarded to the Council for final approval
until improvement plans and the subdividers cost estimate have been approved by
the Public Works Director.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 154.037 STAGE 3B - FINAL PLAT APPROVAL.
   (A)   Final plat approval procedures. Upon final submittal by the
subdivider, the Community Development Director shall initiate either of the
following approval procedures:
      (1)   If any changes are proposed to the final plat, which constitute
changes in the number of lots, an altered access or traffic way or create a
significant impact that would affect the approved preliminary plat, the
Director shall require the final plat to first be reviewed and acted upon by
the Commission, prior to final Council approval.
      (2)   If the final plat is in conformance with the preliminary plat and
all applicable regulations, the Community Development Director shall place the
item on the agenda of the next scheduled meeting of the Council, for
consideration and final approval.
   (B)   Council approval.
      (1)   The Council shall consider the final plat and the Department's
recommendations and may take action to approve, approve with conditions, or
deny the final plat.
      (2)   The decision of the Council to approve, approve with conditions or
deny the final plat shall be final.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 154.038 STAGE 4 - RECORDATION OF PLAT.
   (A)   Following Town Council approval, the final plat shall not be recorded
until all requirements of §§
154.050 to
154.055 have been met to the satisfaction of the Public Works Director and the
Town Attorney.
   (B)   Prior to recordation, the subdivider shall submit to the town the
following fees and documents in a form acceptable to the town:
      (1)   A certification that a development agreement, if required, between
the town and subdivider has been executed;
      (2)   A letter of agreement between the serving utilities and the
developer;
      (3)   Final plat recording fees;
      (4)   Three identical copies of the protective covenants and
restrictions;
      (5)   Proof of boundary closure;
      (6)   One original mylar and two mylar copies of the final plat and all
other easements, maps of dedication, warranty deeds and other legal documents
that need to be recorded. The final plat shall measure exactly 24 inches by 36
inches with a left hand margin of two inches;
      (7)   The final plat should also be submitted as an electronic file. Maps
should be submitted as PDF files and AutoCAD drawings files and conform to La
Paz County Standards and Specifications for CAD drawings. All letters, figures,
dedications, certificates, acknowledgments and signatures shall be made in
black, waterproof India ink or equal. The net size of each sheet shall be 24 by
36 inches. A marginal line shall be drawn completely around each sheet, leaving
an entirely blank margin of one-half inch except the left margin which shall be
two inches;
      (8)   The final plat shall show all certificates and acknowledgments.
They shall appear on the final plat or they may be combined on a separate mylar
of the same size as the final plat. Certificates and acknowledgments, which
shall appear on final plats, may be prepared according to the format available
from the Public Works Director. The notations that are standard on every final
plat include, but are not limited to, assurance statement, conveyance and
dedication, notary acknowledgment, town approval, department approval, and
surveyors certification;
      (9)   If improvements are constructed, one set of mylars and two sets of
black line copies of the as-built drawings along with a PDF format of the as-
built drawings, a final engineering report, and a one-year construction
assurance warranty to the town.
   (C)   Upon receipt of required recording fees and documents listed in
divisions (A) and (B) above, the town shall then cause the final plat to be
recorded in the office of the County Recorder.
   (D)   Certificate of recordation by the County Recorder is caused to be
placed on the recording copies and filed in the office of the County Recorder.
(Copies with book and page number can be requested by the subdivider for the
county's standard fee).
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 154.039 REPLATS (RE-SUBDIVISION FINAL PLAT).
   (A)   Any division of a lot in a recorded subdivision or any change in lot
lines in a recorded subdivision shall be processed in accordance with §§
154.035 and
154.036, after a pre-application conference with town staff as provided in §
154.031.
   (B)   Any replat involving the dedication of land for a public street or any
off-site public improvements shall comply with all procedures set forth in §§
154.035 and
154.036. If the abandonment of a street, alley or public utility easement or
other recorded easement in a previously recorded subdivision is necessary (§
154.038), the replat of that area shall be processed concurrently with the
abandonment and recorded immediately subsequent to the recordation of the
abandonment.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 154.040 ABANDONMENT OF RECORDED SUBDIVISION (REVERSION TO ACREAGE MAP).
   (A)   Pursuant to the provisions of A.R.S. Title 28, Article 14, Section 1,
Subsections 28-1901 through 28-1908, the abandonment of all or part of a
recorded subdivision may be initiated by written petition to the Town Council.
All owners of real property in said subdivision requesting abandonment of all
streets, alleys and easements within said subdivision and giving the legal
description and recording information thereof shall sign the petition.
   (B)   Applications for the abandonment of a recorded subdivision are filed
with the Zoning Administrator and referred for recommendation to the
appropriate town staff and utility companies. Procedures for approval of the
abandonment are the same as for approval of final plats. After the Town Council
approval of the abandonment of any streets, alleys and easements within the
subdivision, and after Town Council approval of the abandonment resolution for
the recorded subdivision, and after the abandonment resolutions are recorded
with the County Recorder's Office, the subdivision is removed from the official
maps.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 154.041 FAILURE TO PROCEED.
   The subdivider shall complete off-site improvements within one year from the
date of the final plat recording. Upon written application of the subdivider
the Public Works Director may consider a request for a one year extension to
complete improvements. In the event the Public Works Director denies the
subdivider's request for extension, the subdivider may appeal within 30 days of
denial to the Town Council. If subdivider fails to complete construction of
off-site improvements within one year, or within two years if an extension is
granted, the town may complete the construction of such off-site improvements
by drawing upon the funds posted by the subdivider for assurance.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 154.042 CONDOMINIUM SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   The development of condominiums shall be subject to the following
requirements, unless as may be otherwise set forth in A.R.S. Title 33, Chapter
9.
   (B)   Application requirements, processing and approval regulations
contained within this chapter shall apply to all condominium subdivisions and/
or conversion subdivisions. A preliminary site plan shall be considered a
preliminary plat and a final site plan, a final plat as specified under this
section.
   (C)   In order for the condominium subdivision application to be considered
complete, the applicant shall provide to the town any plans, specifications
and/or analyses needed to show that the proposed condominium subdivision is in
compliance with this chapter, the Zoning Ordinance, and any other applicable
federal, state, and/or local law, ordinance, code, rule, regulation, policy
and/or guideline.
   (D)   Condominium subdivision plats shall be certified by a registered
architect or engineer and include the following:
      (1)   Conversions of conventional apartment developments.
         (a)   Preliminary plats shall show, in addition to all information
required by the Department checklist for site plans, the following:
            1.   Location of all building shown on the plat and the manner in
which the airspace is to be divided;
            2.   Firewall construction, if required by the Fire Code;
            3.   Additional parking, if required;
            4.   Retention basins, if required;
            5.   Additional open space, if required;
            6.   Locations of individual utility lines and meters, if needed.
         (b)   Final plats shall show:
            1.   Location of all building shown on the plat and the manner in
which the airspace is to be divided;
            2.   Private drives and parking areas;
            3.   Required easements;
            4.   Designation of commonly owned property;
            5.   Necessary dedication statement;
            6.   Statement concerning the formation of a homeowner's
association for the maintenance of the commonly owned property;
            7.   Necessary certifications and approvals;
            8.   As specified by the Public Works Director, but not limited to,
grading plans, floor plans, elevations, and landscape plans.
      (2)   New developments.
         (a)   Preliminary plats shall show all of the information required by
the Department site plan checklist.
         (b)   Final plats shall show all of the information required in
division (D)(1)(b) above;
   (E)   Upon final condominium subdivision approval and recordation, the owner
of the condominium subdivision may build that condominium subdivision,
including individual condominium units, using the exact dimensions and
locations as shown on the final condominium subdivision plat map. However, if
the owner proposes any changes to the dimensions or locations as shown on the
final condominium subdivision plat map, including but not limited to the
locations and dimensions of individual condominium units, the owner shall be
required to re-subdivide the condominium subdivision, and the re-subdivision
shall be required to be in conformance with the subdivision and zoning
regulations in effect at the time of replat application.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
ASSURANCE FOR COMPLETION AND MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENT
§ 154.050 ASSURANCE FOR COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Upon submittal of the preliminary plat, the subdivider shall state the
type of assurance that will be made for the completion of improvements in a
subdivision.
   (B)   The subdivider or his or her agent shall furnish with the final plat
an estimate of the cost of installing and/or constructing the required
improvements, prepared by a professional engineer who is registered to practice
in the State of Arizona. The Public Works Director shall review and approve the
cost estimate before the subdivider's engineer's cost estimate is accepted as
the basis for the amount of the surety required for completion of the
subdivision improvements. All construction shall be inspected while in progress
by the Public Works Department and must be approved in writing upon completion
by the Public Works Director.
   (C)   No final subdivision plat shall be recorded by the town unless one or
more of the following methods of assurance are submitted with the final plat.
Said assurance shall be entered into in the form of a written agreement between
the subdivider, the town and the financial institution, title insurance escrow
company, bonding agent or other third party. Said assurance shall cover water
distribution system; sanitary sewer collection system; street grading, base
course and asphaltic concrete paving; concrete curbs, gutters and sidewalks;
drainage structures where required; street signs; survey monuments in streets
including swing ties; lot corner monuments and other improvements required as a
condition of approval.
      (1)   Construction of improvements prior to final plat recordation. If
the subdivider chooses to construct the required improvements prior to
recording of the final plat, he or she shall submit the construction plans to
the Public Works Director for approval, and a copy of a title report to the
Community Development Director. Upon satisfaction by the Public Works Director
that the improvements have been completed in accordance with the approved plans
he shall schedule the improvements for acceptance into the town maintenance
system by the Council. This shall be scheduled in conjunction with the approval
of the final plat, in the case where the final plat has not already been
approved. A final plat approval shall specify the time in which the subdivision
improvements are to be completed.
      (2)   Surety performance and payment bonds. The subdivider shall obtain
an irrevocable security performance and payment bond from a surety bonding
company authorized to do business in the State of Arizona. The bond shall be
payable to the town, and shall be in an amount sufficient to cover the entire
cost (100%), as estimated by the engineer of record, and approved by the Public
Works Director, of installing and/or constructing all required improvements for
property covered by the final plat. A final plat approval shall specify the
time in which the subdivision improvements are to be completed and the surety
performance bond shall specify that the bond funds shall be provided to the
town if the improvements are not completed and accepted by the Town Council by
the specified completion date. All bonds must be in compliance with A.R.S. §§
34-222 et seq.
      (3)   Escrow account.
         (a)   The subdivider shall deposit cash, or other instrument readily
convertible into cash at face value, either with the town or in escrow with a
financial institution or title insurance escrow company. The use of any
instrument other than cash, and the financial institution or title insurance
escrow company with which the funds are to be deposited, shall both be subject
to the approval of the Council.
         (b)   The amount of the deposit shall be at least equal to the entire
cost (100%), as estimated by the engineer of record and approved by the Public
Works Director, of installing and/or constructing all required improvements for
the property covered by the final plat.
         (c)   In the case of an escrow account, the subdivider shall file with
the Council an agreement between the financial institution or title insurance
company and himself, guaranteeing that the funds of said escrow account shall
be held in trust until released by the Town Council and may not be used or
pledged by the subdivider as security in any other matter during that period. A
final plat approval shall specify the time in which the subdivision
improvements are to be completed and the escrow monies shall be provided to the
town if the improvements are not completed and accepted by the Town Council by
the specified completion date.
      (4)   Letter of credit. The subdivider shall provide, from a financial
institution subject to the approval of the Town Council, an irrevocable letter
of credit, in the amount at least equal to the entire cost (100%), as estimated
by the engineer of record and approved by the Public Works Director, of
installing and/or constructing all required improvements for the property
covered by the final plat. A final plat approval shall specify the time in
which the subdivision improvements are to be completed and the monies from the
letter of credit shall be provided to the town if the improvements are not
completed and accepted by the Town Council by the specified completion date.
      (5)   Property escrow. If the subdivider wishes to record a final plat
prior to the completion of off-site improvements, he or she may set up a
property escrow account with a title insurance company, whereby the town will
be granted a lien on all lots and no lots may be offered for sale until the
off-site improvements have been completed affecting said property and the Town
Council has released said property for sale. The Public Works Director shall
review the improvements and forward a report of the Council, recommending
whether or not the lots should be released for sale. A final plat approved with
a property escrow agreement shall specify a completion date. This subdivision
is subject to the revocation provisions of §
154.021 of these regulations. The property escrow agreement shall state that if
the improvements are not completed by the specified time and the Town Council
and subdivider do not agree on an amended property escrow agreement that will
extend the subdivision improvement construction period then the subdivider
agrees to abandon the subdivision.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 154.051 DURATION.
   The duration of the performance bond or other assurance shall be until
acceptance of the improvements is made by the Town Council. The assurance may
be released by the Town Council in phases as improvements are completed and
accepted by the Council as being constructed to standards. In releasing
assurance in phase, the Town Council shall retain enough monies to insure
completion of the remaining off-sites. In all cases an amount representing not
less than 10% of any assurance shall be retained for a period of one year after
the completion and inspection of all improvements to insure that all work and
materials are adequate and in satisfactory condition.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 154.052 DEFAULT.
   In the event that the subdivider defaults or fails or neglects to
satisfactorily install and/or construct the required improvements within the
time agreed upon for performance, the Town Council may declare the bond, or
other assurance forfeited, and the town may make or cause the required
improvements to be made, using the trust funds, or proceeds of the collection
of the bond or other assurances to defray the expense thereof. In addition, the
Community Development Director shall notify the Arizona State Real Estate
Commission of the default.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 154.053 INSPECTION OF IMPROVEMENT.
   The town shall inspect the required improvements during construction and
insure their satisfactory completion. If the town inspections reveal that any
of the required improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the
approved plans and the town standards and specifications, the subdivider shall
be responsible for correcting and completing the improvements according to the
plans and specifications.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 154.054 ACCEPTANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   After completion of improvements, the subdivider shall furnish to the
Public Works Department a set of the improvement plans that shall show the as-
built horizontal and vertical location of the improvements. The plans shall be
certified by an Arizona-registered civil engineer and include approval in
writing from all applicable utility companies and agencies certifying that all
utilities, including but not limited to water, sewer, and electric have been
completed to their satisfaction. This material shall then become a permanent
part of the town file.
   (B)   The Public Works Director, upon completion of all required
improvements and receipt of the as-built plans shall forward to the Town
Council a statement either certifying that the improvements have been completed
in accordance with the town standards and approved plans or listing the defects
in those improvements.
   (C)   Once the Town Council is satisfied that the required improvements meet
the town standards and the approved plans, they shall, by resolution, accept
those improvements into the town maintenance program and will release any
financial assurances to the subdivider, except 10% of the total assurance
amount. This amount shall be kept by the town for one year from the date
council accepts the public improvements.
   (D)   Improvements on existing perimeter streets and/or access road(s),
which are required by this chapter and/or the ordinance approving the
subdivision plat and are integral with new subdivision improvements, shall be
included on the plans, specifications and estimates prepared by the
subdivider's engineer. Acceptance of these street improvements shall be
governed by this section.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 154.055 WARRANTY PERIOD ON PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.
   Warranty period shall be one year from the day the Council approves and
accepts the public improvements. During the warranty period the developer is
responsible for repair work of any of the public improvements. The town-
assigned personnel will periodically inspect the public improvements and will
notify the developer of the necessary repair work. The developer is responsible
for having the repair work completed prior to the end of the warranty period.
Upon completion of the warranty period the remaining 10% of the assurances
retained by the town will be released or used to do any needed repairs.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
STANDARDS OF SUBDIVISION DESIGN
§ 154.065 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of subdivision regulation is to create functional, attractive
developments, minimize adverse impacts on the community, and to ensure that
future subdivisions will conform to the community's expectations. To
accommodate this purpose, all subdivision plats shall conform to the following
standards, which are designed to result in a well-planned community without
adding unnecessarily to development costs.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 154.066 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   All subdivisions shall conform to the following standards of
subdivision design, except in those cases where the Town Council has determined
that a modification is justified due to unusual topographical conditions or
other exceptional conditions. The layout and design of any, subdivision shall
be in conformance with the provisions of the General Plan, the Zoning Ordinance
and this Subdivision Ordinance.
   (B)   Land which is subject to periodic flooding, or land which cannot be
properly drained or other land which, in the opinion of the Commission is
unsuitable for the proposed use shall not be subdivided; however, the
Commission may approve subdivisions of such land upon receipt of evidence from
the County Health Department and the Town Public Works Director that the
construction of specific improvements can be expected to render the land
usable, in which event construction, upon such land shall be prohibited until
the specified improvements have been planned and construction guaranteed.
   (C)   Where the area proposed for development contains all or part of a
park, a school, flood control facility, or other public site, as shown on the
General Plan or as recommended by the Town Council, such site shall be reserved
for acquisition by the appropriate agency within a specific period of time as
prescribed in A.R.S. § 9-463.01(D) and (E). An agreement should be reached
between the subdivider and the appropriate public agency regarding time,
method, and cost of such acquisition. Dedication of such sites by the developer
may be considered by the town.
   (D)   Every subdivision shall conform to the goals, objectives, and policies
of the General Plan, the Zoning Code, Subdivision Ordinance, other ordinances
and regulations of the town, and the Arizona Revised Statutes. In the event two
or more requirements conflict, the most restrictive requirement shall apply.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 154.067 STREET LOCATION AND ARRANGEMENT.
   (A)   The street system in the proposed subdivision shall relate in
alignment to the existing streets in the area adjoining the subdivision. The
arrangement of streets in the new subdivisions shall make provisions for the
continuation of existing or designated streets as the town may designate.
   (B)   The development of roadways built to arterial or major collector
street standards shall follow the recommendations of the transportation element
of the Quartzsite General Plan, and shall also be required where needed as
recommended by the Public Works Director and approved by the Town Council.
   (C)   The proposed street plan shall consider the future use and/or
subdivision of adjoining unsubdivided property.
   (D)   Where a subdivision adjoins un-subdivided land, stub streets shall be
provided at locations as recommended by the Public Works Director and
determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission and/or Town Council to insure
access and traffic circulation.
   (E)   All streets shall be designed to serve the proposed use of land
abutting the proposed subdivision.
   (F)   Local streets shall be so arranged as to discourage their use by
through traffic.
   (G)   If a subdivision borders on a street, the subdivider shall be required
to improve the near half (or the equivalent thereof) of all perimeter streets.
   (H)   Names of streets shall be consistent with natural alignment and
extensions of existing streets and new street names must be used which will not
duplicate in whole or in part, or be subdivided with existing street names. All
street names shall be consistent with the quartzsite roadway naming and
addressing practices in place and shall be approved by the Development Review
Committee prior to final approval by the governing body.
   (I)   The Development Review Committee may require a sketch of the tentative
future street system beyond the limits of the tract adjacent to the land area
presently being subdivided.
   (J)   If a tract is subdivided into parcels larger than ordinary building
lots, such parcels shall be arranged to allow the opening of the future streets
and logical further subdivision.
   (K)   There shall be no "reserved" strips controlling access to land
dedicated or intended to be dedicated to public use.
   (L)   Where private streets are proposed, such streets shall be constructed
to town standards of construction and shall be placed into specific "street
tracts" of land. Statements shall be contained on the plat and in the deed
restrictions, the homeowners association bylaws and the covenants, conditions
and restrictions (CCRs) that those streets are declared private subject to an
easement authorizing use by emergency and public service vehicles, and remain
the permanent responsibility of the homeowners association. If at any time the
streets are proposed to be dedicated to, and accepted by the town, the streets
must first have been designed and constructed to standards specified by the
town for public streets, and demonstrate they have been maintained to the
current public street maintenance standards, as determined by the Public Works
Director.
   (M)   Alleys may be required in residential, commercial and industrial
subdivisions where needed to provide access to development due to lot sizes or
other circumstances.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 154.068 STREET DESIGN.
   The design of streets shall conform to standards established by this chapter
and the town adopted standards for construction.
   (A)   Street access.
      (1)   To protect residential properties from the nuisance and hazard of
high volume traffic and to preserve the traffic function of major streets in
other types of developments, subdivisions shall, where possible, front onto and
take access from collector and local streets.
      (2)   Where a proposed subdivision abuts or contains an existing or
proposed arterial street or major highway, the development shall be designed to
either:
         (a)   Provide lots that front to local streets with a non-access
easement along the major street; or
         (b)   Utilize a frontage/access road and provide lots that face and
take access from the frontage road.
   (B)   Cul-de-sac streets. Cul-de-sac streets will serve no more than 20
dwelling units and shall be no longer than 600 feet measured from the
intersection of the right-of-way lines to the center point of turning circle
along the street center line. Cul-de-sac design must comply with La Paz County
Standards or other standards adopted or amended by the town.
   (C)   Private streets. Private streets shall conform to above stated design
standards unless otherwise approved by the Town Council.
   (D)   Dead-end streets. Dead-end streets will not be approved except in
locations recommended by the Public Works Director as necessary to future
development of adjacent lands.
   (E)   Private access and driveways. Access from private property to any
dedicated street shall be constructed in accordance with permits issued by the
town. Width of driveway at the property line shall be a minimum of 12 feet and
a maximum of 40 feet. The width will depend on the access to be served (i.e.,
residential or commercial/industrial uses). Minimum driveway spacing shall be
as defined in the town adopted standards for construction. Exceptions to this
requirement may be approved by the Public Works Director based on unusual site
constraints.
   (F)   Alleys.
      (1)   Alleys shall be designed with a minimum of 24 feet of pavement when
there is residential property on both sides and 30 feet when abutting
commercial or industrial properties.
      (2)   Alley intersections shall have corner cutbacks of not less than ten
feet.
      (3)   Cul-de-sac alleys shall have a turnaround of at least 45 feet in
diameter. Dead-end alleys are not, permitted. Such must comply with La Paz
County Design Standards or other standards adopted or amended by the town.
      (4)   Cul-de-sac alleys shall not be longer than 300 feet, measured from
the intersection of the right-of-way lines to the center point of the turning
circle along the street center line, nor serve more than ten lots.
      (5)   Paved service areas may be substituted for alleys at the rear of
lots intended for retail business or multi-family use. Service areas used for
refuse collections shall be adequately concealed.
      (6)   Alleys are not required in residential subdivisions, except that
the commission may require that they be dedicated in certain situations to
complete existing patterns or to serve as secondary access to adjacent
properties. Alleys may be required in commercial and industrial subdivisions as
approved by the Commission.
   (G)   Street intersections.
      (1)   Streets intersecting a major street shall do so at a 90-degree
angle; intersection of local streets shall not vary from 90 degrees by more
than 15 degrees. The Public Works Director, based on terrain and other
conditions, will consider exceptions to these requirements.
      (2)   A 33 foot by 33 foot triangle shall be provided at each property
line corner of the intersection involving two collector streets, two arterial
streets or arterial and collector streets. A 20 foot by 20 foot triangle shall
be provided at each property line corner of the intersection of two local
streets and local streets to collector or arterial street.
      (3)   All street intersections shall be designed to meet the minimum
sight distance visibility requirement standards for horizontal curvature,
vertical curvature and other obstructions as defined by La Paz County Design
Standards or other standards adopted or amended by the town.
      (4)   Minor collector and local roadway street intersections shall have a
minimum separation of 150 feet offset from centerline to centerline.
      (5)   Street intersections other than those of minor collectors and local
roadway streets shall have a minimum of 200 feet offset from centerline to
centerline.
      (6)   Street intersections with more than four legs are not allowed.
   (H)   Street widths. The following chart summarizes the functional
classification designations for the town and their corresponding cross-section
characteristics. All street functional classification and cross-section
characteristics must comply with Quartzsite Transportation Plan, and La Paz
County standards as adopted or amended by the town. Town-accepted cross-section
details are available at the town.
   Table 2: Street Widths
Type of Street Minimum ROW Travel Lane Median Width Bike Lane Sidewalks
Type of       Minimum ROW   Travel Lane   Median Width Bike Lane    Sidewalks
Street
Arterial with 100 ft.       23 ft./23 ft. 16 ft.       6.5 ft. both 5 ft. both
Median                      (2 lanes)     (raised)     sides        sides
Arterial      100 ft.       24 ft./24 ft. 14 ft. (left 6.5 ft. both 5 ft. both
                            (2 lanes)     turn lane)   sides        sides
Collector     80 ft.        12 ft./12 ft. 12 ft. (left 6.5 ft. both 5 ft. both
with Curb                   (1 lane)      turn lane)   sides        sides
Collector     70 ft.        12 ft./12 ft. 12 ft. (left 8 ft.        n/a
without Curb                (1 lane)      turn lane)   shoulder
Local Roadway 50 ft.        11 ft./11 ft. n/a          8 ft.        Both sides
                            (1 lane)                   shoulder
Cul-de-Sac,   50 ft. radius 42 ft. radius None         None         Both sides
Residential
Cul-de-Sac,
Non-          60 ft. radius 50 ft. radius None         None         Both sides
Residential
 
      (1)   Local roadways in subdivisions having a minimum lot size of one
acre or more may be allowed to reduce paving to 21 feet, zero inch travel path
with 18 inch ribbon curb.
   (I)   Street pavement and structural design. All street pavement and
structural design must comply with the La Paz County Public Works Design and
Construction Manual standards.
   (J)   Curb and gutter requirements.
      (1)   All roads and streets shall have curb and gutters installed. Design
must comply with the town standards for construction.
      (2)   Curbs and gutters may be waived, and street paving may be waived to
a minimum of 21 feet in width by the Public Works Director in subdivisions
having a minimum lot size of one acre or more providing an 18 inches ribbon
concrete curb.
      (3)   The Public Works Director may waive paving in subdivisions having
an agriculture zoning classification of RA-5 in the current Zoning Ordinance.
      (4)   For subdivisions where the average minimum lot size meets or
exceeds one acre and promotes the rural theme in design of subdivisions, the
following standards would be permitted:
         (a)   Drainage: low density residential sites may contain on-site
retention areas;
         (b)   Street specifications: ribbon curbs;
         (c)   Lighting: modified street lighting style spacing, and levels of
illumination may be permitted.
   (K)   Street grades.
      (1)   Street grades between 6% and 10% will be approved only for such
distances as topographical conditions make lesser grades impractical. A grade
exceeding 10% will be approved only when conclusive evidence shows the lesser
grade is impractical.
      (2)   The minimum street grades shall be not less than two-tenths of 1%.
      (3)   Flat grades may be considered when adjacent lots or blocks are
designed for ponding storm water.
   (L)   Street landscaping. Landscaping shall be installed as specified in the
Zoning Ordinance. The placement of landscape materials and street design shall
be coordinated to ensure placement of landscaping, berms, walls and other
features do not obstruct sight line distances as defined in other sections of
this code, and do not obstruct visibility of traffic control devices.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 154.069 PEDESTRIAN CIRCULATION SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Pedestrian ways and multi-use paths may be required where essential
for circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, parks,
transportation, and other community facilities.
   (B)   Pedestrian ways and multi-use paths shall also be provided in
accordance with the Quartzsite Pathway and Trails Master Plan.
   (C)   The owner/developer shall be responsible for the design and
development of all pathway and trails improvements within the limits of their
subdivision per the town standards of construction and the Quartzsite Pathway
and Trails Master Plan.
   (D)   Pedestrian ways and multipath may be used for utility purposes.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 154.070 BLOCKS.
   (A)   Blocks shall not be more than 1,200 feet in length unless deemed
necessary for public safety and convenience.
   (B)   Irregular shaped blocks indented by cul-de-sacs containing interior
parks or playgrounds and adequate parking space will be acceptable when
properly designed and covered by agreements as to maintenance of such park
areas.
   (C)   If frontage on an arterial street is involved, the long dimension of
the block shall preferably front thereon by means of a collector road or above
in order to create as few intersections as possible.
   (D)   Blocks intended for business or industrial uses shall be of such
length and depth as may be considered most suitable for their prospective use
by the Planning and Zoning Commission, including adequate provision for
parking, on-site loading and unloading and buffer, as required by the Zoning
Ordinance.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 154.071 LOTS.
   (A)   No lot shall have less area or width than required by the Zoning
Ordinance applying to the area in which it is located.
   (B)   Lot size, width, shape and orientation shall be appropriate for the
location of the subdivision and for all types of use permitted. Lot dimensions
shall not include part of the existing or proposed streets. All lots shall be
buildable, except as a public utility lot. Depth and width of utility lots
shall be adequate to provide for standard setbacks for service structures, and
to furnish off-street parking facilities required by the kind of use
contemplated. In no other case shall the width or area be less than that
prescribed for the zone in which a lot is proposed.
   (C)   Corner lots shall be a minimum of ten feet wider than interior lots.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 154.072 LOT IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Lot arrangement. The lot arrangement shall be such that there will be
no foreseeable difficulties, for reasons of topography or other conditions, in
securing building permits to build on all lots in compliance with the Zoning
Ordinance, and health regulations and in providing driveway access to buildings
on such lots from an approved street.
   (B)   Driveways for each corner subdivision lot must be clearly shown on
subdivision improvement plans subject to approval of the Public Works Director.
Site plans submitted to the Community Development Department must also show the
location of proposed and existing driveways and must comply with that shown on
the improvement plans. Driveway location and construction must be in accordance
with the town adopted standards of construction.
   (C)   Only one driveway with access to a public street, private drive, or
alley is allowed per lot in the SR, SR43, and R1 (single-family residential
uses) zoning districts.
   (D)   All residential lots shall have frontage into a fully approved,
publicly dedicated and accepted right-of-way or private streets that have been
approved by the Town Council and meet town street standards.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 154.073 LOT DIMENSIONS.
   (A)   Lot dimensions shall comply with the minimum standards of the Zoning
Ordinance.
   (B)   Where lots are more than double the minimum required area for the
zoning district, the Planning and Zoning Commission may require that such lots
be arranged so as to allow further subdivision and the opening of future
streets where they would be necessary to serve such potential lots, all in
compliance with the Zoning Ordinance and these regulations.
   (C)   In general side lot lines should be at right angles to street lines
(or radial to curving street lines) unless a variation from this guideline will
give a better street or lot plan.
   (D)   Dimensions of corner lots shall be large enough to allow for the safe
placement of driveway access as required by the town adopted standards of
construction, and erection of buildings, observing the minimum setback from
both streets.
   (E)   Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for business,
commercial, or industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-
street parking and loading facilities required for the type of use and
development contemplated, such as established in the Zoning Ordinance.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 154.074 LOT DRAINAGE.
   (A)   Lots shall be laid out so as to provide positive drainage away from
all buildings and individual lot drainage shall be coordinated with the general
storm drainage pattern for the area. Drainage shall be designed so as to avoid
concentration of storm drainage water from each lot to the adjacent lots. If a
retention basin or retention basins are used, an improvement district may be
established to provide maintenance of said basin or basins.
   (B)   On-site storm water retention will not be allowed on lots less than
one acre in area.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 154.075 DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOTS.
   (A)   Residential.
      (1)   Double frontage and reserved frontage lots shall be avoided except
where necessary to provide separation of residential development from traffic
arterials or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation.
      (2)   Lots shall not derive access exclusively from an arterial street.
Where driveway access from an arterial street may be necessary for several
adjoining lots, the town shall require that such lots be served by a combined
frontage/access drive in order to limit possible traffic hazards on such
street. Driveways should be designed and arranged so as to avoid requiring
vehicles to back into traffic on arterial or collector streets.
   (B)   Non-residential. Double frontage lots in commercial and industrial
areas should be considered where advantages to provide for required parking
facilities and for essential activities of the contemplated use (e.g., loading,
unloading, and drive-in or drive-through services).
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 154.076 LOT DIVIDED BY BOUNDARY LINE.
   No lot shall be divided by a town, county, school district or other taxing
agency boundary line.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 154.077 PUBLIC SERVICE INSTALLATION.
   Public service lines, to include electrical, telephone, natural gas and
cable TV facilities, shall be located in alleys, rights-of-way, or easements
provided for that purpose. Easements shall be set at a width as negotiated with
utility companies serving the property.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 154.078 FIRE PROTECTION.
   Fire hydrants and a fire distribution system shall be provided in accordance
with the recommendations or requirements of the Public Works Department and the
Quartzsite Fire District. In no case are requirements to be less restrictive
than the Uniform Fire Code as adopted by either the Town of Quartzsite or the
Office of the Arizona State Marshall, which ever code is most restrictive.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 154.079 UTILITIES.
   (A)   Sewer. Subdivisions shall be provided with sanitary sewer connections
to each lot. Sewer lines shall be installed to serve all lots within the
subdivision in accordance with the minimum standards of the town. Plans for
disposal systems and sanitary sewer shall be approved by Arizona Department of
Environmental Quality.
   (B)   Water. Water mains and services shall be installed to serve all lots
within the subdivision. Lots with water wells require a reduced pressure
backflow valve at the connection to the town water system. A backflow valve
maintenance program is also required. Water wells can only be connected to the
town water system with approval of the Public Works Director.
   (C)   Electricity. The subdivider shall submit certification from the local
electric power company, that electrical service is available and will be
provided. Location of the power distribution poles and street lighting
standards shall be indicated on the preliminary plat. All electrical
telecommunications lines shall be underground within the subdivision.
   (D)   Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be installed in accordance with
requirements of the Public Works Director and Quartzsite Fire District.
   (E)   Street lighting.
      (1)   Street lighting shall be installed in accordance with APS standards
along all streets within the subdivision and along perimeter streets developed
in conjunction with the subdivision. All utilities to be underground, and
underground street light circuits shall be provided by developer. The developer
shall provide the pole, lamp, luminaries and bracket and underground circuits.
      (2)   The subdivider will take such actions as may be necessary to form,
establish and include the subdivision in an improvement district to purchase
electricity for the lighting of public streets and parks of the subdivision.
      (3)   Upon acceptance of the street lighting improvements by APS and the
town, the street lighting improvements shall be maintained by APS, through such
improvement or assessment districts as may be established.
   (F)   Improvement district. The subdivider will take such action as may be
necessary to form, establish and include the subdivision in an improvement
district for the purpose of providing enhanced municipal services and/or
maintain any retention basins as may be established for said subdivision.
   (G)   Street name signs. Developer shall provide street signs and required
traffic control signs. Specifications for design, construction, location and
installation shall be in accordance with the La Paz County Public Works Design
and Construction Manual or other standards adopted or amended by the Town of
Quartzsite.
   (H)   Utility connections. Where practicable, no utilities shall be
installed under any streets except where access lines are required from one
area to another.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 154.080 DANGEROUS AREAS.
   Areas within the subdivision boundaries which by reason of geological or
topographical conditions, unstable surface conditions, ground water or seepage
conditions, hazard of flood inundation, or erosion shall not be subdivided
except under restrictions required in Chapter 153 as to the use of all or any
part thereof as approved by the Commission and Council.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
Cross-reference:
   Floodplain Management, see
Chapter 153
§ 154.081 EXCLUSIONS.
   (A)   Portions of an adjacent property within the ownership of the
subdivider shall not be excluded from within the boundaries of a subdivision
when needed or required for dedication or improvement of any traffic, drainage
or flood control facility, utility or other access use.
   (B)   Portions of property within the ownership of the subdivider, but not
included within the boundaries of a subdivision, shall be of such size and
shape as to conform to the provisions of this chapter or any element of the
General Plan or Zoning Ordinance.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 154.082 PERMANENT ACCESS TO SUBDIVISION.
   (A)   No subdivision shall be recorded unless permanent public access is
provided from the subdivision to a town, state or federal maintained road.
Public access means dedication to the town or a permanent written easement from
county, state or federal governments.
   (B)   The Public Works Director prior to recording shall approve roads
dedicated to the town for the purpose of providing access.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 154.083 FLOOD CONTROL FACILITIES.
   (A)   The minimum facilities for the control of floodwaters crossing,
flowing into, or falling upon a subdivision shall be designed on a basis of a
100-year storm of two hours duration.
   (B)   The Town Engineer shall approve flood control facilities design.
   (C)   Streets and highways shall not be used as flood channels without
approval of the Town Engineer.
   (D)   The use of streets and highways for tract drainage purposes may be
prohibited by the Public Works Director if, in his or her opinion, said use is
impractical or not in the interests of public health and safety.
   (E)   Flood hazard areas shall incorporate methods and provisions to reduce
flood losses as required in
Chapter 153.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
Cross-reference:
   Floodplain Management, see
Chapter 153
§ 154.084 SUBDIVISION PERIMETER WALL STANDARDS.
   (A)   A protective fence shall be placed around the perimeter of a
subdivision and along any canal, drain, retention basins, highway or other
feature deemed by the review committee or Public Works Director to be hazardous
to the residents of the subdivision.
   (B)   Subdivision perimeter walls shall be six feet in height, measured from
the lowest grade, and constructed per the town adopted standards of
construction of an impervious masonry material.
   (C)   Modifications to the requirements of this subsection shall require
written request and approval of the Community Development Department.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 154.085 PROTECTIVE FENCE.
   (A)   A protective fence of an impervious masonry material around the sides
and rear property lines of each lot is required before the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy.
   (B)   This fence shall be six feet in height on the rear and sides, except
for the distance between the front yard building setback where it shall be
optional and no higher than four feet, measured from the lowest grade.
   (C)   All protective fences shall also comply with the requirements of
Sections 4.4.4 and 4.4.5 of the Zoning Ordinance.
   (D)   Modifications to the requirements of this subsection shall require
written request and approval of the Community Development Department.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 154.086 SUBDIVISION MONUMENTS.
   All subdivision monuments and lot corners shall be in place at the
conclusion of subdivision improvement work.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 154.087 FLOOD HAZARD AREAS.
   This regulation and amendments hereto shall be consistent with the
provisions of the Flood Damage Prevention Regulations of the town.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
Cross-reference:
   Floodplain Management, see
Chapter 153
§ 154.088 SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   In residential subdivisions four foot minimum sidewalks shall be
required with a five foot minimum sidewalk along collector and arterial streets
unless otherwise specified within the Quartzsite Pathway and Trails Master
Plan.
   (B)   In commercial subdivisions with parcels of 20,000 square feet or more,
six foot minimum sidewalks shall be required.
   (C)   All sidewalks shall be constructed according to the La Paz County
Design Standards specifications or such specifications as may be adopted or
amended by the town.
   (D)   Sidewalks shall be constructed on both sides of all streets within the
subdivision and in all open space areas unless otherwise specified within the
Quartzsite Pathway and Trails Master Plan.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 154.089 SIGNAGE.
   (A)   Every subdivision may provide an entry monument sign integrated into
the design of the perimeter wall through use of materials, colors, texture and
form. When walls are not used, highlight the character of the development by
displaying artifacts appropriate to the development theme to act as a focal
point.
   (B)   Subdivision signage shall be installed only at the main subdivision
entryway. Lettering size and type shall be approved by the Community
Development Department prior to installation.
   (C)   Required subdivision walls shall be interesting and unique. All walls
shall be articulated to create visual interest by means such as but not limited
to a change in plane, curves, material accents, regularly spaced pillars or
sculptural insets. Block walls with open fencing, partial masonry/wrought iron
or the addition of texture and/or other form modifications may be submitted to
the Community Development Department for consideration.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c900e4be57b1635e55f2b96bfa67ca34bcf24c6f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1372.png]
 
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
STORM WATER RUNOFF
§ 154.100 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to require the owner/developer of each
lot, plot or parcel of land within the town limits of the Town of Quartzsite to
provide storage of sufficient volume to hold the total runoff from the design
storm falling on that lot, plot or parcel of land. An exception to this
requirement will be granted by the Public Works Director only when runoff can
be directed into a storm sewer, channel or natural drainage-way with sufficient
capacity to transport storm water to an approved ultimate disposal site. The
owner/developer shall not be required to provide storage for runoff from land
other than his or her own except where it can be proven that flow from adjacent
land has historically crossed or inundated the land of the owner/developer.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 154.101 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   50-YEAR STORM. A storm that has a 2% chance of occurring each year in
accordance with the criteria established by Arizona Department of
Transportation (ADOT) Highway Drainage Design Manual (HDDM), Volume 2,
Hydrology (ADOT, 2014).
   100-YEAR STORM. A storm that has a 1% chance of occurring each year in
accordance with the criteria established by the Arizona Department of
Transportation (ADOT) Highway Drainage Design Manual (HDDM), Volume 2,
Hydrology (ADOT, 2014).
   BUILDING FLOOR ELEVATION. The finished floor elevation in feet above mean
sea level of the lowest floor of a building. Building floor elevations shall be
related to the Town of Quartzsite datum.
   BUILDING PAD ELEVATION. The elevation in feet above mean sea level of the
material on which the floor slab directly rests.
   COMBINATION STORAGE. Handling of storm water by utilizing both on-site
retention and retention basins.
   DRAINAGE PLAN. That certain plan on which are shown the location, dimensions
and elevations of proposed storm water areas.
   FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA. Any land susceptible to being inundated by
water from any source.
   FREEBOARD. The distance between the design high water surface and the top of
the wall of a retention basin.
   ON-SITE RETENTION. Storage on public or private property or any combination
thereof, but not on a public street or alley right-of-way.
   RETENTION BASIN. A designated area for total storage, without overland
relief of flows generated during a design storm.
   TEN-YEAR STORM. A storm that has a 10% chance of occurring each year in
accordance with criteria established by Arizona Department of Transportation
(ADOT) Highway Drainage Design Manual (HDDM), Volume 2, Hydrology (ADOT, 2014).
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 154.102 METHODS OF HANDLING STORM WATER.
   Storm water shall be contained within each lot, plot or parcel of land by
any of the following methods:
   (A)   On-site retention;
   (B)   Retention basin;
   (C)   Combination storage.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 154.103 DESIGN STANDARDS FOR HANDLING WATER.
   (A)   When a retention basin is utilized to handle storm water runoff in a
commercial or residential subdivision, the following design standards shall be
applicable:
      (1)   The minimum storage volume shall be computed by estimating the area
under a hydrograph of a 100-year storm of two hours duration (1.22 inches per
hour). In addition, the greater of one foot of freeboard or 25% additional
basin capacity shall be provided in the facility.
      (2)   Maximum basin depth shall not exceed 3.5 feet unless otherwise
approved by the Public Works Director. If a basin is approved to exceed the
maximum depth, the facility shall be enclosed with a six foot high masonry
block fence and a 12 foot wide gate with lock.
      (3)   Maximum side slope shall be 4:1 unless otherwise approved by the
Public Works Director.
      (4)   An acceptable method of transporting water from the street into the
basin shall be provided so as to preserve the integrity of the basin walls and
floor.
      (5)   All residential streets shall be designed to carry the runoff from
a ten-year, two hour storm between the curbs. In cases where peak flows from
the design storm exceed the street capacity, storm sewers of sufficient size to
carry the excess must be installed. The minimum pipe size for underground storm
drainage shall be 12 inches. The peak flow from a 50-year storm must be carried
within the cross-section between buildings (front yards and streets) for
subdivisions served by retention basins. The floor elevations of all habitable
space shall be above flood levels equivalent to a 100-year storm.
      (6)   All streets with curb shall have a minimum longitudinal slope as
shown in the table below, designed in accordance with the Public Works Director
approval.
   Table 3: Street Slope
 
Minimum Slope
Straight (400 feet radius and over) curb 0.20%
Curved (less than 400 feet radius) curb  0.25%
Valley gutter flow-line                  0.30%
 
      (7)   Construction of the retention basin should follow the La Paz County
Public Works Design and Construction Manual.
      (8)   Each retention basin shall be constructed so that storm water will
not stand longer than five days after termination of the storm. Basin drainage
shall be accomplished by infiltration or by controlled flow into an existing
facility suitable to receive, transport and dispose of storm water. When
controlled flow is proposed, the owner/developer and the town shall obtain
approval from the owner of the existing facility, prior to formulating final
drainage for the retention basin. Final drainage plans shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Public Works Director.
      (9)   Subdivisions with more than one retention basin should interconnect
all basins.
      (10)   The owner/developer shall maintain the portion of drainage
improvements that fall within their subdivision following the La Paz County
Public Works Design and Construction Manual.
      (11)   The owner of the property on which the retention basin is to be
located shall grant a right to use said property for drainage purposes. Such
grant shall be made by means of document which shall be approved by the Town
Attorney and recorded in the office of the La Paz County Recorder and shall
contain the following provisions:
         (a)   Legal description of the property to be used for storage
purposes;
         (b)   Legal description of the property which is permitted to drain
the basin;
         (c)   A statement that the owner is responsible for construction and
maintenance of the basin in accordance with standards established by the Public
Works Director;
         (d)   A statement that no habitable structure may be constructed
within the basin. Statement that the property shall be used for storm water
storage so long as required in the opinion of the Public Works Director;
         (e)   Such other provisions as are deemed by the Town Attorney to be
necessary to effectuate the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   In lieu of the requirements contained in division (A), the owner may
dedicate the property to be used for storm water retention to the town for
drainage and for public use. Such dedication shall become effective only upon
acceptance of the basin by the Town Council. Conditions of acceptance by the
town may include but are not limited to:
      (1)   The owner/developer shall include desert landscaping, rocks,
decomposed granite, a drip irrigation system, and lighting as approved by the
Public Works Director.
      (2)   Shall be located adjacent to arterial streets (mile and half-mile
streets) and the geometrics of the basin shall be coordinated with the Public
Works Director.
      (3)   With the approval of the Public Works Director, a retention basin
may be located on other streets, which allow a direct storm sewer route to an
arterial street. Additionally properly designed and sized inlets, manholes,
storm sewer lines and all other appurtenances shall be constructed to a point
where the storm sewer may be connected to a future storm main on an arterial
street.
   (C)   When on-site retention is utilized in residential subdivisions, the
following criteria shall be applicable:
      (1)   Minimum lot size for an on-site retention shall be one acre.
      (2)   A deed covenant prohibiting alteration of the final site ground
elevations shall be required.
      (3)   The maximum design depth of storm water storage on any lot shall
not exceed eight inches except as approved by the Public Works Director.
      (4)   The lot depth below the back edge of the sidewalk shall be computed
using a 100-year storm of 24 hour duration with 3.05 inches of total rainfall.
An allowance for evaporation and/or percolation shall not be incorporated into
the computation for minimum lot depth. Storage volume shall also be provided
for adjacent streets and alleys except for arterial streets.
      (5)   Each lot shall be provided with an earthen berm around the back and
sides of each lot. The earthen berm shall be one foot higher than the adjacent
final ground elevation of the lot.
      (6)   All residential streets shall have curb and gutter designed in
accordance with the La Paz County Public Works Design and Construction Manual
and Public Works Director approval. An appropriate means of transporting water
into the storage area shall be provided.
      (7)   Slope away from building shall not exceed 21:1 for a distance of
five feet out from foundation.
      (8)   Construction of the retention basin should follow the La Paz County
Public Works Design and Construction Manual.
      (9)   Owner shall maintain the portion of drainage improvements that fall
within their parcel following the La Paz County Public Works Design and
Construction Manual.
   (D)   When on-site retention is utilized in commercial and industrial
developments, the following criteria shall be applicable:
      (1)   All storm water from a 100-year storm of two hour duration (2.44
inches) must be retained on site.
      (2)   Dry wells will be permitted to drain surface retention areas.
However, the infiltration cannot be considered to reduce the size of retention
areas.
      (3)   The owner shall be responsible for the design, performance,
operation or maintenance of dry wells or retention basins in commercial or
industrial developments.
      (4)   Dry wells shall not be located within 20 feet of any building.
      (5)   Construction of the retention basin should follow the La Paz County
Design and Construction Manual standards.
      (6)   Owner shall maintain the portion of drainage improvements that fall
within their parcel following the La Paz County Design and Construction Manual
standards.
   (E)   Combination storage shall consist of providing adequate storage volume
for the appropriate design storm by a combination of on-site retention and a
retention basin. All requirements and conditions outlined in the previous
provisions of this section shall apply.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 154.104 BUILDING FLOOR ELEVATIONS.
   (A)   A minimum building floor elevation shall be eight inches above the
design high water elevation in the case of on-site retention or combination
storage. In the case of retention basins, the minimum building floor elevation
shall be eight inches above the back of the curb fronting the lot.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any existing
building or structure, nor to an expansion of less than 25% in floor area or
any alteration to an existing building or structure, but in no case shall the
floor elevation of the extension be below the existing floor of habitable
space.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 154.105 APPROVAL.
   (A)   The surface of any lot, plot or parcel of land may not be filled or
substantially altered without first obtaining written approval from the Public
Works Director.
   (B)   Prior to issuing written approval, the Public Works Director shall
require the owner/developer to submit for review a drainage plan showing
existing and proposed grades together with the calculations showing the volume
of storage required and provided. Such plan and calculations shall be prepared
under the direction of a professional engineer, registered in the State of
Arizona.
   (C)   When the alteration is proposed for a platted residential lot and
where the work is to be done only on said lot, plans and calculations prepared
by a professional engineer will not be required. The property owner shall
submit a sketch to the Department of Building Inspection showing the proposed
work.
   (D)   The Community Development Department shall not issue a building permit
until receipt of notification from the Public Works Director that a drainage
plan has been approved in accordance with this subchapter.
   (E)   The Community Development Department shall not issue a certificate of
occupancy until receipt of notification from the Public Works Director that
construction has been completed in substantial compliance with approved
drainage plan or that subsequent completion has been guaranteed by other means
acceptable to the town.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 154.106 DRAINAGE REPORT.
   (A)   The preliminary plat shall be accompanied by a drainage report.
   (B)   The drainage report review fee shall be shown on the fee schedule as
determined by the Town Council.
   (C)   At this time two copies of a drainage report shall be submitted to the
Public Works Director showing the proposed recommendations for handling
drainage and storm waters and providing protection against floods for both
existing and new improvement. A guide for the preparation of the report is
available from the La Paz County Design and Construction Manual standards.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
MINOR LAND DIVISIONS
§ 154.120 APPLICABILITY.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, a minor land division shall constitute
the following acts, and shall be subject to the provisions of this section:
   (A)   Land splits, as defined in §
154.006;
   (B)   The division of improved or unimproved land or lands for the purpose
of financing, sale or lease, whether immediate or future, into two or three
lots, tracts, or parcels of land when a new street is not involved;
   (C)   The further division of improved or unimproved land or lands for the
purpose of financing, sale, or lease, whether immediate or future, when the
boundaries of such property have been fixed by a recorded subdivision plat, and
when a new street is not involved;
   (D)   Lot line adjustments and lot consolidations in a platted subdivision.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 154.121 GENERAL PROVISIONS AND EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Any lot or parcel of land recorded in the La Paz County Recorder's
Office and lawfully created prior to incorporation of the town and having an
area, width, depth or street frontage less than that required by the zoning
district regulations of the zoning district in which such lot or parcel is
situated, shall be deemed to be a lot of record and may be used as a building
site, provided that all other regulations for the zoning district in which that
lot is situated shall be applicable.
   (B)   The lots, tracts, and parcels resulting after the minor land division
shall meet the requirements of the underlying zoning district. Including but
not limited to the following:
      (1)   No lot shall be reduced in area so as to cause any open space or
yard required by this chapter to be less in dimension than is required for the
zoning district and lot in question.
      (2)   No lot shall be divided in such a way that any division of such lot
shall contain more dwelling units than are permitted by the zoning district in
which such lot is situated.
   (C)   A large lot or parcel of land may be subdivided into smaller lots
provided such smaller lots conform to the lot size limitations of the zoning
district in which the lots are situated; however, a parcel shall not be divided
into more than three lots, or two or more lots if a new street is involved,
without approval of a subdivision plat in compliance with this chapter.
   (D)   The division of land into two or three parcels and not involving any
new streets or access easements shall require approval of a minor land division
in compliance with §
154.122.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 154.122 PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF MINOR LAND DIVISIONS.
   (A)   An application for a minor land division shall be submitted to the
Community Development Department of the town prior to any deeds related to a
minor land division are submitted to the La Paz County Recorder's Office. Any
deed being recorded for such minor land division shall bare the signature of
the Community Development Director as the reviewing authority.
   (B)   The town may approve minor land divisions administratively subject to
approval by the Community Development Department of the town and the Public
Works Director.
   (C)   Information required. All information required as part of the minor
land division submittal shall be shown graphically, or by note on plans, or by
letter, or by combination thereof, and may comprise several sheets showing
various elements of the required data.
   (D)   Submittal requirements. The applicant shall submit the following
materials to the Community Development Department for a minor land division
application:
      (1)   A completed minor land division application form;
      (2)   A non-refundable minor land division application filing fee to
compensate the town for the costs of examining and processing the minor land
division application and subsequent field inspections, if applicable. The
required fee for minor land division applications shall be adopted by
resolution of the Town Council;
      (3)   An ALTA survey, preliminary title report and deed or other
instrument showing proper title to the land to be divided;
      (4)   Digital file of the minor land division map;
      (5)   All minor land division maps shall include the items specified in §
154.032(B)(1) and (2), unless otherwise specified by the Community Development
Director or Public Works Director;
      (6)   The Community Development Director or Public Works Director may
require submittal of any additional information as is pertinent to make a final
determination.
   (E)   Except where expressly modified or permitted by staff all minor land
divisions shall be in general conformity with the design standards and
principles outlined for subdivisions in this section. All lots created by a
minor land division shall be designed to conform to existing zoning and the
general plan.
   (F)   If dedicated and/or public improvements are required for minor land
divisions, the applicant shall be responsible for the preparation of a complete
set of improvement plans, prepared by an Arizona registered civil engineer,
satisfactory to the Public Works Director for the construction of the required
improvements. The plans shall be prepared in conjunction with the minor land
division map and the town adopted standards for construction.
   (G)   The minor land division map shall not be recorded, nor shall any
improvement work commence until the Public Works Director has approved the
improvement plans.
   (H)   No minor land division, which creates a substandard or nonconforming
lot or structure, shall be approved except by Council action in association
with a formal variance process.
   (I)   If any improvements are required for the minor land division pursuant
to regulations contained herein, no building permit for any lot created will be
issued until such improvements are completed and the work accepted by the
Public Works Director.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 154.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Legal procedure. Any building or structure erected or maintained on a
lot or parcel of land that is subject to this chapter, created or established
subsequent to this chapter becoming effective that is contrary to the
provisions of this chapter shall be and the same is hereby declared to be
unlawful and a public nuisance, and the Town Attorney shall, upon order of the
Town Council, immediately commence action or actions, proceeding or proceedings
for the abatement, removal and enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by
law; and shall take such other steps, and shall apply to such court or courts
as may have jurisdiction to grant relief as will abate or remove such building
or structure.
   (B)   Remedies. All remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not
exclusive. The conviction and punishment of any person hereunder shall not
relieve such person from the responsibility of correcting prohibited conditions
or removing prohibited buildings, structures or improvements, nor prevent the
enforced correction or removal thereof.
   (C)   Penalties. It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to
violate, or cause the violation of, any provision of this chapter. Any person,
firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished
by a fine not to exceed $2,500 or by imprisonment for not more than six months
or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each separate day or part thereof during
which any violation of this chapter occurs or continues shall be deemed to
constitute a separate offense, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable
as herein provided.
(Ord. 21-11, passed 10-26-2021)
CHAPTER 155: ZONING
Section
   
155.01   Zoning regulations adopted by reference
§ 155.01 ZONING REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   The document entitled “Town of Quartzsite, Arizona Development
Procedures Handbook and Town of Quartzsite Zoning Ordinance”, dated August 8,
2023, is hereby adopted as the “Zoning Code of the Town of Quartzsite” and made
a part of this section the same as though said code was specifically set forth
in full herein.
   (B)   At least three copies of said code shall be filed in the office of the
Town Clerk and kept available for public use and inspection.
(Prior Code, § 15-1) (Ord. 90-12, passed - -1990; Ord. 90-15, passed - -1990;
Ord. 90-19, passed - -1990; Ord. 92-02, passed - -1992; Ord. 92-01, passed - -
1992; Res. 95-18, passed - -1995; Ord. 95-10#2, passed - -1995; Ord. 96-07,
passed - -1996; Ord. 96-03, passed - -1998; Ord. 96-04, passed - -1996; Ord.
97-04, passed - -1997; Ord. 02-02, passed - -2002; Ord. 14-03, passed 5-27-
2014; Ord. 16-06, passed 9-27-2016; Ord. 18-13, passed 11-27-2018; Ord. 18-14,
passed 12-11-2018; Ord. 20-02, passed 1-28-2020; Ord. 20-09, passed 8-25-2020;
Ord. 21-02, passed 2-9-2021; Ord. 21-03, passed 5-11-2021; Ord. 21-05, passed
8-10-2021; Ord. 21-06, passed 8-10-2021; Ord. 21-12, passed 11-9-2021; Ord. 21-
13, passed 11-9-2021; Ord. 22-01, passed 3-8-2022; Ord. 23-02, passed 6-13-
2023; Ord. 23-04, passed 7-25-2023; Ord. 23-05, passed 8-8-2023; Ord. 24-02,
passed 6-25-2024)
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Arizona Revised Statutes
References to Prior Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO ARIZONA REVISED STATUTES
A.R.S. Section Code Section
A.R.S. Section                   Code Section
1-211 to 1-215                   10.03
Title 4                          130.51
9-232                            30.04
9-234                            30.09
Title 9, Ch. 4, Art. 7.2         111.30
9-402                            35.20
9-462.02                         154.006
9-463                            154.006
9-463.01                         154.004
9-463.01(D), (E)                 154.066
9-463.02                         154.006
Title 9, Ch. 5, Art. 7           116.16
Title 9, Ch. 5, Art. 8           117.16
9-500.22                         33.25
                                 114.01;
9-500.39                         114.02;
                                 114.05;
                                 118.01
                                 50.03;
                                 50.26;
                                 50.27;
                                 50.28;
                                 50.30;
                                 50.31;
                                 50.33;
                                 50.34;
                                 50.35;
9-511.01                         51.03;
                                 52.01;
                                 52.36;
                                 52.37;
                                 52.38;
                                 52.41;
                                 52.44;
                                 52.45;
                                 52.46;
                                 52.60
9-581                            116.01;
                                 152.13
9-583(D)                         116.22
9-584                            117.16
                                 116.01;
9-591                            116.15;
                                 152.13
Title 9, Ch. 13                  117.01
                                 116.01;
9-1401                           116.15;
                                 117.02
9-1414                           117.15
9-1432                           117.37
9-1442(H), (I) and (J)           117.16
9-1445                           117.20
9-1451                           117.04;
                                 117.20
11-1008                          90.25
12-116(A)                        33.22
Title 13                         95.02;
                                 95.04
13-1706                          93.10
13-3899                          90.23;
                                 90.28
13-3903                          90.23;
                                 90.28
13-3108(g)(2)                    96.29
13-3108(g)(5)                    96.29
Title 16                         30.09
16-204                           32.20
20-1562                          154.035
24-153                           90.35
Title 26, Chapter 2              34.03;
                                 34.05
Title 28                         73.02
28-101                           111.26
Title 28, Ch. 5                  10.99
Title 28, Ch. 5, Art. 2, 3 and 4 Ch. 74
28-627                           73.03
28-701(D)                        Ch. 74
28-882                           72.07
28-1106                          73.01;
                                 73.03
28-1901 through 28-1908          154.040
                                 33.15;
Title 32, Ch. 9, Art. 2          50.35;
                                 52.46
Title 33, Ch. 9                  154.042
                                 35.02;
Title 34                         35.05;
                                 35.39
34-222 et seq.                   154.050
Title 36, Ch. 7.1                113.02
36-1601                          130.30
36-1601 et seq.                  130.34
36-1761                          111.27
37-610                           153.34
38-260                           30.06
38-431.01 et seq.                31.58
39-101 to 39-161                 31.16
Title 40, Ch. 2, Art. 6.2        153.12
41-1080                          110.13
41-1750                          31.59;
                                 112.02
Title 45, Ch. 6                  153.12
Title 48, Ch. 21, Art. 1         153.12
48-3609                          153.01
48-3609(H)                       153.12
48-3610                          153.01
48-3613                          153.12;
                                 153.13
48-3613(B)                       153.12
48-3613(C)                       153.12
48-3613(D)                       153.12
49-501(E)                        93.05
49-502                           93.10
49-511                           93.10
49-512                           93.10
49-513                           93.10
49-514                           93.10
49-901 et seq.                   116.01
                                 
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code 2021 Code
Prior Code 2021 Code
1-3-5      10.03
1-3-6      10.03
1-3-7      10.03
1-3-9      10.03
1-3-10     10.03
1-3-11     10.03
1-3-15     10.03
1-3-17     10.03
1-3-18     10.03
1-3-19     10.03
1-3-20     10.03
1-3-29     10.03
1-8        10.99
2-1-1      30.01
2-1-2      30.02
2-1-3      30.03
2-1-4      30.04
2-1-5      30.05
2-1-6      30.06
2-1-7      30.06
2-1-8      30.07
2-1-9      30.08
2-1-10     30.09
2-2-1      30.60
2-2-2      30.61
2-2-3      30.61
2-2-4      30.62
2-2-5      30.63
2-2-6      30.64
2-2-7      30.65
2-3-1      30.20
2-3-2      30.21
2-3-3      30.22
2-3-4      30.23
2-3-5      30.24
2-3-6      30.25
2-4-1      30.40
2-4-2      30.41
2-4-3      30.42
2-4-4      30.43
2-4-5      30.44
2-4-7      30.45
2-4-8      30.46
2-4-9      30.47
2-5-1      32.01
2-5-2      32.02
2-5-3      32.03
2-5-4      32.04
2-5-5      32.05
2-5-6      32.06
2-5-7      32.07
2-5-8      32.08
2-6-1      32.20
2-6-2      32.21
2-6-3      32.22
2-6-4      32.23
3-1-1      31.01
3-1-2      31.01
3-1-3      31.02
3-1-4      31.03
3-2-1      31.15
3-2-2      31.16
3-2-3      31.17
3-2-4      31.18
3-2-5      31.19
3-2-6      31.20
3-3-1      31.55
3-3-2      31.56
3-3-3      31.57
3-3-4      31.58
3-5-1      31.21
3-5-2      31.21
3-5-3      31.21
3-5-4      31.21
3-5-5      31.21
3-6-1      34.01
3-6-2      34.02
3-6-3      34.03
3-6-4      34.03
3-6-5      34.04
3-6-6      34.05
3-6-7      34.06
3-7-1      31.35
3-7-2      31.36
3-7-3      31.37
3-7-4      31.38
3-7-5      31.39
3-7-6      31.40
3-7-7      31.41
3-7-8      31.42
3-7-9      31.43
3-7-10     31.44
4-1-1      31.22
4-1-2      31.22
4-1-3      31.22
4-1-4      31.22
4-1-5      31.22
4-1-6      31.22
5-1-1      33.01
5-2-1      33.02
5-2-2      33.02
5-2-3      33.02
5-3-1      33.03
5-4-1      33.15
5-4-2      33.16
5-4-3      33.17
5-4-4      33.18
5-4-5      33.19
5-4-6      33.20
5-4-7      33.21
5-4-8      33.22
5-4-9      33.23
5-4-10     33.24
5-5-1      33.02
5-5-2      33.02
5-6-1      33.02
6-1-1      90.01
6-1-2      90.02
6-1-3      90.03
6-1-4      90.04
6-1-5      90.05
6-1-6      90.06
6-1-7      90.07;
           90.99
6-2-1      90.20
6-2-2      90.21
6-2-3      90.22
6-2-4      90.23
6-2-5      90.24
6-2-6      90.25;
           90.99
6-2-7      90.26
6-2-8      90.27
6-2-9      90.28
6-2-10     90.29
6-2-11     90.30
6-2-12     90.31
6-2-13     90.32
6-2-14     90.33
6-2-15     90.99
6-2-16     90.34
6-2-17     90.35
6-3-1      90.08
6-3-2      90.99
7-1        150.15
7-2        150.16
7-3        150.17
7-4        150.18
7-5        150.19
7-6        150.20
7-7        150.01
7-8        150.02
7-9        150.21
7-10       150.22
8-1-1      111.01
8-1-2      111.02
8-1-3      111.03
8-1-4      111.04
8-1-5      111.05
8-1-6      111.06
8-1-7      111.07
8-1-8      111.08
8-1-9      111.99
8-1-10     111.09
8-1-11     111.10
8-2-1      110.02
8-2-2      110.03
8-2-3      110.04
8-2-4      110.07
8-2-5      110.08
8-2-6      110.09
8-2-7      110.10
8-2-8      110.11
8-2-9      110.12
8-2-10     110.13
8-2-11     110.14
8-3-1      113.01
8-3-2      113.02
8-3-3      113.03
8-3-4      113.20
8-3-5      113.21
8-3-6      113.22
8-3-7      113.23
8-3-8      113.24
8-3-9      113.25
8-3-10     113.26
8-3-11     113.27
8-3-12     113.28
8-3-13     113.29
8-3-14     113.30
8-3-15     113.31
8-3-16     113.32
8-3-18     113.45
8-3-19     113.46
8-3-20     113.47
8-3-21     113.48
8-3-22     113.49
8-3-23     113.50
8-3-24     113.51
8-3-25     113.52
8-3-26     113.53
8-3-27     113.04
8-3-28     113.05
8-3-29     113.99
8-3-30     113.99
8-3-31     113.99
9-1        36.01
10-1-1     91.15
10-1-2     91.16
10-1-3     91.17
10-3-1     93.01—
           93.11
10-4-1     91.01
11-1-1     130.01
11-1-2     130.02
11-1-3     130.03
11-1-4     130.04;
           130.99
11-1-5     130.05
11-1-6     130.06
11-1-7     130.07
11-1-8     130.08
11-1-9     130.09
11-1-10    130.10
11-1-11    130.11
11-1-12    130.12
11-1-13    130.13
11-1-14    130.14
11-1-15    130.15
11-1-16    130.16
11-3       130.50
11-4-1     95.01
11-4-2     95.02
11-4-3     95.03
11-4-4     95.04
11-4-5     95.05
11-4-6     95.06
11-4-7     95.07
11-4-8     95.08
11-4-9     95.09
11-4-10    95.10
11-4-11    95.11
11-4-12    95.12
11-6-1     130.51
11-6-2     130.51
11-5-3     130.99
12-1-1     70.20
12-1-2     70.21
12-1-3     70.22
12-1-4     70.23
12-1-5     70.24
12-2-1     70.01
12-2-2     70.02
12-2-3     70.03
12-2-4     70.04
12-2-5     70.05
12-2-6     70.05
12-2-7     70.05
12-2-8     71.01
12-2-9     71.02
12-2-10    71.03
12-2-11    71.04
12-2-12    71.05
12-2-13    73.99
12-3-1     72.01
12-3-2     72.02
12-3-3     72.03
12-3-4     72.04
12-3-5     72.05
12-3-6     72.06
12-3-7     72.07
12-3-8     72.08
12-4-1     94.01
12-4-2     94.02
12-4-3     94.03
12-4-4     94.04
12-4-5     94.05
12-4-6     94.99
12-5-1     73.01
12-5-2     73.02
12-5-3     73.03
12-5-4     73.04
12-5-5     73.05
12-5-6     73.06
12-5-7     73.99
14-1-1     115.01
14-1-2     115.02
14-1-3     115.03
14-1-4     115.04
14-1-5     115.05
14-1-6     115.06
14-1-7     115.07
14-1-8     115.08
14-1-9     115.09
14-1-10    115.10
14-1-11    115.11
14-1-12    115.12
14-1-13    115.13
14-1-14    115.14
14-1-15    115.15
15-1       155.01
16-1-1     51.01
16-1-2     51.02
16-1-3     51.03
16-1-4     51.04
16-1-5     51.20—
           51.24
16-1-6     51.35—
           51.41
16-1-7     51.05
16-1-8     51.06
16-1-9     51.07
16-1-10    51.99
16-2-1     52.20—
           52.22
16-2-2     52.35—
           52.47
16-2-3     52.60—
           52.65
16-2-4     52.01
16-2-5     52.02
16-2-6     52.03
16-2-7     52.04
16-2-8     52.05
16-2-9     52.06
17-1-1     50.01
17-1-2     50.02
17-1-3     50.03
17-1-4     50.04
17-1-5     50.50—
           50.53
17-1-6     50.65—
           50.69
17-1-7     50.05
17-1-8     50.06
17-1-9     53.01—
           53.05
17-1-10    50.07
17-1-11    50.08
17-2-1     50.09
17-2-2     50.25—
           50.36
17-2-3     50.10
18-1-1     151.01
18-1-2     151.02
18-1-3     151.03
18-1-4     151.04
18-1-5     151.05
18-1-6     151.06
18-1-7     151.07
18-1-8     151.08;
           151.99
19-1-1     152.01
19-1-2     152.02
19-1-3     152.06
19-1-4     152.07
19-1-5     152.08
19-1-6     152.09
19-1-7     152.10
19-1-8     152.11
19-1-10    152.12
21-1-1     96.01
21-1-2     96.02
21-1-3     96.03
21-1-4     96.04
21-1-5     96.05
21-2-1     96.20
21-2-2     96.21
21-2-3     96.22;
           96.99
21-2-4     96.23
21-2-5     96.24
21-2-6     96.25
21-2-7     96.26
21-2-8     96.27
21-2-9     96.28
21-2-10    96.29
21-2-11    96.30
           
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
89-06    - -1989     30.07
89-08    - -1989     36.01
90-01    - -1990     150.15
90-02    - -1990     150.16
90-03    - -1990     150.18
90-04    - -1990     150.17
90-06    - -1990     150.20
90-17    - -1990     36.01
90-18    - -1990     32.08
90-24    - -1990     10.03;
                     10.99
90-27    - -1990     31.22
                     51.01—
                     51.07;
                     51.20—
91-09    - -1991     51.24;
                     51.35—
                     51.41;
                     51.99
                     51.01—
                     51.07;
                     51.20—
92-04    - -1992     51.24;
                     51.35—
                     51.41;
                     51.99
92-14    - -1992     72.04
94-19    - -1994     32.08
                     51.01—
                     51.07;
                     51.20—
94-22    - -1994     51.24;
                     51.35—
                     51.41;
                     51.99
95-01    - -1995     36.01
95-16    - -1995     51.03
95-18    - -1995     155.01
                     50.02—
                     50.08;
96-01    - -1996     50.50—
                     50.53;
                     50.65—
                     50.69
96-04    - -1996     30.05
                     50.02;
96-05    - -1996     50.03;
                     51.03
98-09    - -1998     51.03
98-12    - -1998     36.01
99-01    - -1999     111.06
99-15    - -1999     32.08
99-21    - -1999     36.01
                     50.25—
                     50.36;
01-06    - -2001     51.02;
                     51.03;
                     52.35—
                     52.47
03-02    - -2003     152.09
03-13    - -2003     111.03;
                     111.06
05-03    - -2005     150.17
06-06    - -2006     150.19
07-20    - -2007     111.06
09-06    - -2009     30.24
22-11    7-12-2022   50.28
22-12    7-12-2022   51.03
                    
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
89-13    - -         36.01
89-05    - -1989     30.40;
                     30.41
89-06    - -1989     36.01
89-08    - -1989     30.05
89-11    - -1989     36.01
89-12    - -1989     36.01
90-01    - -1990     150.15
90-02    - -1990     150.16
90-03    - -1990     150.18
90-04    - -1990     150.17
90-06    - -1990     150.20
90-08    - -1990     36.01
90-9     - -1990     10.03;
                     10.99
90-12    - -1990     155.01
90-13    - -1990     150.02
90-14    - -1990     31.22
90-15    - -1990     155.01
90-19    - -1990     155.01
91-01    - -1991     Ch. 74, Sch. I
                     51.01—
                     51.07;
                     51.20—
91-02    - -1991     51.24;
                     51.35—
                     51.41;
                     51.99
                     51.01—
                     51.07;
                     51.20—
91-04    - -1991     51.24;
                     51.35—
                     51.41;
                     51.99
91-05    - -1991     30.60
92-01    - -1992     155.01
92-02    - -1992     155.01
                     51.01—
                     51.07;
                     51.20—
92-04    - -1992     51.24;
                     51.35—
                     51.41;
                     51.99
92-07    - -1992     30.40
93-08    - -1993     72.08
93-10    - -1993     30.25;
                     32.03
94-03    - -1994     36.01
95-01    - -1995     36.01
95-07    - -1995     36.01
95-10#2  - -1995     155.01
96-01    - -1996     130.15;
                     130.16
                     50.01—
                     50.08;
96-03    - -1996     50.50—
                     50.53;
                     50.65—
                     50.69
96-04    - -1996     155.01
96-06    - -1996     30.45
96-07    - -1996     155.01
96-23    - -1996     36.01
97-02    - -1997     150.15
97-04    - -1997     155.01
97-06    - -1997     130.06
97-07    - -1997     150.15
97-08    - -1997     150.18
97-09    - -1997     150.17
97-10    - -1997     150.16
97-11    - -1997     150.20
96-03    - -1998     155.01
98-01    - -1998     72.05
98-02    - -1998     150.15
                     50.04;
98-04    - -1998     51.04;
                     52.05
98-05    - -1998     36.01
98-06    - -1998     36.01
99-04    - -1999     36.01
                     90.28;
99-07    - -1999     90.29;
                     90.34
99-09    - -1999     30.05
                     51.05;
                     51.20—
00-04    - -2000     51.24;
                     51.35—
                     51.41
                     50.05;
                     50.50—
00-05    - -2000     50.53;
                     50.65—
                     50.69
00-10    - -2000     110.12
00-11    - -2000     53.01—
                     53.05
01-05    - -2001     90.24
                     90.20;
                     90.24;
01-07    - -2001     90.25;
                     90.30;
                     90.99
                     152.01;
01-11    - -2001     152.02;
                     152.06—
                     152.12
01-12    - -2001     111.09
01-15    - -2001     53.01—
                     53.05
01-17    - -2001     90.07;
                     90.99
02-02    - -2002     155.01
02-05    - -2002     30.40
02-07    - -2002     150.15
03-01    - -2003     130.06
03-04    - -2003     150.19
04-06    - -2004     111.09
05-01    - -2005     150.16
05-02    - -2005     150.21
05-04    - -2005     150.15
05-05    - -2005     150.22
05-06    - -2005     150.18
06-05    - -2006     31.16
06-09    - -2006     150.02
06-12    - -2006     31.16
07-02    - -2007     93.01—
                     93.11
07-18    - -2007     111.05;
                     111.99
07-19    - -2007     30.63
07-20    - -2007     111.99
08-13    - -2008     31.16
08-17    - -2008     30.08
08-19    - -2008     30.04
09-11    - -2009     31.04
09-14    - -2009     30.05
09-15    - -2009     30.09
09-21    - -2009     152.12
09-29    - -2009     30.03
09-30    - -2009     150.15
09-31    - -2009     150.22
09-32    - -2009     150.17
09-33    - -2009     150.16
09-34    - -2009     150.21
09-35    - -2009     150.18
                     50.25—
09-36    - -2009     50.36;
                     52.35—
                     52.47
09-39    - -2009     53.01—
                     53.05
                     51.01—
                     51.07;
                     51.20—
10-01    - -2010     51.24;
                     51.35—
                     51.41;
                     51.99
                     50.01—
                     50.08;
10-02    - -2010     50.50—
                     50.53;
                     50.65—
                     50.69
                     30.44;
10-06    - -2010     30.62;
                     34.03
10-07    - -2010     31.16
10-17    - -2010     90.20
11-07    - -2011     36.01
11-08    - -2011     31.19
                     30.05;
11-10    - -2011     30.62;
                     30.65
11-11    - -2011     30.40;
                     30.41
                     33.01—
11-14    - -2011     33.03;
                     33.15—
                     33.24
12-03    - -2012     130.04;
                     130.99
                     33.01—
13-03    - -2013     33.03;
                     33.15—
                     33.24
13-05    - -2013     31.35—
                     31.44
                     30.05;
13-06    - -2013     30.25;
                     32.20
14-02    - -2014     30.40
                     31.16;
14-04    - -2014     31.19;
                     31.21;
                     31.56
14-03    5-27-2014   155.01
                     30.62;
15-01    2-24-2015   30.64;
                     30.65
15-03    2-24-2015   130.17;
                     130.99
15-08    11-10-2015  52.38
16-01    1-12-2016   110.12;
                     110.99
16-04    4-12-2016   30.20
16-06    9-27-2016   155.01
17-01    1-10-2017   31.19
17-02    2-14-2017   30.40
                     51.02;
18-02    5-8-2018    52.37;
                     52.39;
                     52.47
18-03    5-8-2018    50.01;
                     50.27
18-04    5-8-2018    96.05
18-05    5-8-2018    30.44
18-02    5-18-2018   51.01
                     112.01—
18-07    7-10-2018   112.06;
                     112.99
                     96.22;
18-08    7-24-2018   96.24;
                     96.29;
                     96.99
                     153.01—
                     153.16;
18-09    7-24-2018   153.30—
                     153.34;
                     153.45—
                     153.51
18-10    9-25-2018   96.02
18-12    10-23-2018  31.59
                     130.03;
18-11    11-27-2018  130.30—
                     130.36;
                     130.99
18-13    11-27-2018  155.01
18-14    12-11-2018  155.01
19-01    2-12-2019   50.28;
                     52.38
                     117.01—
                     117.04;
                     117.15—
19-03    11-12-2019  117.20;
                     117.35—
                     117.39;
                     117.50;
                     117.51
                     116.01;
20-01    1-14-2020   116.15—
                     116.25 
20-02    1-28-2020   155.01
20-03    1-28-2020   150.18
20-04    1-28-2020   111.25—
                     111.33
                     92.01—
20-05    1-28-2020   92.07;
                     92.99
                     114.01—
20-06    3-10-2020   114.05;
                     114.99
20-08    6-9-2020    110.12;
                     110.99
20-09    8-25-2020   155.01
20-10    9-8-2020    36.01
                     35.01—
                     35.05;
                     35.20—
                     35.23;
20-12    10-27-2020  35.35—
                     35.44;
                     35.55—
                     35.58;
                     35.99
21-02    2-9-2021    155.01
21-03    5-11-2021   155.01
21-04    5-11-2021   152.14
21-05    8-10-2021   155.01
21-06    8-10-2021   155.01
                     152.30—
21-07    8-24-2021   152.35;
                     152.99
21-08    9-14-2021   90.04;
                     90.05
21-09    9-28-2021   Adopting Ordinance
                     154.001—
                     154.006;
                     154.015—
                     154.021;
                     154.030—
                     154.042;
                     154.050—
21-11    10-26-2021  154.055;
                     154.065—
                     154.089;
                     154.100—
                     154.106;
                     154.120—
                     154.122;
                     154.999
21-12    11-9-2021   155.01
21-13    11-9-2021   155.01
22-01    3-8-2022    155.01
22-04    8-23-2022   35.37
23-01    1-23-2023   30.09
23-02    6-13-2023   155.01
23-03    6-13-2023   Ch. 74, Sch. I
23-04    7-25-2023   155.01
23-05    8-8-2023    155.01
                     150.03,
23-06    10-10-2023  150.15—
                     150.24
                     110.01—
23-07    10-10-2023  110.15,
                     110.99
                     111.01—
                     111.10,
23-08    10-10-2023  111.25—
                     111.33,
                     111.99
                     118.01—
23-09    10-10-2023  118.06,
                     118.99
24-01    1-9-2024    33.17,
                     33.25
24-03    4-23-2024   35.59
24-02    6-25-2024   155.01
                    
 
