CITY OF SOMERTON, ARIZONA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-13 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ordinance 2025-004, passed 10-7-2025
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 * www.amlegal.com
ADOPTING ORDINANCES
ORDINANCE 2010-002
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF SOMERTON, ARIZONA
REVIEWING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN EXISTING
GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE POLITICAL SUBDIVISION DEALING WITH SUBJECTS EMBRACED
IN SUCH CODE OF ORDINANCES, WHICH WERE MADE A PUBLIC RECORD BY RESOLUTION NO.
2009-040
WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of the political
subdivision are inadequately arranged and classified and are insufficient in
form and substance for the complete preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality and for the proper conduct of
its affairs; and
WHEREAS, the Acts of the legislature of the State of Arizona empower and
authorize the political subdivision to revise, amend, restate, codify and
compile any existing ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted
or published and to incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in book
form;
WHEREAS, the Legislative Authority of the Political Subdivision has authorized
a general compilation, revision, and codification of the ordinances of the
Political Subdivision of a general and permanent nature and publication of such
ordinance in book form; and
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF
SOMERTON, ARIZONA AS FOLLOWS:
Section 1. The general ordinances of the Political Subdivision as revised,
amended, restated, codified, and compiled in book form are hereby adopted as
and shall constitute the “Code of Ordinances of the City of Somerton, Arizona.”
Section 2. Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist of the
following Titles:
   SOMERTON, ARIZONA
   TABLE OF CONTENTS
Article
   CHAPTER 1: GENERAL
      1-1.   How Code Designated and Cited
      1-2.   Construction of Ordinances
      1-3.   Definitions
      1-4.   Reference to Chapters, Articles, or Sections; Conflicting
Provisions
      1-5.   Section Headings
      1-6.   Effect of Repeal
      1-7.   Severability of Parts of Code
      1-8.   Penalty
      1-9.   Repeal of Existing Ordinances
      1- 10.   Effective Date of Code
   CHAPTER 2: MAYOR AND COUNCIL
      2-1.   Council 2-2. Mayor
      2-3.   Council Election
      2-4.   Council Procedure
      2-5.   Ordinances, Resolutions, and Contracts
      2-6.   Planning and Zoning Commission
      2-7.   Zoning Ordinance
      2-8.   Economic Development Commission
   CHAPTER 3: ADMINISTRATION
      3-1.   Officers in General
      3-2.   Officers
      3-3.   Personnel System
      3-4.   City Manager
      3-5.   Procurement Policy
   CHAPTER 4: POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS
      4-1.   Police Department
      4-2.   Fire Department
      4-3.   Adoption of the Uniform Fire Code
   CHAPTER 5: MAGISTRATE
      5-1.   Magistrate Court Established; Jurisdiction
      5-2.   Presiding Officer
      5-3.   Proceedings of Court
      5-4.   Jail Services Recovery Fee
   CHAPTER 6: ANIMALS
      6-1.   Rules and Regulations
      6-2.    Dogs and Other Animals
   CHAPTER 7: BUILDINGS
      7-1.   Comprehensive Building Safety Code
      7-2.   Roadway Naming and Addressing Policy
      7-3.   Impact Fees
      7-4.   National Flood Insurance Program
   CHAPTER 8: BUSINESS
      8-1.   Peddlers
      8-2.   The City Tax Code of the City of Somerton, Arizona
      8-3.   Business License Tax
      8-4.   Pawnbrokers, Secondhand Dealers, and Junk Dealers
   CHAPTER 9: HEALTH AND SANITATION
      9-1.   Garbage and Trash Collection
      9-2.   Preparation of Refuse for Collection
      9-3.   Fees, Rates, and Service; Liens for Collection Charges; Unlawful
Acts; Penalties
      9-4.   Removal of Litter
      9-5.   Authority to Inspect; Notice to Remove Refuse, Litter, and Debris
(Nonemergency); Right to Appeal; Compulsory Removal and Sanctions
      9-6.   Dust Complaint Sign Regulation
      9-7.   Pollutant Discharge Elimination System; Storm Water Phase II
Permit Program
   CHAPTER 10: OFFENSES
      10-1.   Offenses
   CHAPTER 11: TRAFFIC
      11-1.   Administration
      11-2.   Traffic Control
      11-3.   Parking
      11-4.   Bicycles
      11-5.   Prohibiting the Possession of Alcohol or Other Spirituous Liquor
      11-6.   Public Parks
      11-7.   Civil Traffic Violations
   CHAPTER 12: WATER AND SEWER
      12-1.   Water and Sewer System Administration
      12-2.   Application for Service
      12-3.   Discontinuance of Service
      12-4.   Rates and Bills
      12-5.   Sewer Service
      12-6.   Water Service
      12-7.   Liability
      12-8.   Regulations Part of Contract
      12-9.   Flow of Funds
   CHAPTER 13: GENERAL UTILITIES
      13-1.   General Utility Policies
   PARALLEL REFERENCES
   References to Arizona Revised Statutes
   References to Resolutions
   References to Ordinances
Section 3. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in such Code
of Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of
this ordinance except as they are included and reordained in whole or in part
in such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense committed or
penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of this
ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of ordinances levying
taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory, establishing
franchises, or granting special rights to certain persons, authorizing public
improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing of money,
authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property, granting or
accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public use, vacating or
setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor shall such repeal
affect any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature or pertaining to
subjects not contained in or covered by the Code. The repeal of this ordinance
shall in no way affect any resolution or resolutions which set forth the
various rates for fees and services provided by the City and shall remain in
full force and effect and shall only be amended by future resolutions.
Section 4. Such Code known as “Code of Ordinances of the City of Somerton,
Arizona”, three copies of which are on file in the office of the City Clerk,
which document was made a public record by Resolution No. 2009-040 of the City
of Somerton, is hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully
set out in this ordinance.
Section 5. Such Code shall be in full force and effect and be presumptive
evidence in all courts and places of the ordinance and all provisions,
sections, penalties and regulations therein contained and of the date of
passage, and that the same is properly signed, attested, recorded, and approved
and that any public hearings and notices thereof as required by law have been
given.
 
   PASSED AND ADOPTED by the Mayor and Common Council of the City of Somerton,
Arizona this 18th day of May, 2010.
   APPROVED:
    /s/
   Martin Porchas, Mayor
ATTEST:
/s/
Bill Lee, City Manager/Clerk
APPROVED AS TO FORM:
/s/
Gerald W. Hunt, City Attorney
ORDINANCE NO. 2012-005
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF SOMERTON, ARIZONA, ENACTING “THE 2012 CODE OF
ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF SOMERTON, ARIZONA’, WHICH INCLUDES ALL AMENDMENTS
THERETO, WAS MADE A PUBLIC RECORD BY RESOLUTION NO. 2012-019 AND REPLACES
ORDINANCE 2010-002 ADOPTED ON MAY 18, 2010 AND DETERMINES THE EFFECTIVE DATE OF
“THE 2012 CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF SOMERTON, ARIZONA; AND THE DATE OF
THE REPEAL OF ORDINANCE 2010-002.
Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Somerton, Arizona as follows:
   Section 1: That certain documents knows as “The 2012 City Code of the city
of Somerton, Arizona”, which includes all amendments thereto, three copies of
which are on file in the office of the city clerk of the City of Somerton,
Arizona, was adopted by Ordinance No. 2012-005, which document was made a
public record by Resolution No. 2012-019, Arizona, is hereby referred to,
adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this Ordinance, the
provisions thereof to become effective on the 31st day of December, 2012.
   Section 2: This Ordinance No. 2012-005, adopted on and with effective date
of December 31, 2012 shall repeal Ordinance No. 2010-002, said repeal effective
immediately prior to the effective date of this Ordinance.
   Section 3: All Ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with the
provisions of this Ordinance or any part of the Code adopted hereby by
reference are hereby repealed, effective as of the 31st day of December, 2012.
   Section 4: The repeal of Ordinance No. 2010-002 of the City Code, and
adopted and effective as of the 18th day of May, 2010, does not affect the
rights and duties that matured or penalties that were incurred and proceedings
that were begun before the effective date of the repeal.
   Section 5: Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the City an act is
prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense of a
misdemeanor, or whenever in the code or ordinance the doing of any act is
required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no
specific penalty is provided there for, the violation of any such provision or
the failure to perform any such act shall be a class one misdemeanor punishable
by a fine not exceeding $2,500 or by imprisonment to exceed six months, or by
both the fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court. Each day any
violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense or misdemeanor,
unless otherwise specifically provided.
   Section 6: If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion
of this ordinance or any part of these amendments to the Code adopted herein by
reference is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the
decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect
the validity of the remaining portions thereof.
   PASSED AND ADOPTED by the Mayor and Council of the City of Somerton,
Arizona, this 31st day of December, 2012.
   ATTEST:
   Bill Lee /s/                Martin Porchas /s/
   Bill Lee, City Manager               Martin Porchas, Mayor
   APPROVED AS TO FORM:
   Gerald W. Hunt /s/
   Gerald W. Hunt, City Attorney
CHAPTER 1: GENERAL
      Article
         
1-1.   HOW CODE DESIGNATED AND CITED
         
1-2.   CONSTRUCTION OF ORDINANCES
         
1-3.   DEFINITIONS
         
1-4.   REFERENCE TO CHAPTERS, ARTICLES, OR SECTIONS; CONFLICTING PROVISIONS
         
1-5.   SECTION HEADINGS
         
1-6.   EFFECT OF REPEAL
         
1-7.   SEVERABILITY OF PARTS OF CODE
         
1-8.   PENALTY
         
1-9.   REPEAL OF EXISTING ORDINANCES
         
1-10.   EFFECTIVE DATE OF CODE
ARTICLE 1-1: HOW CODE DESIGNATED AND CITED
   The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall
constitute and be designated City of Somerton, Arizona, Code of Ordinances, and
may be so cited. The code may also be cited as the Somerton City Code.
ARTICLE 1-2: CONSTRUCTION OF ORDINANCES
   The rules and the definitions set forth in this chapter shall be observed in
the construction of this code and the ordinances of the city, unless the
construction would be inconsistent with either the manifest intent of the
Council or the context of this code or the ordinances of the city and federal
and state statutes.
ARTICLE 1-3: DEFINITIONS
Section
   
1-3-1   General rule regarding definitions
   
1-3-2   Acts by agents
   
1-3-3   City
   
1-3-4   Code
   
1-3-5   Council
   
1-3-6   Day
   
1-3-7   Daytime; nighttime
   
1-3-8   Department, board, commission, office, officer, or employee
   
1-3-9   Gender; singular and plural
   
1-3-10   In the city
   
1-3-11   Joint authority
   
1-3-12   Month
   
1-3-13   Oath
   
1-3-14   Or; and
   
1-3-15   Person
   
1-3-16   Personal property
   
1-3-17   Preceding; following
   
1-3-18   Property
   
1-3-19   Real property
   
1-3-20   Shall; may
   
1-3-21   Shall have been
   
1-3-22   Signature or subscription by mark
   
1-3-23   State
   
1-3-24   Tenant or occupant
   
1-3-25   Tenses
   
1-3-26   Time; computation
   
1-3-27   Time; reasonable
   
1-3-28   Week
   
1-3-29   Writing
   
1-3-30   Year
Cross-reference:
   Administration, see
Ch. 3
Statutory reference:
   Definitions and construction of statutes generally, see A.R.S. §§ 1-211
through 1-215
§ 1-3-1 GENERAL RULE REGARDING DEFINITIONS.
   All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to the
common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and
any others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law
shall be construed and understood according to that peculiar and appropriate
meaning.
§ 1-3-2 ACTS BY AGENTS.
   When an ordinance requires an act to be done which may by law as well be
done by an agent as by the principal, the requirement shall be construed to
include all those acts when done by an authorized agent.
§ 1-3-3 CITY.
   CITY. The City of Somerton, Arizona.
§ 1-3-4 CODE.
   THE CODE or THIS CODE. The City of Somerton, Arizona, Code of Ordinances,
unless the context indicates otherwise.
§ 1-3-5 COUNCIL.
   COUNCIL. The City Common Council.
§ 1-3-6 DAY.
   DAY. The period of time between any midnight and the midnight following.
§ 1-3-7 DAYTIME; NIGHTTIME.
   DAYTIME is the period of time between sunrise and sunset. NIGHTTIME is the
period of time between sunset and sunrise.
§ 1-3-8 DEPARTMENT, BOARD, COMMISSION, OFFICE, OFFICER, OR EMPLOYEE.
   DEPARTMENT, BOARD, COMMISSION, OFFICE, OFFICER, OR EMPLOYEE. A department,
board, commission officer, officer, or employee of the city, unless the context
clearly indicates otherwise.
§ 1-3-9 GENDER; SINGULAR AND PLURAL.
   Words of the masculine gender include the feminine; and words in the
singular number include the plural and words in the plural number include the
singular.
§ 1-3-10 IN THE CITY.
   IN THE CITY or WITHIN THE CITY. All territory over which the city now has,
or shall hereafter acquire, jurisdiction for the exercise of its police powers
or other regulatory powers.
§ 1-3-11 JOINT AUTHORITY.
   All words purporting to give a JOINT AUTHORITY to three or more city
officers or other persons shall be construed as giving that authority to a
majority of those officers or other persons, unless it shall be otherwise
expressly declared in the law giving the authority.
§ 1-3-12 MONTH.
   MONTH. A calendar month.
§ 1-3-13 OATH.
   OATH. Includes affirmation or declaration.
§ 1-3-14 OR; AND.
   OR may be read AND, and AND may be read OR, if the sense requires it.
§ 1-3-15 PERSON.
   PERSON. Shall extend and be applied to firms, corporations, or voluntary
associations, as well as to individuals, unless plainly inapplicable.
§ 1-3-16 PERSONAL PROPERTY.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes every species of property, except real property
as defined in this article.
§ 1-3-17 PRECEDING; FOLLOWING.
   PRECEDING and FOLLOWING. Next before and next after, respectively.
§ 1-3-18 PROPERTY.
   PROPERTY. Shall include real and personal property.
§ 1-3-19 REAL PROPERTY.
   REAL PROPERTY. Shall include lands, tenements, and hereditaments.
§ 1-3-20 SHALL; MAY.
   SHALL is mandatory and MAY is permissive.
§ 1-3-21 SHALL HAVE BEEN.
   SHALL HAVE BEEN. Includes past and future cases.
§ 1-3-22 SIGNATURE OR SUBSCRIPTION BY MARK.
   SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the signer cannot write, the
signer's or subscriber's name being written near the mark by a witness who
writes his or her own name near the signer's or subscriber's name; but a
signature or subscription by mark can be acknowledged or can serve as a
signature of subscription to a sworn statement only when two witnesses so sign
their own names thereto.
§ 1-3-23 STATE.
   THE STATE. The State of Arizona.
§ 1-3-24 TENANT OR OCCUPANT.
   TENANT or OCCUPANT. Applied to a building or land, shall include any person
holding a written or an oral lease of or who occupies the whole or part of the
building or land, either alone or with others.
§ 1-3-25 TENSES.
   The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future
includes the present.
§ 1-3-26 TIME; COMPUTATION.
   The time within which an act is to be done as provided in this code or in
any order issued pursuant to any ordinance, when expressed in days, shall be
computed by excluding the first day and including the last, except that if the
last day is a Saturday, Sunday or holiday it shall be excluded; and when the
time is expressed in hours, the whole of Saturday, Sunday or a holiday, from
midnight to midnight, shall be excluded.
§ 1-3-27 TIME; REASONABLE.
   In all cases where any section of this code shall require any act to be done
in a reasonable time or reasonable notice to be given, the REASONABLE TIME OR
NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the time only as may be necessary for the prompt
performance of the duty, or compliance with the notice.
§ 1-3-28 WEEK.
   WEEK. Consists of seven consecutive days.
§ 1-3-29 WRITING.
   WRITING. Includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by
ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement, or record is
required or authorized by this code, it shall be made in writing in the English
language, unless it is expressly provided otherwise.
§ 1-3-30 YEAR.
   YEAR. A calendar year, except where otherwise provided.
ARTICLE 1-4: REFERENCE TO CHAPTERS, ARTICLES, OR SECTIONS; CONFLICTING
PROVISIONS
Section
   
1-4-1   Additional rules of construction
   
1-4-2   References to this code
   
1-4-3   Conflicting provisions; different chapters
   
1-4-4   Conflicting provisions; same chapter
§ 1-4-1 ADDITIONAL RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   In addition to the rules of construction specified in the previous section,
the rules set forth in §§
1-4-2,
1-4-3, and
1-4-4 shall be observed in the construction of this code.
§ 1-4-2 REFERENCES TO THIS CODE.
   All references to chapters, articles, or sections are to the chapters,
articles, and sections of this code, unless otherwise specified.
§ 1-4-3 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS; DIFFERENT CHAPTERS.
   If the provisions of different chapters of this code conflict with or
contravene each other, the provisions of each chapter shall prevail as to all
matters and questions growing out of the subject matter of that chapter.
§ 1-4-4 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS; SAME CHAPTER.
   If conflicting provisions are found in different sections of the same
chapter, the provisions of the section which is last in numerical order shall
prevail, unless the construction is inconsistent with the meaning of the
chapter.
ARTICLE 1-5: SECTION HEADINGS
   Headings of the several sections of this code are intended as a convenience
to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be
titles of the section, nor as any part of the section, nor unless expressly so
provided, shall they be so deemed when any of the section, including the
headings, is amended or reenacted.
ARTICLE 1-6: EFFECT OF REPEAL
   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or provision shall
be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the former
ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it shall be expressly so provided. The
repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred
before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution, or proceeding pending
at the time of the repeal, for any offense committed under the ordinance
repealed.
ARTICLE 1-7: SEVERABILITY OF PARTS OF CODE
   It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Council that the sections,
paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this code shall be severable,
and if any provision of this code is held unconstitutional for any reason by a
court of competent jurisdiction, the unconstitutionality shall not affect any
of the remaining provisions of the code.
ARTICLE 1-8: PENALTY
   Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the city an act is prohibited
or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or
whenever in the code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the
failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is
provided therefor, the violation of any such provision or the failure to
perform any such act shall be a class one misdemeanor punishable by a fine not
exceeding $2,500 or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or by both the
fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court. Each day any violation
shall continue shall constitute a separate offense or misdemeanor, unless
otherwise specifically provided.
(Ord. 262, passed 9-4-2001)
ARTICLE 1-9: REPEAL OF EXISTING ORDINANCES
Section
   
1-9-1   Effective date of repeal
   
1-9-2   Ordinances exempt from repeal
§ 1-9-1 EFFECTIVE DATE OF REPEAL.
   All ordinances of the city, except those specially exempted in this article,
now in force and effect are hereby repealed effective October 2009, but all
rights, duties, and obligations created by the ordinances shall continue and
exist in all respects as if this code had not been adopted and enacted.
§ 1-9-2 ORDINANCES EXEMPT FROM REPEAL.
   The adoption and enactment of this code shall not be construed to repeal or
in any way to affect or modify:
   A.   Any special ordinance or ordinances regarding franchises, annexations,
dedications, or zoning;
   B.   Any ordinance making an appropriation;
   C.   Any ordinance affecting any bond issue or by which any bond issue may
have been authorized;
   D.   The running of the statutes of limitations in force at the time this
code becomes effective;
   E.   The continued existence and operation of any department, agency,
commission, or office heretofore legally established or held;
   F.   Any bond of any public officer;
   G.   Any taxes, fees, assessments, or other charges incurred or imposed;
and/or
   H.   Any ordinances authorizing, ratifying, confirming, approving, or
accepting any compact or contract with any other municipality, the state or any
county or subdivision thereof, or with the United States or any agency or
instrumentality thereof.
ARTICLE 1-10: EFFECTIVE DATE OF CODE
   Each and every section of this code as herein contained and hereby enacted
shall take effect and be in force October 2009, except that where a later
effective date is provided it shall prevail.
CHAPTER 2: MAYOR AND COUNCIL
      Article
         
2-1.   COUNCIL
         
2-2.   MAYOR
         
2-3.   COUNCIL ELECTION
         
2-4.   COUNCIL PROCEDURE
         
2-5.   ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS, AND CONTRACTS
         
2-6.   PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
         
2-7.   ZONING ORDINANCE
ARTICLE 2-1: COUNCIL
Section
   
2-1-1   Elected officers
   
2-1-2   Corporate powers
   
2-1-3   Assumption of office
   
2-1-4   Vacancies in Council
   
2-1-5   Compensation
   
2-1-6   Oath of office
   
2-1-7   Bond
§ 2-1-1 ELECTED OFFICERS.
   The elected officers of the city shall be seven Council Members, one of whom
shall be elected as Mayor in accordance with §
2-2-1. The Mayor and Council Members shall constitute the Council and shall
continue in office until assumption of duties of office by their duly elected
successors. The regular term of office for Council Members shall be four years.
§ 2-1-2 CORPORATE POWERS.
   The corporate powers of the city shall be vested in the Council and shall be
exercised only as directed or authorized by law. All powers of the Council
shall be exercised by ordinance, resolution, order, or motion.
§ 2-1-3 ASSUMPTION OF OFFICE.
   Council Members shall assume the duties of office at the regularly-scheduled
Council meeting next following the date of the general election at which, or
effective as of the date of which, the Council Members were elected.
§ 2-1-4 VACANCIES IN COUNCIL.
   The Council shall fill by appointment for the unexpired term any vacancy
that may occur for whatever reason.
§ 2-1-5 COMPENSATION.
   The compensation of elective officers of the city shall be fixed from time
to time by resolution of the Council; provided, that the compensation allowed
to the Mayor and Council Members shall not exceed that allowed by state
statutes.
§ 2-1-6 OATH OF OFFICE.
   Immediately prior to assumption of the duties of office, each Council Member
shall, in public, take and subscribe to the oath of office.
§ 2-1-7 BOND.
   Prior to taking office, every Council Member shall execute and file an
official bond, enforceable against the principal and his or her sureties,
conditioned on the due and faithful performance of his or her official duties,
payable to the state and to and for the use and benefit of the city or any
person who may be injured or aggrieved by the wrongful act or default of the
officer in his or her official capacity. A person so injured or aggrieved may
bring suit on the bond under provisions identical to those contained in A.R.S.
§ 38-260. Bonds shall be in the sum as shall be provided by resolution and the
premium for the bonds shall be paid by the city.
ARTICLE 2-2: MAYOR
Section
   
2-2-1   Election of Mayor
   
2-2-2   Vice Mayor
   
2-2-3   Acting Mayor
   
2-2-4   Powers and duties of the Mayor
   
2-2-5   Absence of Mayor
   
2-2-6   Failure to sign documents
§ 2-2-1 ELECTION OF MAYOR.
   A.   Pursuant to the initiative on May 18, 1999 the voters of the city
authorized the Mayor to be directly elected by the voters of the city.
   B.   The term of office is a four-year term, beginning with the election
held on March 8, 2005.
(Ord. 288, passed 9-21-2004)
§ 2-2-2 VICE MAYOR.
   At the same meeting at which the Mayor is sworn in, the Council shall
designate one of its members as Vice Mayor, who shall serve at the pleasure of
the Council. The Vice Mayor shall perform the duties of the Mayor during his or
her absence or disability.
§ 2-2-3 ACTING MAYOR.
   In the absence or disability of both the Mayor and Vice Mayor, the Council
may designate another of its members to serve as Acting Mayor, who shall have
all the powers, duties, and responsibilities of the Mayor during the absence or
disability.
§ 2-2-4 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE MAYOR.
   The powers and duties of the Mayor shall include the following.
   A.   He or she shall be the chief executive officer of the city.
   B.   He or she shall be the Chairperson of the Council and preside over its
meetings. He or she may make and second motions and shall have a voice and vote
in all its proceedings.
   C.   He or she shall enforce the provisions of this code.
   D.   He or she shall execute and authenticate by his or her signature any
instruments as the Council, or any statutes, ordinances, or this code, shall
require.
   E.   He or she shall make any recommendations and suggestions to the Council
as he or she may consider proper.
   F.   He or she may deem that an emergency exists due to fire, conflagration,
flood, earthquake, explosion, war, bombing, acts of the enemy, or any other
natural or human-made calamity or disaster or by reason of threats or
occurrences of riots, routs, affrays, or other acts of civil disobedience which
endangers life or property within the city. If he or she does deem that an
emergency does exist, he or she may by proclamation declare an emergency to
exist. If an emergency is declared pursuant to the above, the Mayor shall,
during the emergency, govern by proclamation and shall have the authority to
impose all necessary regulations to preserve the peace and order of the city,
including, but not limited to:
      1.   Imposition of curfews in all or portions of the city;
      2.   Ordering the closing of any business;
      3.   Closing the public access to any public building, street, or other
public place; and/or
      4.   Calling upon regular or auxiliary law enforcement agencies and
organizations within or without the city for assistance.
   G.   He or she shall perform any other duties required by state statute and
this code, as well as those duties required as chief executive officer of the
city.
(Ord. 191, passed 8-1-1989)
§ 2-2-5 ABSENCE OF MAYOR.
   The Mayor shall not absent himself or herself from the city for a greater
period than 15 days without the consent of the Council.
§ 2-2-6 FAILURE TO SIGN DOCUMENTS.
   If the Mayor refuses or fails to sign any ordinance, resolution, contract,
warrant, demand, or other document or instrument requiring his or her signature
for five days consecutively, then a majority of the members of the Council may,
at any regular or special meeting, authorize the Vice Mayor or, in his or her
absence, an Acting Mayor to sign the ordinance, resolution, contract, warrant,
demand, or other document or instrument which, when so signed, shall have the
same force and effect as if signed by the Mayor.
ARTICLE 2-3: COUNCIL ELECTION
Section
   
2-3-1   Election dates
   
2-3-2   Primary election
   
2-3-3   Nonpolitical ballot
   
2-3-4   General election nomination
   
2-3-5   Election to office
§ 2-3-1 ELECTION DATES.
   The primary and general elections shall be held on the consolidated election
dates set by A.R.S. § 16-204.
§ 2-3-2 PRIMARY ELECTION.
   (A)   Any candidate who shall receive at the primary election a majority of
all the votes cast shall be declared to be elected to the office for which he
or she is a candidate effective as of the date of the general election, and no
further election shall be held as to the candidate.
   (B)   In calculating the votes cast in the city primary election for
purposes of determining if a candidate for the office of Mayor or Council has
received a majority of the votes cast, the basis shall be the number of votes
for the office of Mayor at that election.
(Ord. 2013-003, passed 8-20-2013)
§ 2-3-3 NONPOLITICAL BALLOT.
   Nothing on the ballot in any election shall be indicative of the support of
the candidate.
§ 2-3-4 GENERAL ELECTION NOMINATION.
   (A)   If, at any primary election held as provided in §
2-3-2, there be any office or offices for which no candidate is elected, then
as to the office or offices, the election shall be considered to be a primary
election for nomination of candidates for the office or offices, and the second
or general municipal election shall be held to vote for candidates to fill the
office or offices. Candidates to be placed on the ballot at the second or
general municipal election shall be those not elected at the first election,
shall be equal in number to twice the number to be elected to any given office
or less than that number if there be less than that number named on the primary
election ballot, and persons who receive the highest number of votes for the
respective offices at the first election shall be the only candidates at the
second election, provided that if there be any person who, under the provisions
of this article, would have been entitled to become a candidate for any office
except for the fact that some other candidate received an equal number of votes
therefor, then all the persons receiving an equal number of votes shall
likewise become candidates for the office.
   (B)   The number of signatures required on nomination petitions for a
candidate for the office of Mayor or Council shall be 1,000 signatures or at
least 5%, but not more than 10%, of the vote for Mayor in the last preceding
election at which a Mayor was elected, whichever is less.
(Ord. 2013-004, passed 8-20-2013)
§ 2-3-5 ELECTION TO OFFICE.
   The candidates equal in number to the persons to be elected who receive the
highest number of votes shall be declared elected.
ARTICLE 2-4: COUNCIL PROCEDURE
Section
   
2-4-1   Regular meetings
   
2-4-2   Special meetings
   
2-4-3   Meetings to be public
   
2-4-4   Quorum
   
2-4-5   Agenda
   
2-4-6   Order of business
   
2-4-7   Committees and commissions
   
2-4-8   Voting
   
2-4-9   Suspension of rules
§ 2-4-1 REGULAR MEETINGS.
   A.   The Council shall hold regular meetings on the first and third Tuesday
of each month at 7:00 p.m., provided that when the day fixed for any regular
meeting of the Council falls upon a day designated by law as a legal holiday,
such meeting shall be held at the same hour on the next succeeding day not a
holiday at the Somerton City Hall Council Chambers, 143 North State Avenue,
Somerton, Arizona 85350.
   B.   For the month of July only, the Council shall hold a regular meeting on
the third Tuesday of the month. No meeting shall be held on the first Tuesday
in July.
(Ord. 2007-008, passed 11-20-2007; Ord. 2009-006, passed 8-25-2009; Ord. 2015-
003, passed 4-21-2015; Ord. 2025-002, passed 8-18-2025)
§ 2-4-2 SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   The Mayor, or the Clerk upon the written request of two Council Members, may
convene the Council at any time by notifying the Council Members of the date,
hour, and purpose of the special meeting and post within 24 hours' notice to
comply with the State Open Meeting law, being A.R.S. §§ 38-431 et seq.
§ 2-4-3 MEETINGS TO BE PUBLIC.
   All proceedings of the Council shall be open to the public, except that,
upon approval by a majority vote of the Council, the Council may meet in a
closed executive session for a discussion of matters of a confidential nature,
provided that no ordinance, order, rule, resolution, regulation, contract,
appointment, or other official action shall be finally approved in any such
executive session.
§ 2-4-4 QUORUM.
   A majority of the Council Members shall constitute a quorum for transacting
business, but a lesser number may adjourn from time to time and compel the
attendance of absent Council Members.
§ 2-4-5 AGENDA.
   Prior to each Council meeting, or on or before a time fixed by the Council
for preparation and distribution of an agenda, whichever is earlier, the Clerk
shall collect all written reports, communications, ordinances, resolutions,
contracts, and other documents to be submitted to the Council, and prepare an
agenda according to the order of business and shall furnish each Council
Member, the Mayor, and the Attorney with a copy.
§ 2-4-6 ORDER OF BUSINESS.
   The business of the Council shall be taken up for consideration and
disposition in the following order.
   A.   Public meeting.  Notification of public meeting pursuant to A.R.S. §
38-431.02.
   B.   Call to order. The Mayor shall take the chair precisely at the hour
appointed for the meeting and shall immediately call the Council to order. In
the absence of the Mayor, the Vice Mayor shall call the Council to order. In
the absence of both the Mayor and Vice Mayor, the Clerk shall call the Council
to order and an Acting Mayor shall be selected to chair the meeting. Upon the
arrival of the Mayor or the Vice Mayor, the Vice Mayor or the Acting Mayor
shall immediately relinquish the chair upon the conclusion of the business
immediately before the Council. The Mayor shall preserve order and decorum,
decide all questions of order, and conduct the proceedings of the meetings in
accordance with the parliamentary rules contained in Robert's Rules of Order.
   C.   Pledge of allegiance.
   D.   Roll call. Before proceeding with the business of the Council, the
Clerk or his or her deputy shall call the roll of the Council Members, and the
names of those present shall be entered in the minutes. If a quorum is not
present, the Council Members present may adjourn pursuant to §
2-4-4.
   E.   Call to the public. This is the time for the public to comment. Members
of the City Council may not discuss items that are not specifically identified
on the agenda. Therefore, pursuant to A.R.S. § 38-431.01(G), action taken as a
result of public comment will be limited to directing staff to study the
matter, responding to any criticism of scheduling the matter for further
consideration and decision at a later date.
   F.   Consent agenda. All matters listed here are considered to be routine by
the City Council and will be enacted by one motion. There shall be no separate
discussion of these items. If discussion is desired, that item will be removed
from the consent agenda and will be considered separately.
   G.   Old business. All items are for discussion and possible action.
   H.   Minutes. The Clerk or his or her deputy shall read or present the
minutes of the preceding Council meeting, which shall be approved if correct.
Any errors noted shall be corrected.
   I.   Petitions. Petitions, remonstrances, communications, and comments or
suggestions from citizens present shall be heard by the Council. All the
remarks shall be addressed to the Council as a whole, and not to any Council
Member thereof. The remarks shall be limited to three minutes, unless
additional time is granted by the Council. No person other than the individual
speaking shall enter into the discussion without the permission of the
presiding officer. No question shall be asked a Council Member, except through
the presiding officer.
   J.   Reports by officers. City officials and committees shall present any
reports required by the Council.
   K.   Unfinished business. The Council shall consider any business that has
been previously considered and which is still unfinished.
   L.   New business. The Council shall consider any business not heretofore
considered, including the introduction of ordinances and resolutions. All items
are for discussion and possible action. A summary of current events by Mayor,
Council Members, and/or City Manager, pursuant to A.R.S. § 38-431.02(K),
provided that the public body does not propose, discuss, deliberate, or take
legal action on any matter in the summary.
   M.   Claims. The Clerk shall present any claims against the city, which will
then be approved or disapproved by the Council.
   N.   Miscellaneous business. Any agenda may include an invocation and/or
comments by those citizens present. Prior to adjournment, the Council shall, as
it deems necessary, discuss any business as is not specifically provided for
herein, including, but not limited to, Mayor and Council reports.
   O.   Adjournment. The Council may, by a majority vote of those present,
adjourn from time to time to a specific date and hour. A motion to adjourn
shall always be in order and decided without debate.
   P.   Procedure for changing order of business. The order of the agenda may
be altered in any manner that the City Manager, with the consent of the Mayor
or a majority of the Common Council, upon proper motion and Council approval,
deems appropriate.
§ 2-4-7 COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS.
   The Council may create any committees and commissions, standing or special,
as it deems necessary. They shall consist of as many members and shall perform
any duties as the Council may require and shall exist at the pleasure of the
Council.
(Ord. 115, passed 4-18-1979)
§ 2-4-8 VOTING.
   A.   The Mayor shall vote as a member of the Council.
   B.   Upon the request of any Council Member, the ayes and nays upon any
question shall be taken and entered in the minutes.
§ 2-4-9 SUSPENSION OF RULES.
   Any of the provisions of this article may be temporarily suspended in
connection with any matter under consideration by a recorded vote of three-
fourths of the Council Members present, except that this section shall not be
construed to permit any action that is contrary to state statutes.
ARTICLE 2-5: ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS, AND CONTRACTS
Section
   
2-5-1   Prior approval
   
2-5-2   Introduction
   
2-5-3   Same-day passage prohibited
   
2-5-4   Two separate readings
   
2-5-5   Requirements for an ordinance
   
2-5-6   Effective date of ordinances
   
2-5-7   Signatures required
   
2-5-8   Publishing required
   
2-5-9   Posting required
   
2-5-10   City service fees to be adopted by resolution
   
2-5-11   Authority to correct scrivener's errors
§ 2-5-1 PRIOR APPROVAL.
   All ordinances, resolutions, and contract documents shall, before
presentation to the Council, have been reviewed as to form by the Attorney and
shall, when there are substantive matters of administration involved, be
referred to the person who is charged with the administration of the matters.
The person shall have an opportunity to present his or her objections, if any,
prior to the passage of the ordinance, resolution, or acceptance of the
contract.
§ 2-5-2 INTRODUCTION.
   Ordinances, resolutions, and other matters or subjects requiring action by
the Council can be introduced and sponsored by a Council Member, except that
the Attorney, city officials, or the Clerk may present ordinances, resolutions,
and other matters or subjects to the Council, and any Council Member may assume
sponsorship thereof by moving that the ordinance, resolution, matter, or
subject be adopted; otherwise, they shall not be considered.
§ 2-5-3 SAME-DAY PASSAGE PROHIBITED.
   No ordinance except emergency ordinances shall be put on its final passage
on the same day on which it was introduced.
§ 2-5-4 TWO SEPARATE READINGS.
   All ordinances, except emergency ordinances, shall have two separate
readings, but the first and the second reading shall never be made on the same
day. The first reading may be by title only, but the second reading shall be in
full, unless the Council, in possession of printed copies of the ordinance,
shall unanimously allow reading by title only.
§ 2-5-5 REQUIREMENTS FOR AN ORDINANCE.
   Each ordinance should have but one subject, the nature of which is clearly
expressed in the title. Whenever possible, each ordinance shall be introduced
as an amendment to this code or to an existing ordinance, and in that case, the
title of the sections to be amended shall be included in the ordinance.
§ 2-5-6 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   No ordinance, resolution, or franchise shall become operative until 30 days
after its passage by the Council and approval by the Mayor, except measures
necessary for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, or safety of the
city, but such an emergency measure shall not become immediately operative
unless it states in a separate section the reason why it is necessary that it
should become immediately operative, and unless it is approved by the
affirmative vote of three-fourths of all the Council Members, taken by ayes and
nays.
§ 2-5-7 SIGNATURES REQUIRED.
   Every ordinance passed by the Council shall, before it becomes effective, be
signed by the Mayor and attested by the Clerk.
§ 2-5-8 PUBLISHING REQUIRED.
   Only those orders, resolutions, motions, regulations, or proceedings of the
Council shall be published as may be required by state statutes or expressly
ordered by the Council.
§ 2-5-9 POSTING REQUIRED.
   Every ordinance imposing any penalty, fine, forfeiture, or other punishment
shall, after passage, be posted by the Clerk in three or more public places
within the city and an affidavit of the person who posted the ordinances shall
be filed in the office of the Clerk as proof of posting.
§ 2-5-10 CITY SERVICE FEES TO BE ADOPTED BY RESOLUTION.
   (A)   The Council has determined that from time to time, service fees will
be reviewed periodically to determine a reasonable recovery of costs incurred
to provide these services. Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the
city a charge is assessed for the provision of a service, the amount of that
assessment may be set in the form of a resolution and adopted by the Council.
The resolutions modifying service fees shall be in a format similar to those
adopted previously and listed below, and adoption processes shall conform to
applicable state statutes and any state requirements incident thereto, in
particular, for example, water rates and impact fees.
   (B)   Sections:
Section Description
Section        Description
2-7-1          Subdivision services schedule, zoning service schedule, and
               miscellaneous fees
4-3-2(B)(6)(a) Fire Department fees and charges
5-4-4          Municipal Court fees
6-2-2          Dog licensing/registration fees
7-1-8          Building permit fees
7-3-9(C)       Impact fees
8-3-1          Business license tax
9-3-1(A)       Sanitation rates and service charges
11-6-4         Council to adopt park rules and regulations
12-5-12        Sewer service rates
12-6-10        Water service rates
(Ord. 2013-006, passed 12-17-2013)
§ 2-5-11 AUTHORITY TO CORRECT SCRIVENER'S ERRORS.
   A.   The City Attorney and City Clerk are hereby each individually
authorized to correct scrivener's errors in the City Code, Zoning Code, and/or
in ordinances and resolutions adopted by the Council without the need for re-
adoption of the City Code provision, Zoning Code provision, ordinance or
resolution.
   B.   For purposes of this section, a scrivener's error includes one or more
of the following:
      1.   Misspelling;
      2.   Grammatical error;
      3.   Numbering error;
      4.   Cross-referencing error; or
      5.   Inconsistency with the rules of style adopted for the reformatted
City Code, Zoning Code, or any adopted code.
   C.   A correction to an ordinance or resolution shall be accompanied by a
scrivener's note on or attached to the corrected ordinance or resolution.
   D.   Corrections to complete sections of the City Code, Zoning Code, or any
adopted code shall be noted in the code.
(Ord. 2020-006, passed 12-15-2020)
ARTICLE 2-6: PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
Section
   
2-6-1   Established
   
2-6-2   Membership
   
2-6-3   Officers
   
2-6-4   Duties
   
2-6-5   Meetings
   
2-6-6   Voting
   
2-6-7   Fees
   
2-6-8   Board of Adjustment
§ 2-6-1 ESTABLISHED.
   The City Planning and Zoning Commission is hereby established.
§ 2-6-2 MEMBERSHIP.
   A.   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall be composed of a total of
seven members who shall be residents of the city.
   B.   All members shall serve without pay. Members of the Commission may be
reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their duties, upon
authorization or ratification by the Commission and approval of those
expenditures by the Council.
(Ord. 272, passed 7-15-2003)
§ 2-6-3 OFFICERS.
   The Commission shall elect a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson from among its
own members, who shall serve for one year and until their successors are
elected and qualified. The Chairperson shall preside at all meetings and
exercise all the usual rights, duties, and prerogatives of the head of any
similar organization. The Vice Chairperson shall perform the duties of the
Chairperson in the absence or disability of the Chairperson. Vacancies created
by any cause shall be filled for the unexpired term by a new election.
§ 2-6-4 DUTIES.
   It shall be the duty of the Commission to formulate, create, and administer
any lawful plan duly adopted by the governing body for the present and future
growth of the city pertaining to the use of land and buildings for any purpose,
together with all incidental activities usually associated therewith and
commonly known as "planning and zoning"; to make or cause to be made a
continuous study of the best present and future use to which land and buildings
shall be put within the city and in cooperation with adjacent areas; to
recommend to the governing body revisions in those plans which, in the opinion
of the Commission, are for the best interest of the citizens of the city; to
promulgate rules of procedure; and to supervise the enforcement of rules so
promulgated by the Commission and approved by the governing body.
§ 2-6-5 MEETINGS.
   The Commission shall provide in its rules for its meetings. Special meetings
may be called by the Chairperson or, in his or her absence, the Vice
Chairperson. In addition, any two members of the Commission may make written
request to the Chairperson for a special meeting and, in the event the meeting
is not called, the members may call the special meeting in such manner and form
as may be provided in the Commission rules.
§ 2-6-6 VOTING.
   Four members shall constitute a quorum. The affirmative vote of four members
shall be required for passage of any matter before the Commission. The minutes
of the meetings shall reflect the "ayes" and "nays" cast on a particular
measure and shall reflect the vote of each member present. A member may abstain
from voting only upon a declaration that he or she has a conflict of interest,
in which case the member shall take no part in the deliberations on the matter
in question.
§ 2-6-7 FEES.
   The Commission shall be authorized to establish a uniform schedule of fees
for service with all receipts to be paid into the General Fund of the city. The
fee schedules shall become effective upon approval by the Council.
§ 2-6-8 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   The Board of Adjustment shall be established as in Ordinance 259 of the city
(A.R.S. § 9-462.06).
   A.   Members. The Board of Adjustment shall consist of the members of the
City Council.
   B.   Powers and duties.
      1.   The City Council may, by ordinance, delegate to a hearing officer
the authority to hear and decide on matters of the Board of Adjustment, except
that the right of appeal from the decision of a hearing officer to the Board of
Adjustment shall be preserved.
      2.   The ordinance shall provide for public meetings of the Board, for a
Chairperson with the power to administer oaths and take evidence, and that
minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member and records of its
examinations and other official actions be filed in the office of the Board as
a public record.
      3.   A Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals from the
decisions of the Zoning Administrator, shall exercise any other powers as may
be granted by the ordinance, and adopt all rules and procedures necessary for
the conduct of its business.
      4.   Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by persons aggrieved
or by any officer, department, board, or bureau of the municipality affected by
a decision of the Zoning Administrator, within a reasonable time, by filing
with the Zoning Administrator and with the Board a notice of appeal specifying
the grounds thereof. The Zoning Administrator shall immediately transmit all
records pertaining to the action appealed from to the Board.
      5.   An appeal to the Board stays all proceedings in the matter appealed
from, unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to the Board that, in the
Zoning Administrator's opinion by the facts stated in the certificate, a stay
would cause imminent peril to life or property. Upon the certification,
proceedings shall not be stayed, except by restraining order granted by the
Board or by a court of record on application and notice to the Zoning
Administrator. Proceedings shall not be stayed if the appeal requests relief
which has previously been denied by the Board, except pursuant to a special
action in superior court as provided in division B.10. below.
      6.   The Board shall fix a reasonable time for hearing the appeal, and
shall give notice of hearing by both publication in a newspaper of general
circulation in accordance with A.R.S. § 9-462.04 and posting the notice in
conspicuous places close to the property affected.
      7.   A Board of Adjustment shall:
         a.   Hear and decide appeals in which it is alleged there is an error
in a decision made by the Zoning Administrator in the enforcement of this
article;
         b.   Hear and decide appeals for variances from the terms of this
article only if, because of special circumstances applicable to the property,
including its size, shape, topography, location, or surroundings, the strict
application of this article will deprive the property of privileges enjoyed by
other property of the same classification in the same zoning district. Any
variance granted is subject to the conditions as will assure that the
adjustment authorized shall not constitute a grant of special privileges
inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and
zone in which the property is located; and
         c.   Reverse or affirm the order, requirement, or decision of the
Zoning Administrator appealed from, and make the order, requirement, decision,
or determination as necessary.
      8.   A Board of Adjustment may not:
         a.   Make any changes in the uses permitted in any zoning district, or
make any changes in the terms of this article, provided the restriction in
division B.8.b. below shall not affect the authority to grant variances
pursuant to this article; and/or
         b.   Grant a variance if the special circumstances applicable to the
property are self-imposed by the property owner.
      9.   If the City Council is established as the Board of Adjustment, it
shall exercise all of the functions and duties of the Board of Adjustment in
the same manner and to the same effect as provided in this section.
      10.   A person aggrieved by a decision of the Board may, at any time
within 30 days after the Council has rendered its decision, file a complaint
for special action in the Superior Court to review the legislative body
decision. Filing the complaint does not stay proceedings on the decision, but
the court may, on application, grant a stay and, on final hearing, may affirm
or reverse or modify the decision reviewed.
(Ord. passed - -)
ARTICLE 2-7: ZONING ORDINANCE
Section
   
2-7-1   Adoption by reference
§ 2-7-1 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
   The City of Somerton Zoning Ordinance is hereby adopted by reference as if
set out in full herein. Copies are available through city offices.
(Ord. passed - - ; Ord. 2017-005, passed 10-17-2017)
CHAPTER 3: ADMINISTRATION
      Article
         
3-1.   OFFICERS IN GENERAL
         
3-2.   OFFICERS
         
3-3.   PERSONNEL SYSTEM
         
3-4.   CITY MANAGER
         
3-5.   PROCUREMENT POLICY
ARTICLE 3-1: OFFICERS IN GENERAL
Section
   
3-1-1   Officers
   
3-1-2   Reserved
   
3-1-3   Additional officers
   
3-1-4   Bond
   
3-1-5   Vacancies; holding more than one office
   
3-1-6   Additional powers and duties
§ 3-1-1 OFFICERS.
   There are hereby created the Offices of City Clerk, City Engineer, City
Attorney, and City Magistrate, who shall be appointed by the Council and who
shall serve at the pleasure of the Council.
(Ord. 2018-002, passed 8-7-2018)
§ 3-1-2 RESERVED.
§ 3-1-3 ADDITIONAL OFFICERS.
   The Council may appoint and remove, from time to time, any other officers as
it may deem necessary and that are not provided for in this code or state
statute.
§ 3-1-4 BOND.
   The Council shall require each officer of the city to give bond for the due
discharge of his or her duties, in any sums and with any security as it may
direct and approve as determined by resolution, and the city shall pay the
costs of the bond.
§ 3-1-5 VACANCIES; HOLDING MORE THAN ONE OFFICE.
   Any vacancy that shall occur in any city office shall be filled by
appointment by the Council, provided that one person may hold more than one
office and that, at the discretion of the Council, the functions of a city
official may be validly performed and discharged by a deputy or another city
official, or an otherwise qualified individual not holding office but employed
at the pleasure of the Council.
§ 3-1-6 ADDITIONAL POWERS AND DUTIES.
   In addition to any powers and duties prescribed in this code, each officer
shall have any further powers, perform any further duties, and hold any other
office as may be provided by the Council through ordinance, resolution, or
order.
ARTICLE 3-2: OFFICERS
Section
   
3-2-1   City Clerk
   
3-2-2   Police Chief
   
3-2-3   City Engineer
   
3-2-4   City Attorney
   
3-2-5   City Magistrate
§ 3-2-1 CITY CLERK.
   A.   Records. The Clerk shall keep a true and correct record of all business
transacted by the Council and any other records that either pertain to the
business of the city or that the Council directs. The Clerk shall number,
plainly label, and file separately in a suitable cabinet all resolutions,
notices, deeds, surveys, leases, paid and unpaid vouchers, inventories,
letters, orders, and other documents of whatever nature.
   B.   Public inspection of records. The Clerk shall keep convenient for
public inspection all public records and public documents under his or her
control, as provided by state statute.
   C.   Monthly reports. The Clerk shall prepare and collect from city officers
and employees any monthly reports prepared in any manner, and include any
information as may be directed by the Council.
   D.   Minutes. The Clerk shall prepare or cause to be prepared all minutes of
Council proceedings and ensure their correctness and accuracy.
   E.   Ordinances, resolutions, budgets, and notices. The Clerk shall process,
record, file, publish, and, if required by state statute, post all ordinances,
resolutions, budgets, and notices that may be passed by the Council.
   F.   Duties as Treasurer. The Clerk shall hold the Office of City Treasurer
and receive and safely keep all moneys that shall come to the city and pay out
the same when authorized by the Council. He or she shall keep a separate record
and account of each different fund provided by the Council, apportion the
moneys received among the different funds as prescribed by the Council, and
keep a complete set of books showing: every money transaction of the city; the
state of each fund; and from what source the money in each fund was derived and
for what purpose expended. He or she shall make monthly reports to the Council
of all receipts and disbursements and the balance in each fund. At the end of
the fiscal year, he or she shall make a full and detailed statement of the
receipts and expenditures of the city during the year, specifying: the
different sources of revenue and the amount received from each; all
appropriations made by the Mayor and Council, the object for which they were
made, and the amount of money expended under each; the evidences of
indebtedness issued and what portion remains thereof outstanding, with the rate
and amount of interest due thereon; and the amount of cash on hand.
   G.   Election Official. The Clerk shall be the City Election Official and
perform those duties required by state statute.
   H.   Licenses. The Clerk shall issue or cause to be issued all licenses that
may be prescribed by state statute or this code.
   I.   Administrative duties. The Clerk shall perform those administrative
responsibilities and duties that are conferred upon him or her by the Council
or the City Manager, in addition to those specified in this code.
(Ord. 160, passed 5-21-1985)
§ 3-2-2 POLICE CHIEF.
   The Chief of Police is a department head and shall be Collector of Taxes of
the city, provided that the collection of the taxes may be administered by the
Clerk. He or she shall perform any duties as may be required of him or her by
law and as the City Manager may deem necessary.
(Ord. 2018-002, passed 8-7-2018)
§ 3-2-3 CITY ENGINEER.
   The Engineer shall have charge of the city streets, sewers, and waterworks,
and shall perform any duties as may be required of him or her by law and any
other duties as the Council may deem necessary.
§ 3-2-4 CITY ATTORNEY.
   The Attorney shall act as the legal counselor and advisor of the Council and
other city officials, and as such shall give his or her opinion, in writing,
when requested. He or she shall draft all deeds, contracts, conveyances,
ordinances, resolutions, and other legal instruments when required by the
Council. He or she shall approve as to form, in writing, all drafts of
contracts and all official or other bonds before final approval or acceptance
thereof by the Council. He or she shall return, within ten days, all ordinances
and resolutions submitted to him or her for consideration by the Council, with
his or her approval or disapproval as to form noted thereon, together with his
or her reasons therefor. He or she shall prosecute and defend all suits,
actions, or causes where the city is a party, and shall report to the Council,
when required, the condition of any suit or action to which the city is a
party.
§ 3-2-5 CITY MAGISTRATE.
   The presiding officer of the Magistrate Court, and any other magistrates as
deemed necessary by the Council, shall be appointed by the Council. A
magistrate shall serve for a term of four years, with the beginning and end of
the term to be specified at the time of appointment. During the term, a
Magistrate may be removed only for cause.
(Ord. 157, passed 4-7-1985)
ARTICLE 3-3: PERSONNEL SYSTEM
Section
   
3-3-1   Creation and scope
   
3-3-2   Conditions of employment
   
3-3-3   Rules and regulations
   
3-3-4   Political contributions
§ 3-3-1 CREATION AND SCOPE.
   There is hereby adopted a merit system for the employees of the city, the
provisions of which shall apply to all employees of the city, except: elected
officials; officers of the city appointed by the Council; persons engaged under
contract to supply expert, professional, or technical services; temporary
employees; volunteer firefighters; and volunteer personnel who receive no
regular compensation from the city.
§ 3-3-2 CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT.
   The appointment, promotion, and tenure of every employee shall be
conditioned solely on merit, fitness, and the satisfactory performance of the
duties and responsibilities assigned. No employee or applicant for employment
shall be discriminated against on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, or
political affiliation.
§ 3-3-3 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Council may adopt, by resolution, rules and regulations to give effect
to this article, which may be modified or changed from time to time, but the
rules and regulations shall follow the generally accepted principles of good
personnel administration.
§ 3-3-4 POLITICAL CONTRIBUTIONS.
   No officer, official, or employee of the city shall use any influence or
pressure upon any employee to obtain any assessment or contribution of money or
time, either direct or indirect, for any political campaign or personal gain.
ARTICLE 3-4: CITY MANAGER
Section
   
3-4-1   Creation of office
   
3-4-2   Appointment of City Manager
   
3-4-3   Removal of City Manager
   
3-4-4   Powers and duties of City Manager
   
3-4-5   Council not to interfere with appointments or removals
   
3-4-6   Emergencies
   
3-4-7   Bond
   
3-4-8   Compensation
§ 3-4-1 CREATION OF OFFICE.
   The Office of City Manager is hereby created.
§ 3-4-2 APPOINTMENT OF CITY MANAGER.
   The City Manager shall be appointed by majority vote of the City Council for
an indefinite term and shall be chosen by the Council on the basis of executive
and administrative qualifications, with special reference to actual experience
in or knowledge of accepted practices in respect to the duties of this office
hereinafter set forth. All terms relating to the City Manager's employment may
be set forth in an employment contract, which may or may not include a
requirement for residency within the city and/or availability within a
reasonable amount of time.
(Ord. 281, passed 6-1-2004)
§ 3-4-3 REMOVAL OF CITY MANAGER.
   The City Council may remove the City Manager at any time by a majority vote.
Provided the City Manager has been employed for at least one year, the city
shall make regular salary payments for three months following termination,
unless different termination provisions are set forth in an employment
contract.
(Ord. 281, passed 6-1-2004)
§ 3-4-4 POWERS AND DUTIES OF CITY MANAGER.
   The City Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the city. He
or she may head one or more departments and shall be responsible to the City
Council for the proper administration of all affairs of the city. To that end,
he or she shall have power and shall be required to:
   A.   For a period of six months following his or her hiring, the City
Manager may hire or terminate an employee of the city only with Council
consent. Thereafter, he or she may hire or terminate an employee without
Council approval, except that he or she must secure Council approval for the
hiring or removal of any department head;
   B.   Prepare the budget annually and submit it to the Council, together with
a message describing the important features, and be responsible for its
administration after adoption;
   C.   Prepare and submit to the Council, as of the end of the fiscal year, a
complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city for
the preceding year;
   D.   Keep the Council advised of the financial condition and future needs of
the city, and make any recommendations as the Council may deem desirable;
   E.   Recommend to the governing body a standard schedule of pay for each
appointive office and position in the city service, including minimum,
immediate, and maximum rates;
   F.   Recommend to the governing body, from time to time, adoption of any
measures as he or she may deem necessary or expedient for the health, safety,
or welfare of the community, or for the improvement of administrative services;
   G.   Create, consolidate or combine offices, positions, departments, or
units under his or her jurisdiction, with the approval of the City Council,
which can consist of the following department heads and/or directors:
      1.   Community Development Director;
      2.   Economic Development Director;
      3.   Finance and Administrative Services Director;
      4.   Human Resources Director;
      5.   Parks and Recreation Director; and
      6.   Public Works Director;
   H.   Attend all meetings of the City Council unless excused therefrom, and
take part in the discussion of all matters coming before the Council. He or she
shall be entitled to notice of all regular and special meetings of the Council;
   I.   Supervise the purchase of all materials, supplies, and equipment for
which funds are provided in the budget; let contracts necessary for operation
or maintenance of city services for amounts up to and including $30,000;
receive Council permission for purchases or contracts in excess of $30,000;
receive sealed bids for purchases or contracts in excess of $30,000, and to
present them to Council for approval; and advise the Council on the advantages
or disadvantages of contract and bid proposals. No purchase shall be made,
contract let, or obligation incurred for any item or service which exceeds the
current budget appropriation without a supplemental appropriation by the
Council. No contract for new construction shall be let, except by the City
Council. The Manager may issue any rules governing purchasing procedures within
the administrative organization as the Council shall approve;
   J.   Investigate the affairs of the city, or any department or division
thereof; investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the
administration of the government of the city, and in regard to service
maintained by the public utilities in the city; and see that all franchises,
permits, and privileges granted by the city are faithfully observed; and
   K.   Perform any other duties as may be required by the Council, not
inconsistent with state law or city ordinance.
(Ord. 2008-004, passed 3-18-2008; Ord. 2018-005, passed 10-2-2018)
Cross-reference:
   Procurement policy, see
Art. 3-5
§ 3-4-5 COUNCIL NOT TO INTERFERE WITH APPOINTMENTS OR REMOVALS.
   Individual Council Members shall not interfere with the hiring or firing of
employees of the City Manager, nor give orders to any employee of the city,
except as directed and authorized by the Council.
§ 3-4-6 EMERGENCIES.
   In case of accident, disaster, or other circumstances creating a public
emergency, the City Manager may award contracts and make purchases for the
purpose of meeting the emergency; but he or she shall file promptly with the
Council a certification showing the emergency and the necessity for the action,
together with an itemized account of all expenditures.
§ 3-4-7 BOND.
   The Manager shall furnish a surety bond to be approved by the Council, the
bond to be conditioned on the faithful performance of his or her duties. The
premium of the bond shall be paid by the city.
§ 3-4-8 COMPENSATION.
   The City Manager shall receive any compensation as the Council shall affix
from time to time.
(Ord. 143, passed 8-1-1984)
ARTICLE 3-5: PROCUREMENT POLICY
Section
Subarticle I - General Provisions
   
3-5-1   Purpose
   
3-5-2   Applicability/exclusions
   
3-5-3   Authority
   
3-5-4   Contract preparation
   
3-5-5   Contract administration
   
3-5-6   Role of purchasing agent
   
3-5-7   Contract performance monitoring
   
3-5-8   Vendors list
Subarticle II - Purchasing Procedures
   
3-5-20   Acquisition of goods, materials, and non-professional services
   
3-5-21   Purchasing authority; dollar limits on purchasing authority for
standard purchases
   
3-5-22   Purchase orders
   
3-5-23   Bid requirements; formal bid and quote levels
   
3-5-24   Personal service and construction contracts; exemptions from
requisition submission
   
3-5-25   Internal controls; requisitions for items greater than $1,000
   
3-5-26   Special items; check requests
   
3-5-27   Powers and duties of purchasing agent
   
3-5-28   Types of contracts
   
3-5-29   Open market procedures
   
3-5-30   Rejection of bids
   
3-5-31   Low tie bids
   
3-5-32   Taxes
   
3-5-33   Capital outlay buying
   
3-5-34   Purchasing with grant funds
   
3-5-35   Transportation and freight charges
   
3-5-36   Cooperative purchasing
   
3-5-37   Prohibition against subdivision
   
3-5-38   Local preference in purchasing
   
3-5-39   Petty cash
   
3-5-40   City asset management and inventory
   
3-5-41   Purchase order delivery follow-up
   
3-5-42   Contract performance monitoring
   
3-5-43   Inspections
   
3-5-44   Government surplus
   
3-5-45   Repairs/warranty or guarantee items
   
3-5-46   Administration; documents and records
   
3-5-47   City credit cards
Subarticle III - Competitive Bids
   
3-5-60   Purchases of over $30,000
   
3-5-61   Bid specifications
   
3-5-62   Call for bids
   
3-5-63   Pre-bid conference
   
3-5-64   Bid opening
   
3-5-65   Pre-opening modification or withdrawal of bids
   
3-5-66   Errors/corrections to bids
   
3-5-67   Unsigned bids
   
3-5-68   Late bids
   
3-5-69   Addendum to notice of call for bids
   
3-5-70   Bid and performance/payment bonds
   
3-5-71   Responsibilities of bidders and offerors
   
3-5-72   Identical bids
   
3-5-73   Rejection and cancellation of bids
   
3-5-74   Bid evaluation and award
   
3-5-75   Protest of award
   
3-5-76   Change orders - construction projects
   
3-5-77   Contract award - state bid
   
3-5-78   Competitively negotiated contracts
   
3-5-79   Non-competitive negotiations
   
3-5-80   Option provision
   
3-5-81   Public award
Subarticle IV - Competitive Sealed Request for Proposals (RFPs)
   
3-5-95   General provisions
   
3-5-96   Requests for proposals
   
3-5-97   Selection and contracting of architectural-engineering professional
services
   
3-5-98   Selection and contracting of legal services
   
3-5-99   Other professional services
Subarticle V - Suspension and Debarment of Contractors
   
3-5-110   Purpose
   
3-5-111   Authority to debar or suspend
   
3-5-112   Causes for debarment or suspension from consideration
   
3-5-113   Written determinations
   
3-5-114   Period of debarment
Subarticle VI - Leasing
   
3-5-125   General information
   
3-5-126   Procedural information
   
3-5-127   Rental of equipment
   
3-5-128   Lease of city property
Subarticle VII - Sole Source Procurement
   
3-5-140   General information
   
3-5-141   Sole source procurement
Subarticle VIII - Emergency Purchases of Materials and Services
   
3-5-155   Purpose
   
3-5-156   Activities authorized
   
3-5-157   Procedures
   
3-5-158   Definition of emergency
Subarticle IX - Receiving, Inspection, and Acceptance of Materials, Supplies,
and Services
   
3-5-170   Purpose
   
3-5-171   Receiving procedures
   
3-5-172   Purchase order delivery follow-up
   
3-5-173   Encumbrances and year-end cutoff
Subarticle X - Contract Administration
   
3-5-185   Principles
   
3-5-186   Contracts
   
3-5-187   Monitoring of requirements contracts
   
3-5-188   Placing orders against existing requirements contracts
   
3-5-189   Termination of a contract
   
3-5-190   Contract periods
   
3-5-191   Advertisements for formal contracts
   
3-5-192   Arizona state contracts
   
3-5-193   Intergovernmental agreement (IGA)
Subarticle XI - Materials Management
   
3-5-205   General provisions
   
3-5-206   Disposition
Subarticle XII - Procurement Ethics
   
3-5-220   Employee ethics
   
3-5-221   Conflict of interest
   
3-5-222   Gratuities
   
3-5-223   Use of confidential information
   
3-5-224   Public access to procurement information
   
3-5-225   Vendor ethics
   
3-5-226   Fraud
   
3-5-227   Penalty
   
3-5-228   City Attorney opinion
Subarticle XIII - Miscellaneous Provisions
   
3-5-240   Records retention
   
3-5-241   Confidential information
   
3-5-242   Federal and state procurement requirements
   
3-5-243   Licensing/certification requirements
Subarticle XIV - Glossary of Procurement Terms
   
3-5-255   Definitions
Appendices
   
Appendix A:   Disclosure of Responsibility Statement
   
Appendix B:   Contractor Affidavit
   
Appendix C:   Vendor Evaluation Form
   
Appendix D:   Check Request
   
Appendix E:   Credit Card Policy and Procedures
SUBARTICLE I - GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 3-5-1 PURPOSE.
   A.   The purpose of our purchasing or procurement policy is to establish
fairness and uniformity among the city's departments and to ensure that
purchase of goods and services by the City of Somerton comply with all legal,
fiscal, and insurance requirements established by federal, state, or county
government. This article is intended to be used as a reference by city staff,
vendors, and the general public with respect to these policies. The policies
presented in this article have been reviewed and approved by the City Council,
and should be used to determine the appropriate policies to be followed for a
particular procurement. In cases where this policy does not address a
particular situation, the Arizona State Procurement Code found in A.R.S. Title
41 will be followed. A glossary is attached to the end of this article for the
reference of readers. The Council reserves the right to amend or change these
policies and any subsequent changes to these policies shall be incorporated by
reference into all contracts with the city.
   B.   More specifically, the purchasing policies strive for the following
goals:
      1.   Maximization of competition. In order to be responsible to the
public, these specifications are written to allow the purchasing process to be
as open as possible to a number of qualified vendors.
      2.   Equal and fair competition. It is our goal that vendors are provided
the same information regarding the availability of contracts, and products or
service needs and specifications and their responses such as price quotes are
kept confidential until the purchases are completed and so no favoritism is
shown in the purchasing process.
      3.   Predictability. City staff has a clear indication of the rules for
the type of purchase in question so that their time and efforts are best
utilized.
      4.   The best value at the lowest price. The money available for city
services is maximized so that purchases are made the lowest price for the
product or service that best meets the needs of the city.
      5.   Ethical procedures. To prevent and/or disclose conflicts of interest
between vendors on the part of city staff, elected officials and/or appointed
officials.
      6.   Budget responsibility. To ensure that expenditures do not exceed the
funds allocated through the city's budgetary process.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-2 APPLICABILITY/EXCLUSIONS.
   All city agencies, elected officials and employees are subject to this
policy. This policy shall be incorporated by reference into all contracts and
any purchases ordered or contracts entered into with the city and contrary to
the provision hereof shall not be binding upon the city unless later ratified
in accordance with these procedures. Employees, agents, appointed or elected
officials making expenditures outside of these authorized procedures, or
without full ratification of the City Council, may result in their own personal
liability.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-3 AUTHORITY.
   A.   The City Council is the only entity of the City of Somerton that has
the legal authority to incur financial, legal, and other obligations on behalf
of the city, its agencies, employees, and elected officials. To ensure fiscal
control, the City Council must approve all contracts or specifically authorize
a designated elected or appointed official to enter into contracts as provided
in Somerton City Code, §
3-4-4, division I.
   B.   The City Council has delegated purchasing authority according to
certain parameters and subject to the procedures outlined herein. Variations
from these general parameters require one of the following:
      1.   Specific approval of City Council;
      2.   Specific authority in Arizona Revised Statutes; or
      3.   The City Manager may approve emergency or field expediency purchases
to personnel in other city departments, as specified in Subarticle VIII below,
provided the delegation is limited, specific, and subject to immediate
revocation.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-4 CONTRACT PREPARATION.
   All purchases of goods and services must be made pursuant to written
contracts, executed in the name of the City of Somerton by the Mayor or City
Manager; except as it may be otherwise be provided other by this policy or by
law. Except for the city's standard purchase orders and blanket purchase orders
(see below), all contracts shall be reviewed and approved as to form by the
City Attorney.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-5 CONTRACT ADMINISTRATION.
   A.   The department assigned as the "contracting department" shall be
responsible for monitoring contract performance unless otherwise designated by
the City Manager. Each department director will keep the City Manager up to
date on the status of all contracts.
   B.   Oversight of the purchasing policies will be shared among the several
departments as follows.
      1.   The City Manager has the authority to issue invitations for formal
bids and requests for proposals, and may delegate this authority to one or more
department directors in writing.
      2.   The Public Works Director shall coordinate and manage the disposal
of the city's surplus and obsolete materials and equipment.
      3.   The Administrative Services Director will develop the specific
procedures necessary for the purchasing process.
      4.   The City Manager may designate a city employee to be an additional
"purchasing agent" on a temporary basis in order complete a purchase of goods
and/or services.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-6 ROLE OF PURCHASING AGENT.
   The primary role of the purchasing agent is it is to expedite the purchasing
process through the best sources and at the best prices consistent with
quality, delivery, services and any local vendor performance that may occur.
The purchasing agent is generally not empowered to approve or disapprove a
purchase - that is the role and duty of City Council, City Manager, and the
department directors and other designated supervisors. The purchasing agent
does have disapproval authority for items not appropriate to the department's
mission, not deemed to be a necessary purchase, for which the vendor has shown
non-performance previously, duplications and/or obvious miss-orders.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-7 CONTRACT PERFORMANCE MONITORING.
   A.   The purchasing agent and the ordering department are jointly obligated
to ensure that compliance with the purchase order or other contract has been
met prior to payment to any supplier or vendor. The purchasing agent shall be
authorized to take appropriate actions against suppliers when contract terms
are not satisfactorily performed, and the assistance of all the city
departments benefitting from such contracts is very important in this regard.
   B.   In order to ensure the follow-up, the purchasing agent will be
responsible to maintain records and notes sufficient to complete the following
tasks:
      1.   Maintain, in an accessible format, a records of the specific goods,
work, or services ordered, including performance requirements;
      2.   Establish a tickler system of which review all items delivered
pursuant to purchase order to ensure the receipt or lack of receipt of the
goods, work, or services; and
      3.   Report completion and/or non-performance to the contracting
department within 15 days of the contract completion date.
   C.   In the event the goods or services are not furnished by the required
due date, or is delayed such that the purchasing agent anticipates non-
completion by the required due date, the requesting department should contact
the supplier to determine the reasons for delay and identify when the goods or
services will be furnished. In the event the supplier indicates that they do
not intend to furnish the goods or services, or the reason for the delivery
delay is not acceptable, the purchasing agent will immediately cancel the
purchase order.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-8 VENDORS LIST.
   The City of Somerton does not maintain vendors' lists. Vendors may submit
data relating to their products at any time, which is on file in the purchasing
agent's office. Department directors are responsible to keep themselves up-to-
date regarding sources of supplies for their needs.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
SUBARTICLE II - PURCHASING PROCEDURES
§ 3-5-20 ACQUISITION OF GOODS, MATERIALS, AND NON-PROFESSIONAL SERVICES.
   A.   To ensure the city's compliance with budget restrictions, and the
availability of funds for essential services, purchasing procedures exist which
require that all purchases for service and commodities and/or goods must be
initiated by a purchase order and handled via the purchase order process with
the exception of petty cash purchases, and specialized contract services set
out in §
3-5-25 below.
   B.   The amount of cost analysis and procedural formality required by these
policies varies with the specifics of each transaction, including the amount of
money, the type of goods and services, the availability of competing vendors,
and the urgency of the matter for which goods and/or services are sought.
   C.   In making a purchase, city staff and/or officials should ensure
compliance with the procedures with respect to all of the following aspects:
      1.   Who has the authority to make the purchasing decision;
      2.   How to obtain complete and competitive information about the
availability of and the pricing for products and services;
      3.   How to communicate to potential vendors;
      4.   How to receive communications from vendors as to their prices and
services in order to obtain the information in a form which will provide useful
comparative information;
      5.   Which vendors are authorized vendors; and
      6.   How to ensure the city has the funds available in its budget for the
purchase, and that those funds are set aside between the time the products and/
or services are ordered and the time it is received and paid.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-21 PURCHASING AUTHORITY; DOLLAR LIMITS ON PURCHASING AUTHORITY FOR
STANDARD PURCHASES.
   The chart below identifies the type of comparative pricing information
required for standard purchases, divided into different cost levels.
 
                                The purchasing agent and department directors
Up to $3,000.00                 may approve purchases and contracts of less
                                than $3,000
From $3,000.01 up to $10,000.00 The Administrative Services Director may
                                approve purchases for amounts less than $10,000
                                The City Manager must approve all purchases of
From $10,000.01 to $29,999.99   goods and services for amounts between
                                $10,000.01 and $29,999.99
                                The City Council must approve all purchases of
                                goods and services for at least $30,000 in a
From $30,000.00                 public meeting. The requests for purchase must
                                be routed through Finance, Purchasing, and City
                                Attorney prior to the public meeting
 
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-22 PURCHASE ORDERS.
   A.   1.   A purchase order is a standardized contract between the City of
Somerton and a vendor or supplier for the procurement of equipment, supplies,
services, materials, and the lease/purchase or rental of equipment. The city
has no obligation for purchases made without an authorized purchase order
despite any pattern of previous purchases from a vendor or supplier or based on
prior purchasing history.
      2.   Department directors are responsible for maintaining budget and
purchase integrity. No person will submit a purchase order for goods or service
without sufficient approved funds available to meet the purchase obligations.
This practice applies to all purchase orders regardless of the source of
funding. Department directors are responsible for approving and/or disapproving
budget requests within their areas consistent with overall guidelines
established by the City Manager.
      3.   All purchase orders must be reviewed and approved by the appropriate
operating department director or supervisor to determine that budgeted funds
are available to cover the purchase. Operating departments are fully
responsible for establishing internal controls to assure that sufficient funds
exist within their budget to cover all purchases.
   B.   1.   General information. Except in emergencies, the Administrative
Services Department will only allow a purchase order after receipt of an
approved purchase requisition from a user department. The purchase order will
be completed per the most recent approved procedure.
      2.   Blanket purchase orders. The use of blanket purchase orders must be
very limited, or control over expenditures and economy in purchasing will
decrease since these purchase orders do not encumber existing budgeted funds
and therefore increase the risk of budget shortfalls.
         a.   Blanket purchase orders may be used for purchases that require
multiple payments and/or deliveries for undetermined amounts such as automotive
repair parts or when more than one department is sharing the costs of the goods
or services.
         b.   Only Accounting may initiate blanket purchase orders. Departments
requesting a blanket purchase orders must place the order in writing, and,
absent the following terms, will not be approved:
            i.   A statement as to why a standard purchase order does not
suffice;
            ii.   An explanation of the period covered; and
            iii.   A "not to exceed amount" to be purchased during the period.
      3.   Ratification of purchases not authorized by purchase order.
         a.   Conforming purchase orders will be accepted only on a proven
emergency basis and must be submitted to the purchasing agent the next work
day. Invoices received without valid purchase order should be returned to the
vendor informing them to contact and collect from individual who placed the
unauthorized order.
         b.   Accounts Payable shall be required to verify invoice dates
against the date the purchase order was authorized prior to approving payment
of a purchase order. All purchases not approved prior to the placement of the
order will be returned to the department concerned.
      4.   Amendments to purchase orders. Employees will not add items to a
purchase order once approved without the prior approval of the purchasing
agent. Added items not approved in advance will be handled as outlined in this
section above.
      5.   Failure to fill purchase order within 90 days. If a purchase order
is not filled within 90 days of issuance without notification from the
supplier, or if prior arrangements for specified delivery time have been made,
that purchase order may be canceled. The Finance Department will discuss this
with the requesting department prior to canceling an order.
      6.   Insufficient funds. If the account to which the purchase order
applies lacks a sufficient balance to pay the funds necessary to complete the
purchase, the order will be referred to the Administrative Services Director.
If required the City Manager will review the proposed expenditure and if
warranted notify the department director that he or she has the following
courses of action he or she may take:
         a.   Withdraw the request;
         b.   Request a transfer of funds in budgeted accounts;
         c.   Request a budget supplement to cover cost of purchase order. Such
a budget transfer of supplement funds must be fully explained by the department
director and then placed on Council agenda for formal Council action.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-23 BID REQUIREMENTS; FORMAL BID AND QUOTE LEVELS.
   A.   To ensure competition for pricing, three price quotes must generally be
obtained prior to selecting a vendor. In some cases, the city official or staff
must make the request for a price quote in writing and in some cases the
requests for price quotes may be made orally. In some cases, the price quote
must be received in writing, in some cases the quoted price may be received
orally and later placed in writing through the requisitioning process. In some
cases, the request for quotes must contain very specific information about the
scope of the work and other matters, in some cases it need not.
   B.   Again, the cost analysis and procedural formality required by these
policies varies with the specifics of each transaction, including the amount of
money, the type of goods and services, the availability of competing vendors,
and the urgency of the matter for which goods and/or services are sought. These
rules are set out below:
      1.   Expenditures over $1,000.00. Any expenditure over $1,000.00 shall
require three price quotes. The price quotes may be given orally, that is, they
need not be put into writing, and the request for the price quote may also be
put in writing but need not be.
      2.   Expenditures over $3,000.00. The departments or purchasing agent
must receive three written price quotes from vendors in response to a complete
set of written specifications or scope of work for acquisitions from $3,000.01
to $30,000. The department directors or purchasing agent must have a set of
written specifications or scope of work, list of vendors contacted and all
written responses or non-responses from vendors on file. For any procurement
between $10,000.00 and $30,000.00 a copy of the written specification or scope
of work and all written responses must be retained by the using department or
the purchasing agent.
      3.   Expenditures over $30,000.00. In addition to the requirements for
all expenditures over $3,000.00, if the expenditure exceeds $30,000.00 the bids
must be sealed and must pursue a competitive process. (Exceptions exist as set
out below.)
   C.   Summary chart of requisition and price quotes.
 
Required Requisitions and Price Quotes
$1,000.01 to $3,000.00  3 verbal (oral) quotes
$3,000.01 to $30,000.00 3 written quotes
Above $30,000.00        Sealed competitive bids
 
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-24 PERSONAL SERVICE AND CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS; EXEMPTIONS FROM
REQUISITION SUBMISSION.
   Certain types of services, such as personal services contracts, which are
highly specialized, are exempt from the competitive sealed process, since there
are many other factors which must be considered in making a choice of vendors
such as experience, availability, staffing levels, licensing, and insurance.
These are set out below.
   A.   Acquisition of architectural and engineering services. The employment
of an architect on projects less than $250,000 or engineering, landscape
architect, assayer, geologist or land surveyor for projects less than $500,000
may be selected by direct selection, or a Qualifications Based Selection (QBS)
system. For projects exceeding $250,000 for architects, or engineering,
landscape architects, assayers, geologists, and land surveyors projects
exceeding $500,000 the QBS process must be used. These processes and
definitions are discussed in Subarticle IV, §
3-5-97.
   B.   Acquisition of legal services.
      1.   $1,000.01 qualified vendor.  For the cost of goods and/or services
over $1,000 for any legal services the vendor must be "qualified" to provide
those legal services through accreditations, certifications, or defined by
state statute.
   .   2.   Approval required. All elected officials, volunteers, and employees
must have approval from the City Manager, City Attorney's Office and the City
Council in order to obtain legal services outside the City Attorney's Office,
even if the services are on a pro-bono basis. The City Magistrate, City
Attorney, and City Prosecuting Attorney may, in accordance with the city
purchasing policy, acquire legal services in the discharge of their regular
duties as required by statute. All legal services required by the City
Magistrate, City Attorney, and City Prosecutor outside the regular course of
business require approval of the City Manager, City Attorney, and City Council.
   C.   Acquisition of other professional services.
 
$1,000.01 to $3,000.00 3 verbal proposals
3,000.01 to $30,000.00 3 written proposals
Above $30,000.00       Formal RFP process
 
   D.   Acquisition of construction contracts. Construction contracts will be
awarded through a solicitation of bids in accordance with A.R.S. Title 34.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-25 INTERNAL CONTROLS; REQUISITIONS FOR ITEMS GREATER THAN $1,000.
   A.   In order to ensure that city funds are both available for a purchase,
that the purchase is essential to the department's function, and to set aside
funds from the budget while payment is pending, an internal process exists
which requires items to be requisitioned. This procedure allows city
departments to obtain necessary equipment, materials, supplies and services,
and for the rental and leasing of equipment, when the anticipated cost is above
$1,000.
   B.   Requisitions must be entered into the financial management system and
approved by the City Manager, the Administrative Services Director, or the
purchasing agent depending upon level of approval prior to making purchases see
Subarticle II, §
3-5-21. An exception exists for emergency situations as set out below.
   C.   Requisitions convey to the vendor and the Administrative Services
Department exactly what the requesting department's needs are and provides a
method to check the availability of budgeted funds. Requesting departments
should make certain the requisition contains a description of the product or
service description in clear, concise and sufficient terms for the buyer to
make the proper purchase.
   D.   Requisitions that are properly created increase the efficiency of the
procurement process and reduce the time needed to process the requisition. The
requisition will be completed per the most recent approved procedure.
   E.   Purchases that are exempt from requisition submission are:
      1.   Salaries and related costs; FICA, federal and state withholding tax,
workers' comp, employee retirement, and the like;
      2.   Visiting judges, and city court reporters;
      3.   Jury and witness fees (does not include expert witness);
      4.   Travel (utilize per diem request and receipts for reimbursement);
      5.   Utilities: telephone, gas, electric, water, and the like;
      6.   Uniform allowances for Public Safety;
      7.   Intergovernmental service department charges; photocopier,
mechanical;
      8.   Expenditures from petty cash (when replenishing the Petty Cash Fund
utilize a check request);
      9.   Purchases of $1,000 or less (utilize a purchase order, do not create
a requisition) except for credit card purchases of $1,000 or less accompanied
by receipts;
      10.   Emergency purchases of low-cost items. These may, in certain
circumstances, be purchased directly by user departments;
      11.   Insurance settlements/payments (utilize a check request);
      12.   Contracts approved for formal processing (process progress payments
utilizing a check request);
      13.   State sales tax (utilize a check request);
      14.   Postage machine replenishment;
      15.   Bulk fuel deliveries for gasoline and diesel;
      16.   Employee cell phone reimbursement (use check request);
      17.   Employee reimbursement for safety boots (use check request); and
      18.   Others, as approved by the City Council.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-26 SPECIAL ITEMS; CHECK REQUESTS.
   A check request is used to pay for travel and per diem expenses, replenish
petty cash, make insurance payments, payment of contract services already
approved via the purchase order process (liability), security deposit
reimbursement City Council donations. This list is not all inclusive but
provides basic guidelines for its use. See
Appendix D for form.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-27 POWERS AND DUTIES OF PURCHASING AGENT.
   A.   The purchasing agent has the following responsibilities which may be
delegated by the City Manager as needed to department directors:
      1.   Supervise the purchase of all materials, supplies, and equipment for
which funds are provided in the budget or by specific City Council action;
      2.   Negotiate contracts necessary for operation or maintenance of city
services for amounts up to and including $30,000 once approved by proper
authority,
      3.   Negotiate for purchases or contracts in excess of $30,000 upon
approval of City Council;
      4.   Receive sealed bids for purchase or contracts in excess of $30,000
and present them to the City Council for approval;
      5.   Advise the Council on the advantage or disadvantage of contract and
bid proposals.
   B.   The purchasing agent is not able to negotiate for new construction
contracts. Further, the authority shall not extend to any contract or
obligation incurred for any item or service which exceeds the current budget
appropriation without a supplemental appropriation by the Council.
   C.   No contract for new construction shall be let except by the City
Council.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-28 TYPES OF CONTRACTS.
   A.   The purchasing agent may issue the following types of contracts either
on his or her own initiative for $3,000 or less, up to $30,000 with proper
authority and with City Council action for those areas over $30,000, after City
Attorney review and concurrence.
      1.   Fixed price contract.
      2.   Lease. A lease may be entered into only after the purchasing agent
determines in writing that:
         a.   A lease is advantageous to the city;
         b.   All conditions for renewal and cost determination are set forth
in the lease; and/or
         c.   The lease is not used to circumvent required procurement
procedures.
      3.   Lease with purchase option.
      4.   Time and material contracts and labor hour contract.
         a.   Cost-plus or cost incentive contracts shall not be used.
         b.   Fixed price contracts. A fixed-price contract may be used if:
            i.   The extent and type of work necessary to meet city
requirements to the city can be reasonably specified;
            ii.   A firm fixed-price contract may be used if prices
advantageous to the city can be established at the outset of the contract; and
            iii.   Fixed-price contract with price adjustment.
               (1)   The solicitation for a fixed-price contract with price
adjustment and the contract shall specify the basis for determining the price
adjustment.
               (2)   Notice of price adjustment shall be given by the
contractor in the manner and within the time specified in the contract.
   B.   1.   Time and materials and labor hour contracts shall contain a stated
ceiling or an estimate of a contractual amount that shall not be exceeded
without prior approval of the purchasing agent.
      2.   A time and materials or labor hour contract may only be used if:
         a.   Personnel have been assigned to closely monitor the performance
of the work;
         b.   It is advantageous to the city to use the contract; and
         c.   No other contract type is practicable.
   C.   The City Council shall have the final approval authority on all
purchases for supplies, materials, equipment or services requiring a bid.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-29 OPEN MARKET PROCEDURES.
   Purchase of supplies, equipment, contractual services, and sales of personal
property of an estimated value in the amount of $1,000 or more will be made by
the purchasing agent in the open market.
   A.   Open market purchase shall, wherever possible, be based on at least
three bids and may be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder.
   B.   The purchasing agent shall solicit bids by written requests to
prospective vendors, by telephone and by public notice posted on a public
bulletin board at City Hall. The city shall obtain, if possible, informal
competitive bids in writing or telephonic from at least three suppliers or
contractors on expenditures over $1,000. The city shall accept the informal
competitive bid which, under all the circumstances, appears to be in the best
interest of the city or it may reject all informal competitive bids.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-30 REJECTION OF BIDS.
   A.   The purchasing agent shall have the authority to reject any and all
bids, parts of any and all bids, or all bids for any one or more supplies or
contractual services included in the proposed contract, when the public
interest will be served thereby.
   B.   The purchasing agent may, at his or her discretion, not accept the bid
of a contractor who is in default on the payment of taxes, licenses or other
moneys due the city or other governmental agency when the taxes, licenses or
other moneys may have impact upon the bid. Agent may condition award of any
successful bid upon payment of any and all required taxes, license fees or
other moneys due to city or other governmental agency or obtaining proper
licenses or certifications.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-31 LOW TIE BIDS.
   If low bids received are for the same total amount and everything else being
equal, the contract shall be awarded to one of the low tie bidders by drawing
of lots in public.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-32 TAXES.
   City of Somerton is responsible for the payment of all applicable sales and
use taxes as may be required by the State of Arizona or its political
subdivisions, or municipalities, in accordance with state tax laws, or local
tax laws.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-33 CAPITAL OUTLAY BUYING.
   A.   CAPITAL OUTLAY BUYING is defined as machinery, equipment, and vehicles
with a usual life exceeding one year, costing $5,000 or more. Also included are
land, building and improvements other than buildings costing $5,000 or more?
   B.   Generally, capital outlay purchases must be proposed and approved as
part of the annual budget process. However, occasionally it is necessary to
make non-budgeted capital outlay purchases when unusual circumstances exist.
   C.   Non-budgeted capital outlay purchase requisitions are subject to City
Manager review and approval to determine the availability of funds. The Finance
Department may review any capital outlay purchases. If the City Manager
determines that funds are available, the request will be approved.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-34 PURCHASING WITH GRANT FUNDS.
   A.   If a department uses grant funding for purchases and the specific
funding agencies policies and guidelines are not covered by the city's
purchasing policy, compliance with those policies and guidelines is obligatory.
Any additional policies or procedures required by outside funding sources
should be followed when they apply to a particular procurement.
   B.   It is the responsibility of each department director to develop
departmental policies and guidelines to ensure that all employees adhere to the
city's purchasing policies and procedures and any additional purchasing
policies and procedures required by their other funding sources.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-35 TRANSPORTATION AND FREIGHT CHARGES.
   Purchase orders notations regarding transportation charges generally fall
into these categories:
   A.   F.O.B. Somerton.  When the purchase order is marked in this manner, no
transportation charges are to be paid by the city. This is the preferred way to
have freight shipped in order to have the vendor "at risk" during shipment.
   B.   F.O.B. Freight allowed. In these cases the city will pay the freight
bill and deduct the amount from the invoice.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-36 COOPERATIVE PURCHASING.
   The purchasing agent shall have the authority to participate with other
units of government for the procurement of supplies or services in cooperative
purchasing agreements when the best interests of the city would be served
thereby.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-37 PROHIBITION AGAINST SUBDIVISION.
   No contract or procurement shall be subdivided to avoid any requirements of
this policy.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-38 LOCAL PREFERENCE IN PURCHASING.
   A.   Whenever possible, the city prefers to purchase its good and services
from local business establishments in order to stimulate the local economy for
the benefit of all Somerton residents. However, the city will not purchase from
local businesses at exorbitantly high prices. This is only sound economic and
financial practice and shall be supported by all tax concerned citizens of
Somerton.
   B.   Normally, to afford competition yet provide purchasing preference to
local businesses, the following guidelines will be used:
      1.   Purchase order total of:
 
$1,000 - $3,000  10% difference
$3,000 - $10,000 5% difference
$10,000 and up   No preference is given
 
      2.   Typical exceptions to this schedule are:
         a.   Sole source purchases;
         b.   Emergency purchases;
         c.   Where a significant difference in quality materially affects the
outcome of a project or service; or
         d.   Where a local business fails to respond to requests for price
quotations.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-39 PETTY CASH.
   A.   A small cash account is allocated for incidental purchases and which is
known as the city's Petty Cash Fund. This account is appropriated out of money
in the General Fund, not otherwise appropriated, and is allocated by
department.
   B.   Petty cash funds, at the discretion of the purchasing agent, may be
used to purchases made by employees for incidentals not in excess of $30. Petty
cash expenditures may be made for expendable items only. A request for petty
cash reimbursement shall be accompanied by a valid receipt for the purchase.
   C.   Cash may be advanced to city employees from the Petty Cash Fund for the
purpose of purchasing an authorized item. A temporary receipt shall be placed
in the Fund at the time cash is removed fro the purpose of maintaining
accountability of the funds at all times. This temporary receipt may be removed
from the Fund after the purchase transaction has been completed and a balance
has been reached.
   D.   To maintain an adequate cash balance, the employee maintaining the
actual Fund will provide to the City Manager a statement showing the actual
expenditures from each charge made out of the Petty Cash Fund and the City
Manager shall approve via a check request reimbursement for expenditures from
time to time as may be required.
   E.   The allocation of petty cash is made through the budgetary process, but
the maximum amount of cash maintained on-site in the petty cash fund at any
given time is as follows:
 
$200                                 Finance Department
$50                                  Police Department
$50                                  Parks and Recreation Department
$125                                 Magistrates Office
$200 Change Fund A/R, Cash Drawer #1 Finance Dept
$200 Change Fund A/R, Cash Drawer #2 Finance Dept
 
   F.   Abuse of a Petty Cash Fund may result in the requirement for the prior
approval of the purchasing agent prior to expenditure being made by the
offending department.
   G.   Purchases may be made from the Petty Cash Fund when:
      1.   The item is not carried in the city's inventory;
      2.   The cost of the purchase is not greater than $30; and
      3.   It represents an unusual emergency or infrequent expenditure.
   H.   Exclusions. Purchase or expenses generally prohibited from the Petty
Cash Fund are:
      1.   Items available from the city's inventory;
      2.   Expenditures for more than $30 except with prior approval of the
purchasing agent;
      3.   Payment to employees for services of any kind (salaries must be paid
through regular payroll procedures);
      4.   Payment supported by an unauthorized, uncertified copy or
reproduction of an invoice or receipt;
      5.   Mileage;
      6.   Employees' travel expenses;
      7.   Subscriptions, dues, memberships, registrations and tuitions; and
      8.   Items of a personal nature, which are not generally furnished by the
city.
   I.   The use of petty cash funds for any other purchases, including cash
advances, cashing checks or for any other purpose is illegal and may subject
the staff to immediate disciplinary actions.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-40 CITY ASSET MANAGEMENT AND INVENTORY.
   A.   Inventories of items identified as "pilferable" but cost less than
$5,000 and city assets shall be conducted annually, preferably at the end of
the fiscal year. Department directors are responsible to maintain a current and
up-to-date inventory list at all times.
   B.   Items purchased that become part of the city's assets, cost over $5,000
and capitalized will be so marked on the purchase order to allow the Accounting
Department to identify those items and automatically add them to the city
master asset list (capitalized).
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-41 PURCHASE ORDER DELIVERY FOLLOW-UP.
   A.   The purchase is complete only when satisfactory performance by the
supplier has resulted. An interruption or delay in city activities or schedule
through failure as any other default and in addition is unfair to the
unsuccessful bidders, and authority for payment is granted subject only to the
contract terms.
   B.   Payment for goods and services will only be made for goods received or
services performed in a manner which is in conformance with the contract terms
including delivery of goods and/or services:
      1.   At the appropriate time;
      2.   In the appropriate place;
      3.   In the appropriate quantity; and/or
      4.   In the appropriate quality.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-42 CONTRACT PERFORMANCE MONITORING.
   A.   The purchasing agent and the ordering department are jointly obligated
to ensure that compliance with the purchase order or other contract has been
met prior to payment to any supplier or vendor. The purchasing agent shall be
authorized to take appropriate actions against suppliers when contract terms
are not satisfactorily performed, and the assistance of all the city
departments benefitting from such contracts is very important in this regard.
   B.   In order to ensure the follow-up, the purchasing agent will be
responsible to maintain records and notes sufficient to complete the following
tasks:
      1.   Maintain, in an accessible format, a record of the specific goods,
work, or services ordered, including performance requirements;
      2.   Establish a tickler system of which review all items delivered
pursuant to purchase order to ensure the receipt or lack of receipt of the
goods, work, or services; and
      3.   Report completion and/or non-performance to contracting department
within 15 days of a the contract completion date.
   C.   In the event the goods or services are not furnished by the required
due date, or is delayed such that the purchasing agent anticipates non-
completion by the required due date, the requesting department should contact
the supplier to determine the reasons for delay and identify when the goods or
services will be furnished. In the event the supplier indicates that they do
not intend to furnish the goods or services, or the reason for the delivery
delay is not acceptable, the purchasing agent will immediately cancel the
purchase order and take the necessary steps to secure the goods or services
from another source.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-43 INSPECTIONS.
   Each department utilizing the goods and/or services shall inspect supplies
and equipment delivered and contractual services performed immediately to
determine their conformance with the specifications set forth in the purchase
order or other contract including its supporting documents. Satisfactory or
unsatisfactory performance on the part of the vendor, supplier, or contractor
will be made known to the purchasing agent and become part of the official
records.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-44 GOVERNMENT SURPLUS.
   A.   The Public Works Director has full responsibility for the acquisition
and disposal of all government surpluses. Requests for the acquisition or
disposal of governmental surplus must be submitted in writing to the Public
Works Director.
   B.   All using departments shall submit to the Public Works Director, at
such time and in such form as he or she prescribe, reports showing all supplies
and equipment which are no longer used or which have become obsolete or worn
out. The City Manager shall have authority to sell all supplies and equipment
which cannot be used by any department for, or trade in the same on, new
supplies and equipment, with prior approval of the Council.
   C.   The City Council may sell such portions of the real and personal
property of the city not needed within a reasonable future time. Each sale
shall be made on such conditions as the Council may prescribe to the highest
responsible bidder after published notice of the sale in accordance with the
following schedule:
      1.   Personal property valued in excess of $500 shall be sold after
published notice of the sale or auction.
      2.   Real property may be sold after published notice of sale prior to
opening of bids or sale at auction.
      3.   The City Council shall have the right to reject any and all bids.
      4.   The City Council may also in its discretion subdivide and plat city
property which it determines to sell, providing restrictions relative to its
use and dedicated and alleys remain as determined necessary for the use of the
public.
   D.   The Public Works Director shall have the right to sell or otherwise
dispose of any personal property having a value of $500 or less without
published notice but with written advice of the sale or disposal to be given to
the City Manager.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-45 REPAIRS/WARRANTY OR GUARANTEE ITEMS.
   The city purchases numerous items, which have a warranty or guarantee such
as tires, batteries, heaters, roofs and new equipment. Before these items are
repaired or replaced, the appropriate department director shall review the
files to make sure the items is or isn't under warranty or guarantee.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-46 ADMINISTRATION; DOCUMENTS AND RECORDS.
   Once a purchase order is written and signed by the purchasing agent, no
changes will be made to the purchase order without the prior approval of the
purchasing agent. Defacing or changing records is expressly prohibited and will
result in disciplinary action and possible referral for criminal conviction.
Records or documents are not to be removed from their normal location without
proper authorization.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-47 CITY CREDIT CARDS.
   See
Appendix E for credit card policies.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
SUBARTICLE III - COMPETITIVE BIDS
§ 3-5-60 PURCHASES OF OVER $30,000.
   A.   In accordance with the authority delegated by the City Council, the
City Manager is responsible for preparation of requests for bids, opening of
bids, and recommendations regarding awards in connection with the purchase of
supplies, materials and nonprofessional contractual services with an estimated
total cost in excess of $30,000.
   B.   City of Somerton follows Arizona State Procurement Code as its
authority for public bidding procedures. All purchases of supplies, materials,
equipment and contractual services, except professional services which are
procured through the formal RFP process described in Subarticle IV, made by the
city having an estimated cost in excess of $30,000 shall be based on sealed,
competitive bids. The city purchasing agent shall give notice of awards, upon
City Council approval. The invitation for bids and specifications must be
issued in sufficient time before the purchase is made and in sufficient detail
to permit free competition.
   C.   Notice of the invitation for bids shall be published in a newspaper in
accordance with the provisions of A.R.S. Chapter 2, Title 39, § 39-204 unless
Council, by at least two-thirds vote of its membership, determines that an
emergency exists requiring immediate action to protect the public health or
safety. Copies of the invitation and specifications shall be supplied to, and
bids shall be solicited from qualified sources consistent with the item to be
purchased as determined by the city purchasing agent, including all qualified
suppliers who, before the issuance of the invitation notify the purchasing
department in writing that they desire to bid on materials, supplies, equipment
or contractual services.
   D.   Bids shall be publicly opened at the time and place stated in the
invitation. On City Council approval, the city purchasing agent shall make
awards with reasonable promptness by giving written notice to the responsible
bidder whose bid is responsive, i.e., conforms to the invitation, and whose bid
is the most advantageous to the city concerning price, conformity to the
specifications and other factors. The City Council may reject all bids if
rejection is in the public interest.
   E.   All supplies, materials, equipment and contractual services with an
estimated total cost in excess of $30,000 will be bid publicly. Emergency and
sole source procurements in excess of $30,000 are explained in Subarticles VII
and VIII respectively.
   F.   In accordance with A.R.S. Title 34, bids will be solicited for the
construction of public buildings and improvements.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-61 BID SPECIFICATIONS.
   The first task which must be completed when a department wishes to purchase
an item with a total cost in excess of $30,000 is the preparation of a bid
specification. The specification will be written by the requesting department.
If the item or service required is of a specialized nature, the specification
may be written by the department and sent to the purchasing agent for editing.
Every effort should be made to ensure that the specification provides potential
suppliers with a description which is complete and accurate without being
overly restrictive. Completed bid specification packets including purchase
description, delivery and/or performance schedule, and evaluation criteria are
available from the Administrative Services Department.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-62 CALL FOR BIDS.
   After the bid specification is prepared, the purchasing agent issues a call
for bids for the desired item. Pursuant to A.R.S. § 39-204, notice of the bid
must be published in the newspaper for four consecutive days, and copies of the
notice sent to all those who are registered as potential suppliers for the
item. Current providers of service contracts will automatically receive a
notice of call for bids regardless of whether they are registered on the
bidder's list. The notice will indicate the address to which to return the
bids, the time deadline for bid submittal, and the place of the bid opening.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-63 PRE-BID CONFERENCE.
   A pre-bid conference and/or walk-through site inspection may be conducted to
provide a complete explanation and clarification of all bid specifications to
the suppliers. The notice for a pre-bid conference will be stated in the call
for bid documents.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-64 BID OPENING.
   The purchasing agent or his or her designated representative will hold the
opening of bids, at the time and location stated in the call for bids. A
reasonable period of time for the preparation of bids shall be allotted between
the issuing of the call for bids and the scheduled date of opening. Bids are
secured in a locked vault located at City Hall until opening. Bid envelopes
will be opened and bids read aloud at the public bid opening. A representative
of the City Manager will be present at all bid openings, and will initial each
bid. Faxed bids will not be accepted. All information submitted, excepting
proprietary information, will be made available for public inspection following
award of the contract.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-65 PRE-OPENING MODIFICATION OR WITHDRAWAL OF BIDS.
   A bidder may modify or withdraw his or her bid at any time before bid
opening if the modification or withdrawal is received before the time and date
set for bid opening at the location designated in the call for bids.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-66 ERRORS/CORRECTIONS TO BIDS.
   A.   After bid opening, corrections to bids shall be permitted only to the
extent that the bidder can show by clear and convincing evidence that a mistake
of a non-judgmental character was made, the nature of the mistake, and the bid
price actually intended.
   B.   After bid opening, no changes in bid prices or other provisions of bids
prejudicial to the city or fair competition shall be permitted. In lieu of bid
correction, a low bidder alleging a material mistake of fact may be permitted
to withdraw his, her, or its bid if:
      1.   The mistake is clearly evident on the face of the bid document but
the intended correct bid is not similarly evident; or
      2.   The bidder submits evidence that clearly and convincingly
demonstrates that a mistake was made. All decisions to permit the correction or
withdrawal of bids, or to cancel awards or contracts based on bid mistakes,
shall be supported by a written determination made by the purchasing agent.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-67 UNSIGNED BIDS.
   Bids must be signed by an appropriate officer or authorized representative.
However, unsigned bids will not necessarily be rejected if the omission was
determined to be a clerical error. A signed document must be submitted
declaring the clerical error and stating the offer is true in order for the bid
to be evaluated for possible award.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-68 LATE BIDS.
   The call for bids states the date, time and place assigned for the opening
of bids and no bid will be accepted after the time indicated in the call. A bid
will not be considered late if it can be shown that the city received the bid
by the time indicated on the invitation to bids, but internally, improperly
handled and/or delivered. Any late bids will not be opened, but returned to the
vendor marked as late.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-69 ADDENDUM TO NOTICE OF CALL FOR BIDS.
   A.   An addendum to an invitation for bids shall be issued if necessary to:
      1.   Make changes in the notice of call for bids;
      2.   Correct defects or ambiguities;
      3.   Furnish to other bidders information given to one bidder, if the
information will assist the other bidders in submitting bids or if the lack of
information will prejudice the other bidders;
      4.   Correct quantities on the bidding schedule; and
      5.   Correct, add to or clarify specifications.
   B.   The addendum shall be sent to all persons to whom the Purchasing Office
has sent bid packets. The addendum shall require that the bidder acknowledge
receipt of the addendum. If a bidder fails to acknowledge the receipt of the
addendum, the city may waive the requirement as informality, if the vendor's
proposal shows that the information given in the addendum has been addressed.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-70 BID AND PERFORMANCE/PAYMENT BONDS.
   A.   Bid and performance and payment bonds are normally not required for
supplies, materials, equipment, and professional services. However, these bonds
or professional liability insurance may be required for nonprofessional service
contracts at the discretion of the Administrative Services Director, and shall
be required for contracts for the construction of buildings and public
improvements. Bids submitted without bonding requirements will be automatically
rejected.
   B.   Performance and payment bonds are binding on the parties upon execution
of the contract. Performance/payment bonds must be executed by a surety company
authorized to do business in the State of Arizona. In lieu of a bid bond, the
bidder may submit a certified check or cashier's check.
   C.   When a bid bond is required, the bonds of the three lowest bidders are
retained in a locked vault by the City Clerk until award of the bid is made by
the City Council. However, a bidder other than the three low bidders, who has
deposited a bond/surety, may request his or her bid deposit be returned prior
to the award. If the bid is for a procurement for which a contract is required,
the three low deposits will be retained until the contract is executed and
filed in the City Clerk. In case a performance and payment bond is required,
the deposit will be held until the terms of the contract are completed.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-71 RESPONSIBILITIES OF BIDDERS AND OFFERORS.
   A.   Determination of non-responsibility. If a bidder or offeror who
otherwise would have been awarded a contract is found non-responsible, a
written determination of non-responsibility, setting forth the basis of the
finding, shall be prepared by the purchasing agent. The unreasonable failure of
a bidder or offerors to promptly supply information in connection with an
inquiry with respect to responsibility may be grounds for a determination of
non-responsibility with respect to the bidder or offerors. Factors which may be
considered in determining if a prospective contractor is responsible may
include but not be limited to:
      1.   The proposed contractor's financial, physical, personnel or other
resources, including subcontracts;
      2.   The proposed contractor's record of performance;
      3.   Whether the proposed contractor is legally qualified to contract
with the City of Somerton; and
      4.   Whether the proposed contractor has supplied all necessary
information concerning his, her, or its responsibility.
   B.   Final determination.  The final determination is made by the purchasing
agent and shall become part of the contract file and is made a public record.
The purchasing agent may establish specific responsibility criteria for a
particular procurement. Any specific responsibility criteria shall be stated in
the solicitation. All vendors shall be required to complete a disclosure of
responsibility statement and an affidavit of non-collusion when submitting bids
and proposals. See Appendices
A and
B.
   C.   Nondisclosure. The city shall not disclose information regarding
responsibility furnished by a bidder or offerors pursuant to this section.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-72 IDENTICAL BIDS.
   In the event that two or more bidders offer identical bids, all bids may be
rejected and new bids invited, unless it is deemed in the best interest of the
city to award the bid to one of the tied bidders by using the drawing of lots
in a public place, or to split the award if it is agreeable to both bidders and
will not result in added cost to the city.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-73 REJECTION AND CANCELLATION OF BIDS.
   A.   The City Council reserves the right to reject any and all bids if it
considers it to be in the best interest of city. Prior to opening, a
solicitation may be canceled in whole or in part when it is determined, in
writing, that the action is in the city's best interest for reasons including,
but not limited to:
      1.   The city no longer requires the proposed procurement;
      2.   The city can no longer reasonably expect to fund the procurement; or
      3.   Proposed amendments to the solicitation would be of such magnitude
that a new solicitation is desirable.
   B.   When a solicitation is canceled prior to opening, notice of
cancellation shall be sent to all businesses solicited. The notice of
cancellation shall identify the solicitation, the reason for cancellation, and
where appropriate, explain that an opportunity will be given to compete on any
re-solicitation or any future procurement.
   C.   A solicitation may be canceled after opening, but prior to award when
all bids or proposals are rejected in whole or in part, or when it is
determined in writing that the action is in the best interest of the city.
Reasons for which a solicitation may be canceled after opening include, but are
not limited to the following:
      1.   The procurement is no longer required;
      2.   Ambiguous or otherwise inadequate specifications were part of the
solicitation;
      3.   The solicitation did not provide for consideration of all factors of
significance to the city;
      4.   Prices exceed available funds and it would not be appropriate to
adjust quantities to come within available funds;
      5.   All otherwise acceptable bids or proposals received are at clearly
unreasonable prices; or
      6.   There is reason to believe that the bids or proposals may not have
been independently arrived at in an open competition, may have been collusive,
or may have been submitted in bad faith.
   D.   A recommendation to reject any or all bids is documented by means of an
explanatory letter from the purchasing agent to the City Manager on a City
Council agenda form. The reason for cancellation or rejection shall be made
part of the bid file and available for public inspection.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-74 BID EVALUATION AND AWARD.
   A.   After the bid opening, the requesting department will prepare a
detailed tabulation of all bids, which will then be reviewed by the purchasing
agent. In case of a difference between the unit prices and extended totals in a
bid, the unit price shall prevail. In case of a difference between written
words and figures in a bid, the amount stated in written words shall govern.
All relevant state and local, and use taxes shall be included in the final bid
amount shown as this is the amount that will be used for purposes of bid
evaluation. After reviewing the bids with the department originating the
request and the bid evaluation committee (if such a committee is being used),
the department will submit a recommendation for award to the lowest responsive,
responsible bidder. The recommendation must go through the purchasing agent for
review, then to the City Council on a City Council agenda form.
   B.   No criteria may be used in bid or proposal evaluation that is not set
forth in the bid documents.
   C.   Upon receiving a recommendation for award (or rejection of bids), the
purchasing agent will, in writing, notify all offerors of the recommendation.
If the low bid is found to be unacceptable, justification will be submitted in
writing to the City Manager. The recommendation to the City Council must
contain detailed explanations as to how or why the low bid was unacceptable.
The city reserves the right to waive any minor informality in accepting and
awarding of bids.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-75 PROTEST OF AWARD.
   A.   Any bidder may object to the recommendation of award, rejection of a
bid, solicitation procedures of a bid, or any portion thereof and the protest
will be considered according to the following terms:
      1.   The protest must be filed with the purchasing agent the sooner of:
         a.   Five business days from notification of the recommendation; or
         b.   Prior to the City Council meeting at which the recommendation is
on the agenda for award or rejection.
      2.   The protest must be in writing and must include the following terms:
         a.   The name, address and telephone number of the protesting bidder;
         b.   The signature of the protester or his, her, or its
representative;
         c.   Identification of the solicitation number;
         d.   A detailed statement of the legal and factual grounds of the
protest including copies of relevant documents; and
         e.   A statement as to why the protester has standing to protest
(either as a competing bid or as a citizen of the City of Somerton.
      3.   The form of relief requested.
   B.   The purchasing agent shall have the authority to dismiss such a
protest, upon without scheduling an appeal if:
      1.   The grounds for the protest are not valid according to city policy;
      2.   The protest is untimely (not within five business days from
notification or prior to the City Council meeting); or
      3.   The possible remedies would unfairly prejudice other interested
parties, impact the integrity of the procurement system, or have a serious
detrimental affect on the good faith of the parties, cost to the city, the
urgency of the procurement, and the impact of the relief upon the using
department.
   C.   The purchasing agent shall place the decision in writing directed by
mail to the address provided by the protester and shall respond within 15 days.
   D.   The purchasing agent shall have the authority to sustain the protest in
whole or part. Should the purchasing agent determine that a solicitation or
proposed contract does not comply with this policy, with state or federal
policy, or uncovers an irregularity or error in the bid, the recommendation for
award shall be stayed and an appropriate remedy shall be implemented.
   E.   In determining an appropriate remedy, the purchasing agent shall confer
with the Administrative Services Director and shall consider all the
circumstances pertaining to the proposed procurement including but not limited
to: the seriousness of the procurement deficiency, the degree of prejudice to
other interested parties or to the integrity of the procurement system, the
good faith of the parties, cost to the city; the urgency of the procurement;
and the impact of the relief upon the contracting department.
   F.   An appropriate remedy may include one or more of the following:
      1.   Withdraw staff recommendation, and reissue the solicitation;
      2.   Withdraw staff recommendation, and issue a new solicitation;
      3.   Withdraw staff recommendation, and recommend award of contract
consistent with the city purchasing policy; or
      4.   Such relief as is determined necessary to ensure compliance with
this section.
   G.   If the determination of the purchasing agent is not satisfactory to the
party submitting the protest, the party could then appeal to the City Manager.
The same remedies are available as listed above. The written determination of
the City Manager's Office shall be final.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-76 CHANGE ORDERS - CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS.
   A.   The city, without invalidating the contract, may order changes in the
work within the general scope of the contract consisting of additions,
deletions, or other revisions; the contract sum and the contract time being
adjusted accordingly. All such changes in the work shall be authorized by
change order, and shall be performed under the applicable conditions of the
contract documents. The change order will be initialed by the project
architect/engineer with his or her recommendation and forwarded to the city for
approval or rejection.
   B.   The contractor shall bear any additional fees and costs incurred by the
owner, architect, engineer, or consultant for fees as a result of a change
order which adjusts the contract time and which is not because of any act or
omission of the owner, architect, engineer or consultant.
   C.   The cost or credit to the owner resulting from a change in the work
shall be determined in one or more of the following ways:
      1.   By unit price stated in the original contract documents.
      2.   By cost, as deemed below, properly itemized and supported by
sufficient substantiating data to permit evaluation, plus a fee of 10% designed
to compensate the contractor for overhead and administrative costs. Specific
costs shall be itemized by crafts defined within the schedule of values and
limited to the following items directly allocable to the change in work:
         a.   Cost of materials, including cost of delivery;
         b.   Cost of labor, including, but not limited to, social security,
and unemployment insurance and fringe benefits required by agreement and
workers' compensation insurance;
         c.   Rental value of equipment and machinery;
         d.   Sales tax, insurance and bond premiums; and
         e.   Amounts for any additional supervision and field office
personnel, which shall not exceed 5% of the total of the above divisions C.2.a.
through C.2.d.
      3.   By mutual acceptance of a lump sum amount representing properly
itemized services and supported by sufficient substantiating data to permit
evaluation; provided that the lump sum shall not exceed that amount calculated
under division C.2. above.
   D.   All change orders within amounts appropriated in the current fiscal
year budget for the subject of the bid award will be authorized and executed in
the following manner:
      1.   Authority to approve change orders is subject to the following
cumulative per project limits:
 
$5,000 or less       Project Manager
$5,000 up to $10,000 Department Director
$10,000 to $30,000   City Manager
$30,000 and above    City Council
 
      2.   For example, if the Project Manager is asked to approve $1,000
change orders, he or she can only do so up to five times. If the five change
orders are $3,000 each, the department director must approve the second and
third change order and the City Manager must approve the fourth change order,
as the cumulative amount exceeds $10,000. In addition, the City Manager must
then approve all subsequent change orders within the approved contract. A
change order tabulation sheet must be submitted showing all change orders
incurred for a project along with each request for approval of a change order.
   E.   If any change order causes the total expenditures on a project to
exceed the amount of the contract for that project approved by the City
Council, then the City Council must approve that change order. The City Council
must approve any single change order exceeding $30,000.
   F.   For equipment, goods, and services, all change orders within amounts
appropriated in the current fiscal year budget for the subject of the bid award
will be authorized and executed in the following manner. If the change order is
for less than $10,000, the department director will have authority for approval
or rejection. If the change order is between $10,000 and $30,000, the City
Manager's approval is needed. If the change order exceeds $30,000, the City
Council will have the final authority to sign the change order. If any change
order exceeds the current fiscal year budget for the subject project, the City
Council must approve it. The City Council reserves the right to adjust these
authorized approval amounts for each individual project.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-77 CONTRACT AWARD - STATE BID.
   Whenever another political entity has previously conducted a sealed,
competitive bidding process for goods or services, and the City Council
determines that goods or services are the best available to the city, and the
goods or services are made available to the city at the same terms, price and
conditions as the other political entity, the Council may:
   A.   Award the contract to the successful bidder of that sealed competitive
bid without issuing a request for proposal in accordance with this subarticle;
or
   B.   If a request for proposal has been solicited, reject all proposals and
award the contract per §
3-5-74.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-78 COMPETITIVELY NEGOTIATED CONTRACTS.
   A.   When, due to the complex nature or technical detail of a particular
procurement or when, in the opinion of the City Council, specifications can not
be fairly and objectively prepared so as to permit competition in the request
for sealed bids or for high technology electronic equipment available from a
limited number of sources of supply and for which specifications of the
equipment of a single source of supply or when it is otherwise determined by
the City Council that the invitation for competitive sealed bids is not
practicable, a contract may be awarded for a procurement by competitive
negotiations.
   B.   When it has been determined that it is not practical to invite
competitive bids as provided in the previous division A., action to obtain
procurement by competitive negotiations shall commence by advertisement policy.
The advertisement or solicitation for proposals for competitive negotiations
shall state:
      1.   The city proposes to enter into competitive negotiation with
responsible offerors for procurement;
      2.   The date, hour, and place that written proposals for the procurement
shall be received;
      3.   The type of procurement involved and a description of the supplies
or services sought; provided, however, that potential offerors shall be
informed by the advertisement or solicitation where such detailed
specifications, if available for the particular procurement, may be obtained;
and
      4.   The evaluation factors to be considered by the city in the
competitive negotiations in determining the proposal most advantageous to the
city and the proposed method or methods of award of contract.
   C.   Such other information as may be desirable or necessary to reasonably
inform potential offerors about the requirements of the procurement or the
limits or bounds of the competitive negotiations proposed to obtain the
procurement.
   D.   All written proposals received by the city in response to advertisement
or solicitation for proposals for competitive negotiations shall be kept secure
and unopened until the date and hour set for opening the proposals.
   E.   Proposals for competitive negotiations shall not be subject to public
inspection until negotiations between the city and all offerors have been
concluded and a contract awarded to the responsible offeror submitting the
proposal determined in writing to be the most advantageous to the city, price,
and the evaluation factors set forth in the advertisement and solicitations for
proposals considered.
   F.   The purchasing agent shall examine each written proposal received for
general conformity with the advertised terms of the procurement. If it has been
provided in the advertisement or solicitation for proposals that an award may
be made without written or oral discussion, the City Council may, upon the
basis of the written proposals received, award the contract to the responsible
offeror submitting the proposals determined in writing to be the most
advantageous to the city, price, and the published evaluation factors
considered. If after the proposals have been examined, it is determined that
written and/or oral discussions should be had with the offerors, the purchasing
agent shall determine in writing, based on an individual review, those selected
for award of contract for the procurement. Each offeror shall be contacted
informally by the purchasing agent and a meeting scheduled for discussion of
the offeror's proposals.
   G.   Discussion with offerors shall be held informally and may be conducted
orally, in writing, or both. If, however, after discussion with all responsible
offerors have concluded or after examination of written proposals initially
submitted, it is determined that no acceptable proposal initially submitted,
any or all proposals may be rejected and in the discretion of the City Council,
new proposal may be solicited as provided in this section on the basis of the
same or revised terms or the procurement may be abandoned.
   H.   The purchasing agent shall prepare a written summary of all oral
discussions in the competitive negotiations setting forth the date or dates of
discussions with all responsible offerors and the general substance of the
discussions. Verbatim records of the discussions shall not be required.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-79 NON-COMPETITIVE NEGOTIATIONS.
   Procurement contracts may be awarded through non-competitive negotiations
only as provided in this regulation. Contracts, which may be awarded on the
basis of non-competitive negotiations, include and shall be limited to the
following:
   A.   Contractual services for telephone service, electrical energy and other
public utility service and other contractual services provided within a defined
geographic area pursuant to a franchise for such service awarded pursuant to
law by a city, county, or other political subdivision authorized to award the
franchise;
   B.   Commodities, equipment, and services available, in the discretion of
the City Council, from a single source. Such items shall include, but not be
limited to, patented equipment and copyrighted material and equipment
peripheral to other equipment already owned by the city determined to be
incompatible to the other equipment without modification or adjustment in
either the equipment already owned or the equipment to be acquired;
   C.   Instructional materials available from a single source. A written
determination setting forth need in relation to a particular instructional
program and justifying the procurement of the particular materials on a non-
competitive basis, shall be made by the purchasing agent prior to the award of
the contract;
   D.   Special supplies or equipment required for laboratory or experimental
studies. A written determination setting forth the need in relation to such
studies and justifying the procurement of the supplies or equipment on a non-
competitive basis shall be made by the purchasing agent prior to the award of
the contract;
   E.   Contracts or subscriptions for the purchase of published books, maps,
periodicals, technical pamphlets, recording, films and works of art for museum
and public display;
   F.   Contracts for professionals, technical, scientific, legal or artistic
services;
   G.   Contract or agreements for the purchase or sale of supplies, equipment,
or services between the city and the government of the United States, the State
of Arizona, a political subdivision of the state or non-profit organization
organized under the laws of this state, another state or the District of
Columbia or chartered under an Act of Congress and serving a public purpose of
an essentially government, civic, educational or charitable nature;
   H.   Contracts with vendors who maintain a general service administration
price agreement with the United States of America or any agency thereof;
provided, however, that no contracts executed under this provision shall
authorized a price higher than is contained in the contract between general
service administration and the vendor; and
   I.   Contracts for the purchase of real property or interests in real
property.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-80 OPTION PROVISION.
   A.   If a contract is to include an option for renewal, extension, or
purchase, the applicable option provision shall be included in the
solicitation.
   B.   No option for renewal, extension, or purchase shall be exercised unless
a competitive procurement is not more advantageous to the city than exercising
the particular option.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-81 PUBLIC AWARD.
   After contract award by the City Council, all proposals shall be open for
public inspection except to the extent the withholding of information is
permitted.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
SUBARTICLE IV - COMPETITIVE SEALED REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS (RFPS)
§ 3-5-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   Competitive sealed proposals are only to be used when the use of competitive
sealed bidding is either not practical or not advantageous to the city as
determined by the Purchasing Office. This process is generally used for the
procurement of professional and non-professional services.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-96 REQUESTS FOR PROPOSALS.
   A.   Professional and/or other services with an estimated value of $30,000
or more shall be procured through a formal request for proposals. The procedure
for formal request for proposals is established for the purpose of providing an
alternative method to sealed competitive bid for the purchase of professional
and other services. The procedural guidelines outlined in Subarticle III, §§
3-5-61 through
3-5-81 of competitive sealed bids, also apply to RFPs. As with formal bids, the
user department initiates the process and assists the purchasing agent in
creating a specification, called a "Scope of Services".
   B.   When the RFP is ready, notice of the RFP is published in the newspaper
for four consecutive days, and copies of the notice of RFP are sent to the
current contractor (if applicable) and all those who have registered with the
city as potential providers for the required services.
   C.   Proposals will be opened publicly at the time and place stated in the
request for proposal. The request for proposal will include a statement of how
the proposals will be evaluated, the relative importance of price and other
factors, the general terms of the written contract, and that professional
liability insurance may be required.
   D.   Questions from offerors regarding any clarifications of the RFP will be
answered prior to the opening. If any question results in a change to the scope
of work, an addendum will be made and distributed to all offerors who have
requested a bid packet. Discussions with proposers may also be conducted after
the opening. In conducting the discussions, no disclosure of other proposals
shall be made.
   E.   Prior to award, the city may issue a written request for best and final
offers. The request shall state the date, time, and place for the submission of
the best and final offers. Best and final offers shall be requested only once
unless the purchasing agent makes a written determination that it is
advantageous to the city to conduct further discussions or change the city
requirements. The request shall inform offerors that, if they do not submit a
notice of withdrawal or a best and final offer, their immediately previous
offer will be construed as their best and final offer.
   F.   All persons who submitted a proposal shall be given the opportunity to
submit a best and final offer if one is requested. The proposals will be
reviewed by the user department and the Purchasing Office, or evaluation
committee. A recommendation will then be made to the City Council based on an
evaluation of all factors stated in the RFP.
   G.   Upon City Council approval, award shall be made to the responsible
offerors whose proposal is determined in writing to be the most advantageous to
the city, taking into consideration price and the evaluation factors set forth
in the request for proposals. No other factors or criteria shall be used in the
evaluation. The bid file shall contain the basis on which the award is made.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-97 SELECTION AND CONTRACTING OF ARCHITECTURAL-ENGINEERING PROFESSIONAL
SERVICES.
   A.   The services of architect and engineering related services may be
acquired through a qualifications based selection process, direct selection or
public competition.
      1.   Direct selection. Direct selection means the selection of one
technical registrant/firm without the requirement of advertising. For smaller
jobs where there is a preference for a qualified firm to perform the work, the
firm is simply notified and the parties negotiate a fair and reasonable
contract, and based on price is subject to approval by the City Council.
Contracting of architects and engineers (A/Es) by direct selection is
accomplished by selecting the consultant based on knowledge of his or her
qualifications and experience, agreeing on a negotiated scope of work and then
fixing the compensation. If agreement on scope of work or compensation cannot
be agreed upon, another consultant may be selected. Ranking of firms is not
required under this selection process.
      2.   Qualifications based system. Selection may also be made according to
a qualifications basis system (QBS). Dollar thresholds are defined in
Subarticle I, §
3-5-3. Firms engaged in the lawful practice of the profession may submit an
annual statement of qualifications (SOQ) and experience. A solicitation for
request for qualifications (RFQ) is also required based on a detailed scope of
work of the project. This RFQ will be advertised in the newspaper of general
circulation.
   B.   A selection committee is formed to evaluate the current SOQs on file
and RFQs. The committee should consist of at least three persons. The committee
shall select, in order of preference and based on criteria established, a short
list of at least three firms deemed to be the most qualified to provide the
services required. The selection of the short list must be based on
demonstrated competence and qualifications only. Fees, price, man-hours or any
other cost information may not be considered in the selection of the short
list.
   C.   After a short list is selected, negotiations may commence for a
contract with the highest rated firm for the required services. The
negotiations shall include consideration of compensation and other contract
terms and conditions the city determines to be fair and reasonable. In making
this determination, the city shall take into account the estimated value, the
scope, complexity, and nature of the required services. The negotiated contract
terms are subject to City Council approval based on contract dollar amounts as
defined in Subarticle II, §
3-5-23.
   D.   If a satisfactory contract cannot be negotiated with the highest rated
firm at a price or on other contract terms, negotiations shall be formally
terminated. Negotiations would then be started with the next highest rated
firm, in sequence, until an agreement is reached or a determination is made to
reject all firms on the short list.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-98 SELECTION AND CONTRACTING OF LEGAL SERVICES.
   The services of outside legal counsel when such services are recommended by
the City Attorney, Superior Court or conflict counsel, when such services are
recommended by the Public Defender, shall be acquired by the following process.
   A.   Persons engaged in providing legal services may submit statements of
qualifications and expressions of interest in providing such services. The city
may specify a uniform format that profiles qualifications and assures equal
opportunity for potential offerors. Persons may amend these statements at any
time by filing a new statement.
   B.   Whenever practicable, the city shall give adequate notice for the need
for such services. The notice shall describe the services required, list the
types of information and data required of each offeror and state the relative
importance of particular qualifications.
   C.   The city may conduct discussions with any offeror who has submitted a
proposal to determine the offeror's qualifications for further consideration.
Discussions shall not disclose any information derived from proposals submitted
by other offerors.
   D.   The provisions of this section are not applicable to contracts for
professional witnesses if the purpose of the contracts is to provide for
professional services or testimony relating to a criminal prosecution or an
existing or probable judicial proceeding in which the city is or may become a
party or to a contract for special investigative services for law enforcement
purposes.
   E.   All resultant contracts to the offerors determined in writing to be the
most qualified and after negotiation of compensation, determined to be fair and
reasonable, shall be placed before the City Council for award.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-99 OTHER PROFESSIONAL SERVICES.
   All other professional service contracts shall be procured at the option of
the City Council by Council approval or through the competitive sealed RFP
process with pricing levels set in Subarticle II, §
3-5-24.
(Ord. 2014-003, passed 3-18-2014)
SUBARTICLE V - SUSPENSION AND DEBARMENT OF CONTRACTORS
§ 3-5-110 PURPOSE.
   For the protection of its citizens, the city excludes certain vendors or
suppliers from consideration for awards for City of Somerton contracts. This
action shall be based upon certain types of criminal convictions, civil
judgments or contract violations, or for any other cause deemed to affect
responsibility as a city contractor. This duty is delegated as follows.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-111 AUTHORITY TO DEBAR OR SUSPEND.
   The Administrative Services Director is delegated the authority to debar or
suspend a party from participating in city procurement. The Administrative
Services Director shall not have an obligation to seek information concerning
the criminal history of applicants unless provided notice of this history by
third parties.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-112 CAUSES FOR DEBARMENT OR SUSPENSION FROM CONSIDERATION.
   The causes for debarment or suspension include, but are not limited to, the
following:
   A.   Conviction of any person or subsidiary or affiliate of any person for
commission of a criminal offense arising out of obtaining or attempting to
obtain a public or private contract or subcontract, or in performance of the
contract or subcontract;
   B.   Conviction of any person or any subsidiary or affiliate of any person
under any statute of the federal government, this state, or any other state for
embezzlement, theft, fraudulent schemes and artifices, fraudulent schemes and
practices, bid rigging, perjury, forgery, bribery, falsification, or receiving
stolen property, or any other offense indicating a lack of business integrity
or business honesty which affects responsibility as a City of Somerton
contractor;
   C.   Conviction or a civil judgment finding a violation by any person or any
subsidiary or affiliate of any person under state or federal antitrust
statutes;
   D.   Violations of contract provisions of a character which are deemed to be
so serious as to justify debarment action, including, but not limited to, the
following:
      1.   Knowingly failing without good cause to perform in accordance with
the specifications or within the time limits provided; and
      2.   Failure to perform or unsatisfactory performance with the terms of
one or more contracts, except that failure to perform or unsatisfactory
performance caused by acts beyond the control of the contractor shall not be
considered to be a basis for debarment. A disclosure of responsibility form can
be found in
Appendix A. This form will be sent with each bid packet and must be returned by
the vendor with his or her proposal.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-113 WRITTEN DETERMINATIONS.
   A.   The Administrative Services Director shall make a written determination
to debar or suspend which shall be issued and contain:
      1.   The reasons for the action taken;
      2.   The action taken and the effective date and length of time the
action shall be in effect; and
      3.   Informing any debarred or suspended party involved of his or her
right to administrative appeal.
   B.   A copy of the decision shall be mailed or otherwise furnished to any
debarred or suspended party. A vendor may apply for reinstatement at any time
after the period of debarment has expired.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-114 PERIOD OF DEBARMENT.
   The period of time for debarment shall not exceed three years from the date
of the determination. If debarment is based solely upon debarment by another
governmental agency, the period of debarment may run concurrently with the
period established by the other debarring agency.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
SUBARTICLE VI - LEASING
§ 3-5-125 GENERAL INFORMATION.
   A.   A lease/purchase financing agreement is a contract by which one party
conveys property to another for a period of time in exchange for the payment of
interest and a portion of principal on the purchase price of the property.
Lease purchase agreement is authorized herein, subject to specific contract
review by the City Attorney.
   B.   Purchases made with lease purchase financing are made using the same
purchasing guidelines as other purchases, except that the use of lease/purchase
financing will generally be limited to those situations in which it is in the
city's best interest to secure third party financing.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-126 PROCEDURAL INFORMATION.
   Departments seeking to lease/purchase equipment must submit requests to use
lease/purchase financing to the Administrative Services Director. Upon
approval, the Administrative Services Director will forward the approval to the
requesting department and the purchasing agent. The user department will then
submit a requisition to the purchasing agent for procurement of the equipment.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-127 RENTAL OF EQUIPMENT.
   Equipment should only be rented to fill short-term equipment needs. This may
include one-time, short-term needs or short-term needs that may be re-occurring
in which the rental of equipment is more cost effective than ownership of the
equipment.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-128 LEASE OF CITY PROPERTY.
   A.   The City Council has delegated authority to the City Manager to
negotiate lease contracts up to $30,000. Any lease that exceeds $30,000 must be
done through the RFP process. The City Council must award all lease contracts.
   B.   The City Council may lease any land, building, or part thereof owned by
the city by public auction, sealed bids, or negotiation. Prior to the approval
and execution of any such lease, the city shall publish a "Notice of Intent to
Lease City Property." The City Council may in its discretion, reject any and
all offers.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
SUBARTICLE VII - SOLE SOURCE PROCUREMENT
§ 3-5-140 GENERAL INFORMATION.
   A.   A sole source purchase is the purchase of a commodity available from
only one supplier. A purchase of this type generally is of a special nature
because of the type of goods, materials, or services required by the user. The
requesting department will be required to justify, in writing, the reasons for
selecting a product or service that is available from a sole source only,
including obtaining the necessary City Council approval as indicated in
Subarticle II, §
3-5-23.
   B.   Sole source purchases are contrary to public purchasing procedures, and
therefore the selection of products or services of a sole source nature must be
limited as much as possible. The only justification for sole source purchases
are:
      1.   The purchase of a sole source item is to the city's best economic
interest; or
      2.   The items are generally classified as "captive" source items and
cannot be procured from other sources because of manufacturer marketing
arrangements, patents, and the like.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-141 SOLE SOURCE PROCUREMENT.
   A.   When an item or service is required which is thought to be available
only from a single supplier, the following procedures shall be followed.
      1.   For purchases with an anticipated cost of $30,000 or less, a
purchase requisition shall be transmitted to the purchasing agent indicating
that only one source is known to exist. Efforts should be made by the
requesting department to locate any other possible sources, and the names of
those contacted who were unable to supply the required items or services shall
be noted in the comment section of the requisition. The purchasing agent will
review the requisition and attempt to identify any potential suppliers who are
not listed on the requisition. If no other source is found, a purchase order
will be issued to the sole supplier who is known to be capable of filling the
order.
      2.   Request for sole-source purchases with an anticipated cost of over
$30,000 shall be transmitted to the Purchasing Office in requisition form in
the same manner as above, with the names of potential suppliers, except for
proprietary purchases, who have been contacted by the requesting department
listed on the requisition.
   B.   The purchasing agent will attempt to locate any other potential
suppliers, and will publish notice of the proposed purchase in the newspaper
for four consecutive days, with a request that anyone who wishes to be
considered as a potential supplier contact the Purchasing Office. If any
supplier other than the one previously identified is found to exist, then the
purchase must be done through the formal bid process. If no other suppliers are
discovered, the Purchasing Office will notify the department who will then
submit a request for approval of the purchase to the City Council for
consideration as an agenda item. If the City Council approves the purchase, a
purchase order will be issued.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
SUBARTICLE VIII - EMERGENCY PURCHASES OF MATERIALS AND SERVICES
§ 3-5-155 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this section is to enable the city to respond quickly in
procuring materials and/or services when an emergency condition exists.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-156 ACTIVITIES AUTHORIZED.
   A.   The City Manager may authorize others to make emergency procurements if
there exists a threat to public health, welfare, or safety, or if a situation
exists which makes compliance with §
3-5-60 impracticable, unnecessary, or contrary to public interest. Emergency
procurements shall be made with as much competition as practicable under the
circumstances.
   B.   Any item that is procured under this emergency clause using the
reasoning that "a situation exists which makes compliance with §
3-5-60 impracticable, unnecessary or contrary to public interest" may be
considered as a one-time opportunity purchase and must:
      1.   Be capital equipment or capital equipment as part of a capital
project;
      2.   Clearly demonstrate that the price is significantly below market
price. Two other vendor quotes shall be required;
      3.   Receive City Manager approval prior to placing the order; and
      4.   Receive post acquisition approval from the City Council.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-157 PROCEDURES.
   There are separate procedures to be followed for emergencies occurring
during regular hours, and at all other times.
   A.   1.   From Monday through Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., all emergency
purchases are to be handled through the purchasing agent. Emergency purchases
will be left to the discretion of the department director.
      2.   For purchases over $30,000, the purchasing agent will advise the
City Manager of the emergency condition and request approval. The using
department shall provide whatever information or assistance is deemed
necessary. The operating department shall immediately transmit a purchase
requisition with "EMERGENCY" indicated in the comment section and the reasons
why the indicated acquisition is an emergency.
   B.   In the event the emergency occurs after regular working hours and
contact with the City Manager cannot be made, a department director may act for
the City Manager as outlined herein:
      1.   Emergency purchases of $30,000 or less may be authorized by the
responsible department director, and confirmed by transmitting a purchase
requisition marked "EMERGENCY" to the purchasing agent no later than noon of
the next normal working day following the purchase date. The department
director shall approve the purchase requisition and a brief but complete
explanation shall be included in the requisition to support the emergency
nature of the purchase.
      2.   Approval of emergency purchases of over $30,000 shall be limited to
the City Manager. A department may proceed under procedures as outlined in
division B.1. above, for purchases of over $30,000 without the prior approval
of the City Manager only in the most extreme emergency circumstances and only
after all efforts to contact the City Manager or an authorized delegate have
been exhausted. The City Manager must be notified as soon as possible of this
type of emergency procurement and a report must be drafted and forwarded to the
City Manager.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-158 DEFINITION OF EMERGENCY.
   A.   EMERGENCY is defined as: Where materials, services, or equipment are
needed for a situation where the health, safety, or welfare of the public is
endangered or the city is exposed to serious cost consequences if immediate
corrective or preventive action is not taken, or when needs arise after normal
working hours that cannot be postponed.
   B.   An emergency shall also exist when so declared in accordance with the
City Municipal Code. Any emergency procurement shall be limited to those
materials, services, or construction necessary to satisfy the emergency need.
   C.   To initiate an emergency purchase, the authorized person in the
department may call the purchasing agent for an order or authorization number.
They must state:
      1.   The nature of the emergency;
      2.   Vendor's name and address;
      3.   This must be followed up with a confirming purchase order the next
regular word day after the emergency purchase was made; and
      4.   The confirming purchase order should indicate the items were
purchased as "emergency" and date and time of purchase.
   D.   Realizing that most emergencies occur at night or on weekends when the
office is closed., employees are expected to have a senior supervisor verbally
approve the purchase of emergency items only, fix whatever the problem might be
and have the department director process the necessary paperwork the next
workday. Supervisors are reminded that only the minimum amount or items
necessary to take care of the emergency will be approved by the purchasing
agent.
   E.   1.   In the event of an emergency as described above the purchasing
agent may award contracts and make purchases for the purpose of meeting the
emergency.
      2.   As soon as possible after a contract is awarded or purchases made in
accordance with this section, the purchasing agent shall provide the Council
with a certificate showing:
         a.   Description of the emergency;
         b.   The necessity of the action; and
         c.   An itemized account of all expenditures.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
SUBARTICLE IX – RECEIVING, INSPECTION, AND ACCEPTANCE OF MATERIALS, SUPPLIES,
AND SERVICES
§ 3-5-170 PURPOSE.
   Purpose is to establish for all departments the procedures for receiving,
inspecting and accepting equipment, materials, supplies, and services. The
purchase is complete only when satisfactory performance by the supplier has
occurred. Conformance to contracts includes time and place, as well as quantity
and quality. An interruption or delay in city activities or schedules due to
the failure to keep a promised delivery date is as uneconomical and harmful as
any other default, and in addition is unfair to the unsuccessful bidders.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-171 RECEIVING PROCEDURES.
   A.   The Purchasing Office and the Requisitioning Department share
responsibility for purchase order delivery follow-up.
   B.   The Requisitioning Department has responsibility for the following
activities:
      1.   Receive and thoroughly inspect all delivered equipment, materials,
and supplies;
      2.   Inspect the product or services to ensure the following:
         a.   Items are correct;
         b.   The quantities are correct;
         c.   All items are received in good condition; and
         d.   All items are delivered to the correct location.
      3.   Enter the information as to the quality, quantity, and timing of all
items into the financial software as a received and accepted item or items;
      4.   Upon discovery of a shipment that is not acceptable for any of the
reasons listed in divisions B.1. or B.2., to immediately contact the vendor and
provide him or her written notice of the defect, and to notify the Purchasing
Office and obtain its guidance for appropriate action;
      5.   If the defects are remedied within a reasonable time period, the
person should enter the quantities received in the financial software;
      6.   Back-ordered items should not be electronically received until they
actually arrive on site; and
      7.   When the full quantity of merchandise has not been received, but due
to various reasons the requesting department wishes to consider the order
complete, as is, the department should contact the Purchasing Office so that
they can cancel all back orders and consider the purchase order complete.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-172 PURCHASE ORDER DELIVERY FOLLOW-UP.
   A.   The Purchasing Office assists the Requisitioning Department when
requested, and takes appropriate actions against suppliers when necessary. The
assistance of the user departments is very important in this regard.
   B.   The prerequisite for purchase order delivery follow-up is prompt
knowledge of both the goods, work or services ordered, including performance
requirements; and the receipt or lack of receipt of the goods, work or
services. For this purpose, pertinent information must be available promptly
for persons responsible for delivery follow-up. Such information is identified
in the Purchase Order Inquiry screen in Caselle accounting software which shows
the vendor, purchase order number, goods or services ordered, and the delivery
due date. In the event the goods or services are not furnished by the required
due date, the requesting department should contact the Purchasing Office to
determine the reasons for delay and identify when the goods or services will be
furnished.
   C.   In the event the supplier indicates that they do not intend to furnish
the goods or services, or the reason for the delivery delay is not acceptable,
the Purchasing Office will take the necessary steps to secure the goods or
services, either from that supplier, or from another supplier.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-173 ENCUMBRANCES AND YEAR-END CUTOFF.
   A.   It is essential that city does not obligate itself for amounts in
excess of those budgeted, for a particular purpose. In an accrual accounting
system, all expenditures must be charged against the budget of the year in
which the goods or services are received. To achieve these goals, the budgetary
device of encumbering must be employed. An encumbrance does not result in the
recognition of an expenditure. It simply obligates or "reserves" a portion of
an unexpended budget for the purpose of paying a liability when the related
goods are received or services rendered. In the encumbrance system used by the
city, it will be necessary to encumber for all expenditures requiring a
purchase order.
   B.   At fiscal year-end, all outstanding encumbrances will be analyzed as to
status. All encumbrances for items which have not been received before June 30,
will be canceled, and, if desired and provided for in the new budget, re-
encumbered in the new fiscal year. Encumbrances for items that have been
received, or services which have been performed, but not yet paid at fiscal
year-end will be charged to the fiscal year in which the items were received,
or the services were performed. In order to accomplish a timely year-end
cutoff, purchase orders, other than emergencies, will not be issued after the
second week of May of each fiscal year. Departments should plan their
purchases, including those not requiring purchase orders, accordingly.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
SUBARTICLE X – CONTRACT ADMINISTRATION
§ 3-5-185 PRINCIPLES.
   A.   Contract administration primarily consists of actions which must be
taken by the Purchasing Office from the time a contract is awarded until the
supplies, or services have been delivered and accepted, and payment has been
made. Once the purchase has been made or the contract awarded, the contract
administration function is the primary link between the supplier, the buyer,
and the using department, to handle problems arising from the procurement
action.
   B.   User departments are responsible for contract administration to assure
that the supplier delivers the product or service to the city user in
accordance with the terms and conditions of the contract issued by the
Purchasing Office.
   C.   To ensure consistent contractor compliance, the contract administration
includes, but is not limited to the following tasks:
      1.   Holding pre-performance conferences to emphasize city requirements
and contractor responsibilities under certain complex or critical contract
programs;
      2.   Follow up with the contractor and user department on problems
occurring during the period of performance. It is the responsibility of the
user department to document and keep records of vendor performance on
contracts. This information is crucial in determining contract extensions or
terminations;
      3.   Upon notification from departments, supported by documentation, a
letter of nonperformance will be sent to a vendor who has unsatisfactorily
performed on a city contract. This notice may state performance standards that
must be satisfied by a time indicated, quantity of goods to be provided, or
quality of service provided;
      4.   Follow-up on past due purchase orders and expedite delivery as
necessary;
      5.   Take necessary actions to amend existing contracts through required
approval channels;
      6.   Take necessary actions to terminate existing contracts, when
required, through approved channels; and
      7.   Resolve contract provision disputes within the authority limits
granted by the City Council, state statutes, and internal procedures.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-186 CONTRACTS.
   A.   A contract is a written agreement for the procurement or disposal of
supplies, services, insurance, equipment, or construction. To be effective, a
contract must include offer and acceptance by competent parties and the
furnishing of some good or service for an agreed monetary consideration.
   B.   All services provided to the city by outside agencies, firms, or
individuals shall be on a contractual basis. If the estimated annual cost of
services is over $30,000, the services shall be bid publicly and the contract
awarded and signed by the City Council. For services with an annual cost not to
exceed $30,000, a minimum of three written quotations shall be required, and a
contract signed with the successful company. The City Manager shall sign
contracts valued from $10,000 to $30,000 for cooperative purchasing agreement
contracts. The Administrative Services Director shall sign contracts with an
annual cost of between $3,000 and $10,000. The purchasing agent may sign
contracts from $1,000 to $3,000. Department directors may sign contracts for
under $3,000.
   C.   Generally the city utilizes only "fixed price" contracts, but might in
a special instance, because of market conditions, utilize a contract with price
increase provisions. A fixed price contract is used when the extent and type of
work necessary can be reasonably specified and the cost reasonably estimated.
Any time there is a price increase under these contracts, there must be
supporting documentation from the vendor showing an increased price for raw
materials from his or her supplier. Escalator clauses relating to the Consumer
Price Index may be included in the contract language.
   D.   REQUIREMENTS CONTRACTS are fixed price agreements set up to provide for
recurring purchases of indefinite quantities from the same supplier for a
specified period of time. The use of cost-plus-a-percentage-of-cost contract is
prohibited. A cost-plus-a-percentage-of-cost provides reimbursement to the
supplier for his or her actual cost plus an agreed-upon percentage of the costs
of the supplier's overhead and profit.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-187 MONITORING OF REQUIREMENTS CONTRACTS.
   A.   The Purchasing Office is responsible to ensure that the provisions of
requirements contracts are strictly adhered to by the contractor, and
monitoring by any city personnel authorized to place orders against the
contract.
   B.   Since the user department utilizes the contracted services or products,
they are in the best position to provide feedback information to the Purchasing
Office regarding specific contractor performance. Any questions or problems the
user has with a contract supplier must be brought to the attention of the
purchasing agent for resolution.
   C.   A vendor evaluation form should be completed for every contract
administered by the city. This form measures vendor product performance and may
be used as a source of evaluation criteria on future contracts. Forms to be
used to document vendor performance are included as exhibits in
Appendix C.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-188 PLACING ORDERS AGAINST EXISTING REQUIREMENTS CONTRACTS.
   A.   Only those individuals who have been specifically authorized by the
City Manager or Administrative Services Director can place orders against
existing requirements contracts. Only those items specifically defined in the
agreement can be purchased as a part of the agreements.
   B.   User departments who have not submitted their estimated quantity needs
for requirements contracts may not place orders against the existing agreement
without first receiving authorization from the Administrative Services
Director.
   C.   Each user department that has submitted its estimated needs and whose
requirements have been included in the contract shall monitor its ordered
material or service usage to ensure that they do not exceed the estimated
requirements. In the event that quantity limits will be exceeded, the user must
first request in writing to the purchasing agent that the specific requirements
contract be amended to include any additional quantities.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-189 TERMINATION OF A CONTRACT.
   A.   Terminating a contract is normally the last alternative after all other
administrative means have been sought to resolve a problem between the city and
a contractor. There are two reasons for terminating or canceling a city
contract: for convenience, and for cause (default).
      1.   Terminating for convenience. There are two types of terminations for
convenience used by the city: for the mutual convenience of the contractor and
the city; and for the unilateral convenience of the city.
         a.   Mutual convenience. An example of this type is where both parties
agree that the contractor is no longer able to provide the service or product
to the city under an existing contract. The Finance Director is responsible for
negotiating the final settlement formula regarding costs and date of
termination, and to prepare the recommended termination in accordance with the
terms of the existing contract, if applicable.
         b.   City convenience.  Depending upon the terms of the written
contract, this type of termination may occur whenever the city determines that
termination is in the best interests of the city or that funds are not
available.
      2.   Terminating for cause. 
         a.   This type of termination is employed when the contractor is in
default or breach of contract. Depending upon the situation and the terms of
the written contract, it is the city's standard practice that a cure notice be
sent via certified mail by the Purchasing Office to the contractor.
         b.   This notice shall set forth the details regarding the
deficiencies, with the dates and background information supporting non-
performance or substandard performance. The Finance Director establishes a firm
cure deadline date. The period must be of a reasonable length of time to cure
the deficiencies; normally the time period varies from ten to 30 days,
depending upon the individual circumstances of each case. Assuming the
contractor does not cure the deficiencies to the satisfaction of the city, the
Finance Director will then send a show cause letter by certified mail to the
contractor, wherein the contractor is requested to show cause why his or her
contract should not be terminated. The Finance Director will then establish
another deadline date for an answer to the show cause letter, usually five to
ten days. Unless the contractor shows sufficient cause why the contract should
not be terminated for cause, the Finance Director will initiate the necessary
steps to terminate the agreement and document the final action accordingly.
   B.   In all termination actions, the Administrative Services Director must
rely on the user department to provide the necessary documentation to justify
contractual decisions that are made. The using department personnel are the
"eyes and ears" of the city, expressing satisfaction or dissatisfaction with
contractor performance. The Administrative Services Director either resolves
the problem or recommends termination of the appropriate contract to the City
Council.
   C.   The usual procedure for terminating a contract is by no means the
exclusive method. The action taken will always depend upon the written terms of
the contract, and the actual, factual situation presented. The city reserves
the right to employ all other available mechanisms and remedies to deal with a
breach of contract.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-190 CONTRACT PERIODS.
   Contracts should be for periods of time that coincide with the city's fiscal
year whenever practical. Contracts that span more than one fiscal year must
include language noting that the continuation of the contract is subject to
non-appropriation. Contracts may have renewal clauses, but should not exceed
three to five years.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-191 ADVERTISEMENTS FOR FORMAL CONTRACTS.
   Invitations for bid will be prepared in a concise manner consistent with
legal requirements, and describe the character of the proposed contract or
agreement in sufficient detail to enable the bidders to know what the general
scope will be, either in the advertisement itself or by reference to detailed
plans and specifications on file at the time of publication of the first
announcement.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-192 ARIZONA STATE CONTRACTS.
   A.   The City of Somerton has entered into a cooperative purchasing
agreement with the Purchasing Office of the State of Arizona, Department of
Administration, and Finance Division. This agreement permits the city to
purchase any supplies, commodities, equipment, services, and materials covered
by existing state contracts from consenting contractors. The city recognizes
substantial savings on every item bought through the state contracts.
   B.   Purchases from the Arizona state contracts are not subject to the
requirement for public bidding of any purchase with a value over $30,000, as
the State Purchasing Office has already publicly bid the commodities on the
contracts. Purchases of supplies, equipment, and services shall be made from
the state contracts whenever it is in the best financial interest of the city,
and the best overall value. Cost comparisons are not required when a purchase
is made from the state contracts; however, random comparisons are encouraged.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-193 INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENT (IGA).
   A.   A cooperative purchasing IGA allows the city to make purchases using
the results of bids and RFPs from other governmental agencies. When it is in
the city's best interest, using a bid or RFP from another agency with which the
city has an IGA may be used. This allows the city to purchase like goods and
services without going through the bid process, which has already been done by
the agreeing agency. The vendor must agree to sell the goods at the same price.
The bid or RFP from the other agency must have been let within the last 12
months.
   B.   The City of Somerton is also a member of the Mojave Educational
Services Cooperative. Purchases made through this cooperative have also been
publicly bid and therefore are not subject to the bidding requirements.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
SUBARTICLE XI – MATERIALS MANAGEMENT
§ 3-5-205 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   The Administrative Services Director shall develop and administer procedures
governing:
   A.   The management of materials during their entire life cycle;
   B.   The acquisition and distribution of federal surplus materials;
   C.   The sale, lease, trade-in, or disposal of surplus, scrap, and salvage
materials; and
   D.   The transfer or trade-in of excess materials, surplus materials, and
fixed assets.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-206 DISPOSITION.
   A.   The City Council acts in all matters pertaining to the disposition of
surplus materials as provided by statute. The disposition of surplus materials
shall be as follows.
      1.   Surplus materials shall be disposed of as provided by law. Only
certified funds or cash shall be accepted for sales of surplus property.
      2.   Auctions shall be advertised in accordance with statutory
provisions. When making sales by auction, the solicitation shall specify all
terms and conditions of any sale.
      3.   Materials to be disposed of by trade-in to a vendor for credit on an
acquisition shall be subject to the same approval levels set forth for contract
approvals as in Subarticle I, §
3-5-3. For credit amounts under $1,000, the department director may approve;
from $1,000 to $3,000 the purchasing agent may approve; and any credit amount
exceeding $30,000, the City Council must approve.
   B.   Without public auction, by unanimous approval of the City Council,
property may be sold or leased or donated to any other duly constituted
governmental entity including the state, cities, towns or other counties; or
city property may be sold, leased, or donated to any charitable, social, or
benevolent nonprofit organization in or operating in this state.
   C.   A city using agency may acquire federal or state surplus property as
may be usable and necessary for public purposes. These acquisitions can only be
made by authorized department directors.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
SUBARTICLE XII – PROCUREMENT ETHICS
§ 3-5-220 EMPLOYEE ETHICS.
   A.   It is the policy of the Purchasing Office to promote the city's
reputation for courtesy, fairness, impartiality, integrity, service,
progressivism, economy, and government by law. The responsibility for
implementing this policy rests with each individual who participates in the
procurement process, including the using department and suppliers, as well as
purchasing personnel. The Purchasing Office adheres to the ethical standards as
set forth in State of Arizona Procurement Code.
   B.   Among the prescribed practices for city employees are the following:
      1.   No public employee having official responsibility for a procurement
transaction shall represent the city in that transaction when the employee
knows that:
         a.   The employee is contemporaneously employed by a bidder, offeror,
or contractor involved in the procurement transaction;
         b.   The employee, the employee's partner, or any member of the
employee's immediate family holds a position with a bidder, offeror, or
contractor such as officer, director, trustee or partner, has a personal and
substantial participation in the transaction, or owns or controls more than 5%
of the firm;
         c.   The employee, the employee's partner or any member of the
employee's immediate family has a pecuniary interest arising from the
transaction;
         d.   The employee, the employee's partner or any member of the
employee's immediate family is negotiating, or has an arrangement concerning
prospective employment with a bidder, offeror, or contractor;
         e.   No employee having official responsibility for a procurement
transaction shall solicit, demand, accept or agree to accept any payment, loan
subscription, advance deposit of money, services, entertainment or anything of
more than nominal value from any bidder, offeror, contractor, or subcontractor.
      2.   Employees may attend functions that are not limited exclusively to
city employees, i.e., an industry trade fair, or like function. Purchases made
directly from any city employee must be reviewed by the Finance Director and a
written conflict of interest statement must be submitted to the City Clerk to
be entered into the public record.
      3.   Any person involved in a transaction may request a written City
Attorney's opinion about the applicability of these provisions.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-221 CONFLICT OF INTEREST.
   A.   State Statute A.R.S. § 38-503 defines CONFLICT OF INTEREST, in part, as
follows:
Conflict of Interest........Any public officer or employee of a public agency
who has, or whose relative has, a substantial interest in any contract, sale,
purchase, or service to such public agency shall make known that interest in
the official records of the public agency and shall refrain from voting upon or
otherwise participating in any manner as an officer or employee in the
contract, sale, or purchase.
   B.   The mere employment of an individual simultaneously by the city and an
outside company that has a direct or indirect business relationship with the
city, in itself, establishes no conflict of interest.
   C.   A conflict of interest would arise if actions by the city employee
conferred a direct or indirect pecuniary or proprietary benefit on the city
employee or a relative by virtue of that person's connection with the outside
business. The law provides that when the potential for a conflict of interest
arises, the city employee must make his or her interest (or that of a relative)
known and refrain from taking any action or otherwise participating in any way
in the matter.
   D.   When a potential for conflict of interest arises, the city employee
must provide written notification to the City Clerk, identifying what
relationship exists that could be classified as a potential conflict. Should a
question arise pertaining to any potential conflict of interest in a purchasing
situation, consult with the Administrative Services Director or the City
Attorney's office.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-222 GRATUITIES.
   It is a breach of ethical standards for any person to offer, give, or agree
to give any employee or former employee, or for any employee or former employee
to solicit, demand, accept, or agree to accept from another person, a gratuity
or an offer of employment in connection with any decision, approval,
disapproval, recommendation, preparation of any part of a purchase request.
City employees shall not accept personal gifts from any past, current, or
potential supplier of goods or services to the city.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-223 USE OF CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
   It shall be a breach of ethical standards for employee or former employee to
knowingly use confidential information or actual or anticipated personal gain,
or for the actual or anticipated personal gain of any other person.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-224 PUBLIC ACCESS TO PROCUREMENT INFORMATION.
   Procurement information, which is not confidential information for actual or
anticipated personal gain, or for the actual or anticipated personal gain of
any other person.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-225 VENDOR ETHICS.
   City of Somerton requires vendors to also be held to certain ethical
requirements as follows:
   A.   No bidder, offeror, contractor, or subcontractor shall confer upon any
public employee having official responsibility for a procurement transaction
any payment, loan, subscription, advance, deposit of money, services, or
anything of more than nominal value, present or promised;
   B.   All bidders, offerors, contractors, or subcontractors shall submit with
their bid a disclosure of interest form to inform any personal interest of any
member of the City Council, City Manager, City Attorney, Finance Director,
purchasing agent, or the spouse of each official;
   C.   Failure to make the required disclosure may result in disqualification,
debarment, and suspension from bidding and recession of contracts;
   D.   No contractor or subcontractor shall give, demand, or receive from any
supplier, subcontractor, or competitors any bribe, kickback, or anything of
value in return for participation in a procurement transaction or agreeing not
to compete in a transaction; and
   E.   Architects or engineers employed by the city may not furnish building
materials, supplies or equipment for any structure or project on which they are
providing professional services. The city also does not accept bids or
proposals from consultants or bidders who have solely and directly prepared
specifications for a specific requirement, regardless of whether the
consultant/bidder was paid for the specification.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-226 FRAUD.
   An act of fraud is committed if an employee of the city negotiates a
personal procurement by fraudulent use of a city requisition number or purchase
order number. Fraud also occurs if an employee claims a purchase is on behalf
of City of Somerton when in fact the purchase was made solely for personal use.
A personal procurement from the State Contracts is also an offense subject to
prosecution. Fraud is subject to prosecution and employee discipline.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-227 PENALTY.
   Willful violation of the city's Procurement Ethics Code may result in
disciplinary action up to and including termination of employment.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-228 CITY ATTORNEY OPINION.
   City staff is encouraged to request assistance from the City Attorney's
Office whenever questions arise regarding the applicability of these
provisions.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
SUBARTICLE XIII – MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
§ 3-5-240 RECORDS RETENTION.
   A.   All procurement records shall be retained and disposed of by the city
in accordance with records retention guidelines and schedules issued by the
State of Arizona Department of Library, Archives and Public Records. If a
contract is funded in whole or in part by assistance from a federal agency,
then the records retention requirements of that granting agency shall be
followed. Defacing or changing records is expressly prohibited and will result
in disciplinary action. Records or documents are not to be removed from their
normal location unless there is proper authorization.
   B.   All determinations and other written records pertaining to a
solicitation, award, or performance of a contract shall be maintained by the
city in a bid file by originating departments and the City Clerk's office.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-241 CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
   Procurement information shall be a public record to the extent provided in
A.R.S. § 39-121 and shall be available to the public as provided in the
statute. Claims of confidentiality may be honored in limited circumstances to
the extent allowed under the law as an exception to the public records
requirements. Confidential information shall be designated as follows:
   A.   If a person believes that a bid, proposal, offer, specification, or
protest contains information that should be withheld, a statement advising the
purchasing agent of this fact shall accompany the submission and the
information shall be so identified wherever it appears.
   B.   The information identified by the person as confidential shall not be
disclosed if the purchasing agent makes a determination that disclosure should
not be made. The City Attorney's Office may be asked to assist in these
determinations.
   C.   Claims of confidentiality will be considered on a case-by-case basis.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-242 FEDERAL AND STATE PROCUREMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   Whenever federal or state grants projects are required to follow procurement
procedures different from these policies, those requirements shall be followed.
If either procedure can be followed, these polices shall prevail.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 3-5-243 LICENSING/CERTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   No contract or award shall be made for any amount to any entity which does
not comply with all licensing and certification requirements of the city,
county, or state. Examples include but are not limited to the following:
business license, contractors license, and with certificates of appropriate
insurance, i.e., workers' compensation, auto, liability, and the like.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
SUBARTICLE XIV – GLOSSARY OF PROCUREMENT TERMS
§ 3-5-255 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCELERATED PROCUREMENT. A procurement method used by commodities such as
fuel that must be obtained quickly due to significant shortages and/or short-
term price fluctuations.
   ADEQUATE EVIDENCE. More than mere accusation but less than substantial
evidence. Consideration shall be given to the amount of credible information
available, reasonableness in view of surrounding circumstances, corroboration,
and other inferences that may be drawn from the existence or absence of
affirmative facts.
   AMENDMENT EXTENSION. Amendment extensions are used when one agency needs to
continue a contract that would otherwise expire, but the contract has known
renewal provisions available. An amendment may be used to extend such a
contract for up to one year. These extensions ensure that services can continue
without interruption, but require the same procedure as a new contract.
   ARCHITECTURE/ENGINEERING SERVICES. Architecture and engineering services
specifically relate to the preparation of plans and specifications for
construction projects. This category does not include construction management
or construction management and bill contracts, nor does it include the
preparation of environmental studies.
   AWARD. This term refers to the right of a vendor to sign a contract with the
City of Somerton.
   BID.  An offer to furnish services in accordance with the request for
proposal, these general conditions, special instructions, and the
specifications.
   BID OFFER.  The form on which the bidder submits his or her bid.
   BIDDER. Any person, company, or corporation submitting a bid.
   BRAND NAME OR EQUAL SPECIFICATIONS.  A specification that uses one or more
manufacturers' names or catalog numbers to describe the standards of quality,
performance, and other characteristics needed to meet city requirements, and
that provides for the submission of equivalent products.
   BUDGET. The allocation of the city's money for particular uses. On an annual
basis, the City Council approves the uses of the city's money by breaking it
down into allocations for each department for particular uses within the
department.
   BY AGAINST PROCUREMENT. The process by which, as part of contract
administration, an agency obtains goods and services to fulfill its
requirements after a vendor defaults or fails to fulfill its contract
responsibilities.
   CHANGE ORDER.  A written modification or amendment of a contract used to
implement necessary changes to unforeseen or unanticipated conditions
discovered after the performance under the contract has begun. CHANGE ORDERS
may adjust price or time for performance under the original contract and may
include nonmaterial changes to the scope of the contract. CHANGE ORDERS must be
completed with the same formality as negotiation of the original contract
terms.
   COMPETITIVE SEALED BID. The most frequently used procurement method for
purchasing goods and construction and for standardized services. Contracts are
awarded to the responsible vendor that agrees to provide the goods or services
at the lowest price.
   COMPETITIVE SEALED PROPOSAL.  A procurement method used when an agency must
consider factors in addition to price such as the vendor's experience and
expertise. Also known as a request for proposal (RFP), it is most frequently
used when procuring services, professional services, and architecture/
engineering services.
   COMPETITIVENESS. A goal intended to ensure the responsible use of public
funds. It is achieved when multiple vendors compete contend for a contract, for
competitive sealed bids, request for proposals, and competitive innovative
procurements. This goal is achieved when agency receives three or more
responses. For small purchases, COMPETITIVENESS is deemed as soliciting a
minimum of ten vendors.
   CONCESSION. An income-generating contract for the private use of city-owned
property to serve a public purpose is a CONCESSION. Examples include pushcart,
recreational facilities such as golf courses and tennis courts, parking lots,
and the like. CONCESSIONS do not include franchises, revocable consents, or
leases.
   CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION. Any information which is available to an employee
only because of the employee's status as an employee of this city and is not a
matter of public knowledge or available to the public on request.
   CONFIRMING PURCHASE ORDER.  A retroactive contract registered by the
Administrative Services Director. After the contract start date.
   CONSTRUCTION. The process of building, altering, repairing, improving, or
demolishing any structure or building, or other improvements of any kind to any
real property, does not include the routine operations, routine repair, or
routine maintenance of existing structures, buildings, or real property.
   CONTRACT. Agreement in which the City of Somerton is a party. CONTRACTS may
take the form of a purchase order, or other instrument. CONTRACTS must be in
writing in order for the city to be legally committed to expend funds. Such
funds may be expended in exchange for goods, professional services, standard
services, and architect/engineering or construction. The city may also enter
into agreements to cooperate with other governmental entities through memoranda
of understanding.
   CONTRACTOR. Any person or business having a contract with the governmental
body.
   COOPERATIVE PURCHASING.  Procurement conducted by, or on behalf of, more
than one public procurement unit.
   DAYS. Calendar days, and shall be computed pursuant to A.R.S. § 1-243.
   DEBARMENT. Means an action taken by the city under section 805 to prohibit a
person from participating in city procurements.
   DEFAULT. Failure on behalf of a contractor to fulfill the requirements of
the contract commonly a result of poor performance, inability to perform,
unreasonable delays, loss of insurance or bond, or other deviation from the
contract.
   DEMONSTRATION METHOD. A short-term, carefully planned pilot exercise
designed to test and evaluate the feasibility and up to ability of an
innovative product, approach or technology. Not currently used by the city. At
the conclusion of the contract term, based on the document results of the
project, the agency determines whether to competitively acquire or to
discontinue the use of the product, approach, or technology.
   EMERGENCY PROCUREMENT. Method of procurement used to obtain goods and
services very quickly, and in many instances without competition when an agency
must address threats to public health or safety or provide a necessary service
on an emergency basis.
   FILED. Delivery to the City Clerk or the purchasing agent, whichever is
applicable; a time/date mark affixed to a document shall be determinative of
the time of delivery for purpose of filing.
   FINANCE DIRECTOR.
   FISCAL. A term which refers to financial matters.
   FISCAL YEAR.  The city's financial activity is established by virtue of an
annual budget. All expenditures made pursuant to that budget are based upon a
FISCAL YEAR, that is, 12 months established by legislative activity were local
rule. The FISCAL YEAR may or may not be the calendar year. July 1 through June
30.
   FRANCHISE. A contract that confers the right to occupy or use city property
such as streets and parks, to provide a public service such as
telecommunications and transportation services.
   GOODS.  A budget/fiscal category that includes the purchases of physical
items.
   GOVERNMENT TO GOVERNMENT PROCUREMENT. A method of procurement which allows
the city to obtain goods and/or services from another part, governmental and
succeed. In these cases, the accepted price terms and conditions achieved by
another other governmental agency are deemed to meet the public need for
competitiveness in the procurement process, intergovernmental purchase and Fast
track method that enables city agencies to buy goods or services using pre-
existing contracts between vendors and other government agencies.
   LINE ITEM APPROPRIATION. As part of the city's budget process, the City
Council provides funding directly to specific vendors such as a community-based
human services organization or other nonprofit group.
   NEGOTIATED ACQUISITION.  A procurement method used to obtain services when
only a few vendors are available to provide the goods and or services needed,
when there's limited time available to procure the necessary goods and
services, or when a competitive procurement process is otherwise not feasible.
This method is often used for a variety of litigation support services.
   NEGOTIATED ACQUISITION EXTENSION.  Amendments to an existing contract. It is
rarely used but is sometimes the only option to extend an on-going contract
when renewals have been used up or are unavailable. These extensions ensure
that services may continue uninterrupted and may extend the amount of time,
money, or both time and money allocated to complete a project. Extensions
require approval through the normal approval processes.
   NON-RESPONSIBLE. A vendor that lacks the business integrity, financial
capacity and/or ability to perform the requirements of a particular contract
will be determined by the agency to be a NON-RESPONSIBLE bidder/proposer and
thus eligible to be awarded a contract with the city. The vendor that is found
NON-RESPONSIBLE made appeal that determination as set out in the use rules.
   PRIME CONTRACTOR. Also referred to as a "contractor" or "general contractor"
in construction services industry, it refers to a company or an individual who
has entered into an agreement with the city to provide goods and services.
   PROCUREMENT. The city's purchasing process, which includes vendor selection,
payment, contract monitoring and administration, and evaluation of vendors.
   PROFESSIONAL SERVICES. A class of services that require an individual to
hold an advanced degree or have experience in a specialized field. Professional
services are usually procured through a request for proposals, where emphasis
is placed on the quality of the vendors approach, as the service is likely to
be highly individualized. Services of this type include: legal, management
consulting, information technology, accounting, auditing, actuarial,
advertising, health, architecture, construction management, and environmental
analysis.
   PROTEST.  Vendors that object to any aspect of a procurement and/or the
resulting word such as the qualifications of the winning vendor, may file a
vendor protest as set out above. This does not apply to accelerated
procurements, emergency procurements, or small purchases.
   PUBLIC HEARING. Public hearings are held in contract awards to make the
process transparent and to give the public an opportunity to comment on
proposed terms. The city conducts hearings on most contracts valued above
$30,000. Departments may cancel a PUBLIC HEARING if, after notice is published,
no member of the public indicates an interest in testifying.
   PURCHASE ORDER.
   RENEWAL CONTRACT. Procurement method used to continue operation of a
registered contract that includes one or more options to renew.
   REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS (RFP). See Competitive Sealed Proposals, above.
   REQUISITION. The process through which the city's fiscal agents accomplish
the following:
      1.   Encumber or hold funds to insure payment to the vendor on successful
completion of the contract;
      2.   Record all city contracts and agreements;
      3.   Track city payments and revenue associated with each contract or
agreement; or
      4.   Objects if there is evidence of corruption related to the
procurement process itself or with the selected vendor.
   RESPONSIBLE BIDDER OR PROPOSER.  A vendor that has the capability in all
respects to perform in full the contract requirements in the business integrity
and reliability that will assure good performance and justify the award of
public tax dollars.
   SMALL PURCHASE.  Method of procurement used for buying goods, services, and
construction valued at between $0 to $1,000.
   SOLE SOURCE CONTRACT.  A procurement method, which may only be used when one
vendor is available to provide the goods or services.
   SOLICITATION. A process of notifying potential vendors that an agency wishes
to receive bids or proposals for furnishing goods, services, or construction.
The process may include public advertising, mailing invitations for bids and
request for proposals, posting notices come into her delivery of telephone or
fax messages to prospective vendors.
   STANDARDIZED SERVICES. Standardized services typically do not require the
provider to have experience in a specialized field or hold an advanced degree.
The standard I services are clearly defined and highly commoditized:
procurements for the services are generally awarded based on the lowest price.
Examples include janitorial, collection, and food related services.
   SUBCONTRACTOR. An individual or entity that has entered into an agreement
with a contractor to provide goods and services required pursuant to a
contract.
   TIME. Mountain Standard Time.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
APPENDICES
APPENDIX A: DISCLOSURE OF RESPONSIBILITY STATEMENT
1.   List any convictions of any person, subsidiary or affiliate of the company
arising out of obtaining or attempting to obtain a public or private contract
or subcontract, or in the performance of the contract or subcontract.
2.   List any convictions of any person, subsidiary, or affiliate of this
company for offenses such as embezzlement, theft, fraudulent schemes, and the
like or any other offenses indicating a lack of business integrity or business
honesty which affects the responsibility of the contractor. (See procurement
policy §
3-5-126 for types of offenses.)
3.   List any convictions or civil judgments under state or federal antitrust
statutes.
4.   List any violations of contract provisions such as knowingly (without good
cause) to perform, or unsatisfactory performance, in accordance with the
specifications of a contract.
5.   List any prior suspensions or debarments by any governmental agency.
6.   List any contracts not completed on time.
7.   List any penalties imposed for time delays and/or quality of materials and
workmanship.
8.   List any documented violations of federal or state labor laws,
regulations, or standards, occupational safety and health rules.
I, ____________________________________, as _________________________________
Name of individual                Title and Authority
Of_____________________________________________, declare under oath that
Company Name
the above statements, including any supplemental responses attached hereto, are
true.
________________________________________
Signature
State of __________________________________
City of __________________________________
Subscribed and sworn to before me on this______________day of
___________________________
20______ by _________________________________representing him or herself to be
___________________________________of the company named herein.
__________________________________
Notary public
My Commission expires:
__________________________________
Residing at:
__________________________________
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
APPENDIX B: CONTRACTOR AFFIDAVIT
AFFIDAVIT BY CONTRACTOR CERTIFYING THAT THERE WAS NO COLLUSION IN BIDDING FOR
CONTRACT
STATE OF ARIZONA    )
                  ) ss
CITY OF:            )
____________________________________________________________________
   (Name of Company, Representative)
being first duly sworn, deposes and says:
That he or she is___________________________________ of
         (Title)
         __________________________________
         (Name of Company)
And that pursuant to § 112(C) of Title 23 U.S.C., he or she certifies as
follows: That neither he nor she nor anyone associated with the said
         __________________________________
         (Name of Company)
has, directly or indirectly entered into any agreement, participated in any
collusion or otherwise taken any action in restraint of free competitive
bidding for the bid for the: ________________________
By:
_______________________________________________________________________________
(Name of Individual/Representative)
Subscribed and sworn to before me this_________day of_____, 20____
Title:__________________________________
My Commission expires:___________________________________
(Notary Public)
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
APPENDIX C: VENDOR EVALUATION FORM
VENDOR EVALUATION FORM
Department Name: __________________________________
Vendor Name: __________________________________
Bid/RFP #: __________________________________
Contract Award Date: __________________________________
Type of Service Provided: __________________________________
Rate the Following Service Issues
 
Quality of Service                                4 3 2 1
Delivery Time of Goods or Services                4 3 2 1
Quality of Product or Service                     4 3 2 1
Responsiveness to Departmental Questions/Concerns 4 3 2 1
1 - Poor 2 - Fair 3 - Good 4 - Excellent
 
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
APPENDIX D: CHECK REQUEST
CITY OF SOMERTON
Form Number 105
(Rev. 03/93)
CHECK REQUEST
Payable To
 
 
ACCOUNT EXPLANATION AMOUNT
ACCOUNT EXPLANATION        AMOUNT
   TOTAL AMOUNT OF REQUE$T
 
REQUESTED BY:    DATE:
APPROVED BY    DATE / /
APPROVED BY    DATE / /
PREPARED BY    DATE / /
CHECK NUMBER:
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
APPENDIX E: CREDIT CARD POLICY AND PROCEDURES
Section
   Introduction
   General Guidelines
      Card issuance
      Account maintenance
      Card usage
      Preferred vendors vs. vendors not accepting visa
      Limitations and restrictions
      Lost or stolen cards
   Authorized Purchases
   Reconcilement and Payment
      Receipt retention/record log
      Reconcilement of purchases
      Disputed or fraudulent charges
   Sales and Use Tax
   Common Questions and Concerns
   Attachments
      
Attachment I: Cardholder User Agreement
      
Attachment II: Purchasing Card Account Maintenance Form
      
Attachment III: Preferred Vendor List
      
Attachment IV: Wells Fargo Bank Commercial Card Dispute Form
      
Attachment V: Declaration of Forgery or Unauthorized Use 
      
Attachment VI: Business Card Holder Agreement 
INTRODUCTION
Welcome to the WellsOne Commercial Card Program!
The purpose of the WellsOne Commercial Card Program is to streamline and
simplify the requisitioning, purchasing and payment process for small dollar
transactions. The program is designed to shorten the approval process and
reduce the paperwork of procurement procedures such as purchase orders, petty
cash, check requests and expense reimbursements. The goal of the program is to:
   - Reduce the cost of processing small dollar purchases
   - Receive faster delivery of required merchandise
   - Simplify the payment process
   - Provide cardholders with empowerment to choose!
This reference guide will provide you with the particulars of the program,
including general guidelines, reconcilement and record keeping procedures, and
customer service information. It is important to read the following information
carefully, as you will be responsible for adhering to the city-established
policy and procedures.
As with any new process, it is difficult to anticipate every question or issue
that may arise. The pilot phase is intended to surface procedures, issues or
hurdles that may be encountered in using the card. The feedback will give us an
opportunity to refine our policies and procedures.
If you have any additional questions, please contact your Department Head or
your card program administrators:
City of Somerton
110 N. State Avenue
PO Box 638
Somerton, AZ 85350
Gary Halford
Phone: 928-627-8866
Fax: 928-627-3794
Email: garyh@cityofsomerton.com
Gina Johannsen
Phone: 928-627-8866
Fax: 928-627-3794
Email: gjohannsen@cityofsomerton.com
Rita Valtierra
Phone: 928-627-8866
Fax: 928-627-3794
Email: ritav@cityofsomerton.com
GENERAL GUIDELINES
Card Issuance:
As a cardholder, you will be asked to complete a cardholder application form,
which will then be signed, by your Department Head and the Program
Administrator. By signing the application form, you have agreed to adhere to
the guidelines established in this article. Most importantly, you are the only
person entitled to use the card and the card is not to be used for personal
use. As each card is linked to a specific cost center and individual employee,
the card cannot be transferred from one employee to another.
Upon receipt of your WellsOne Commercial Card, you will need to activate the
account by calling the toll-free number printed on the card. For verification
purposes, you will be asked to provide a piece of information, such as the last
four digits of your Social Security Number. Although the card will be issued in
your name, your personal credit history will not affect your ability to obtain
a card. The city is responsible for payment of all purchases.
Account Maintenance:
If there's a need to change any information regarding your account, such as
mailing address or expense accounting code, please complete the Account
Maintenance Form (see
Attachment II) and forward to your Program Administrator. The only account
information you are able to change online is the email address and the
automatic deposit (ACH) information.
Card Usage:
The WellsOne Commercial Card can be used at any merchant that accepts Visa,
except as the city otherwise directs. It may be used for in-store purchases as
well as online, phone, fax or mail orders. There is no special terminal or
equipment needed by the Visa merchant to process a card transaction.
When using the card with merchants, please emphasize that an invoice must not
be sent as this may result in a duplicate payment. For online, phone, fax and
mail orders, please instruct the merchant to send a receipt only. This receipt
must be retained for your records. When possible, print a copy of the receipt
from the on-line vendor.
Preferred Vendors vs. Vendors Not Accepting Visa:
Please refer to
Attachment III for a listing of our preferred vendors. Whenever possible,
please be sure to use these vendors.
Not all of your suppliers will accept Visa. However, as card programs become
more and more popular, vendors will want to accommodate their customers by
accepting Visa as a method of payment. If you have a vendor who does not accept
Visa, please contact your Program Administrator. Your Administrator will work
with Wells Fargo Bank to communicate our desire, and the benefits, of accepting
Visa. Alternatively, you may advise the vendor to contact its local bank for
details of becoming a Visa member. It will be to our benefit, and the success
of the program, if as many suppliers as possible are Visa merchants.
Limitations and Restrictions:
Your program administrator has assigned a credit limit to your card where every
cardholder has a total monthly dollar limit assigned to his or her account. As
limitations vary by cardholder, please discuss the limit with your respective
Department Head. If you believe your monthly limit to be insufficient for your
requirements, and your Department Head agrees, your Department Head must
contact the Program Administrator to have your limit(s) increased.
The WellsOne Commercial Card Program also allows for merchant category
blocking. If a particular merchant category is blocked (e.g., jewelry stores),
and you attempt to use your card at such a merchant, your purchase will be
declined. Management has made an effort to ensure that the vendors/suppliers
used during the normal course of business are not restricted. If your card is
refused at a merchant where you believe it should have been accepted, you
should call the Wells Fargo Business Purchasing Service Center at 1 -800-932-
0036 to determine the reason for refusal. Depending on the result of your
inquiry, you may want to discuss the issue further with your Program
Administrator. He or she (Administrator) is empowered to modify the
restrictions on your use of the card.
IMPORTANT: All requests for changes in limitations and restrictions must be
made through your Department Head or the Program Administrator. Wells Fargo
Bank will change existing cardholder restrictions only after a request is
received from the Program Administrator.
Lost or Stolen Cards:
You are responsible for the security of your card and any purchases made on
your account. If you believe you have lost your card or that it has been
stolen, immediately report this information to Wells Fargo Bank Business
Purchasing Service Center (BPSC) at 800-932-0036. Immediately after reporting
to the BPSC, you must inform your Program Administrator. It is extremely
important to act promptly in the event of a lost or stolen card to avoid city
liability for fraudulent transactions.
As with a personal charge card, you will no longer be able to use the account
number after notifying the bank. A new card should be issued within 48 hours of
notice to Wells Fargo Bank.
AUTHORIZED PURCHASES
Purchases may include:
•    Office supplies and forms
•    Books and subscriptions
•    Computer supplies, e.g., software and diskettes
•    Day timers and calendars
•    Professional membership dues
•    Hardware and tools
•    Spare parts
•    Miscellaneous items, e.g., videotapes
•    Congratulatory or sympathy flowers
•    Uniform rentals/cleaning
•    Courier/overnight deliveries
•    Mobile phones and pager bills
•    Travel and entertainment expenses
•    City vehicle expenses
Please refer to the attached preferred vendor listing. Whenever possible,
please purchase merchandise and/or materials from these vendors.
As with any city purchase, the card is not to be used for any product, service
or with any merchant considered to be inappropriate for city funds.
Failure to comply with the above guidelines for authorized purchases under the
WellsOne Commercial Card Program may result in disciplinary action,
cancellation of your card privileges, and possible termination of employment.
RECONCILEMENT AND PAYMENT
Reconcilement and Payment:
Unlike personal credit cards, the WellsOne Commercial Card Program is handled
as city liability. Your personal credit history has not been taken into account
when a card has been issued in your name.
The Accounts Payable Department is responsible for paying the Program invoice
(s) each month. You are not responsible for payment under your account.
At the end of a statement period, you will be notified via email that it is
time to review your card statement. You will access the Commercial Card Expense
Reporting tool via the Internet to review your statement. The statement will
reflect the transaction date, posting date, supplier/merchant name and the
total amount of the purchase. You have the ability to reconcile your account at
any time.
You are responsible for the following:
-   Retaining all receipts for items purchased under the program.
-   Ensuring all transactions posted are legitimate purchases made by yourself
on behalf of the city.
Receipt Retention/Record Log:
It is a requirement of the program that you keep all receipts for goods and
services purchased. For orders placed via phone, fax or mail, or online, you
must request a receipt, detailing merchandise price, sales/use tax, freight,
etc., be included with the goods mailed/shipped. (Note: a merchant should not
reject this request, as it is a Visa policy). It is extremely important to
request and retain purchase receipts, as this is the only original
documentation that shows whether sales tax has been paid.
To assist you in retaining receipts for purchases made over the phone, please
create a phone and internet purchase record log. Since standard reimbursement
policies require retention of receipts or other proof of purchase, record
keeping is not an extraordinary requirement.
As card records will be audited from time to time, it is essential to adhere to
the above record keeping guidelines.
Reconcilement of Purchases:
It is your responsibility, immediately upon receipt of your statement to check
it to ensure all the transactions posted are legitimate transactions made by
yourself, mark transactions for which receipts will be attached, and attach
line item detailed point of sale receipts or delivery invoices. Other optional
functions such as splitting transactions, adding descriptions, marking
transactions as personal, and reclassifying expenses can be performed using the
Commercial Card Expense Reporting tool. All of the available functions will be
part of your initial training and can be referenced in the Cardholder Quick
Reference Guide. If everything is in order, you will mark the statement as
reviewed. Once your statement has been marked as reviewed, an email will be
issued to your Department Head for his or her approval. Follow city procedures
for forwarding the receipts to your Department Head. Please make copies for
your records.
Disputed or Fraudulent Charges:
If there is a discrepancy between your record log and your statement, it is
imperative that the issue is addressed immediately! Depending on the type of
discrepancy, you will need to contact the merchant or complete the online
dispute form to resolve the disputed transaction.
If you believe the merchant has charged you incorrectly or there is an
outstanding quality or service issue, you must first contact the merchant and
try to resolve the error or problem. If you are able to resolve the matter
directly with the merchant, and the error involved an overcharge, a credit
adjustment should be requested and will appear on your next statement. Note:
The item should be highlighted on your record log as a reminder to verify that
correct credit has been received.
If the merchant disagrees that an adjustment is necessary, you will complete
the online dispute form. The details of the disputed transaction will be
entered online and followed up on by Wells Fargo Bank.
Wells Fargo Bank must receive any charge dispute within 60 days of the
transaction date. While pending resolution, Wells Fargo Bank will credit the
city's account for the amount of the disputed transaction. Although Wells Fargo
Bank acts as the arbitrator in any dispute, you should never assume that a
dispute will be resolved in your favor.
If the dispute is not resolved to your satisfaction, and you believe the
merchant has unfairly treated you, please notify your Department Head with the
relevant details. If the merchant is one of our preferred vendors, our
purchasing department may take further action.
Any fraudulent charge (i.e., a charge appearing which was not authorized by
you) must be reported immediately to your Program Administrator. Prompt
reporting of any such charge will help to prevent the city from being held
responsible.
SALES AND USE TAX
Merchants are required by tax authorities to include the applicable sales or
use tax at the time of purchase. The amount of tax is dependent on a variety of
factors including the state, country, and city where the goods are purchased.
All merchandise not purchased for resale should include the applicable sales
tax.
Out-of-state purchases, where sales tax has not been charged, should accrue the
applicable use tax.
If your purchases are usually tax-exempt, you will be required to provide
merchants with the necessary forms for non-taxable goods or services. Your
program may require that you have two cards, one for tax-exempt and one for
taxable items. Questions regarding this policy and any other questions
concerning tax issues should be addressed to your Program Administrator.
COMMON QUESTIONS AND CONCERNS
•    Why did the city decide to participate in a Commercial Card Program?
Like most companies today, we are exploring ways to streamline processes and
reduce costs. Frequently the expenses incurred to process a small dollar
purchase can run as high as the price of the item itself.
With a commercial card, many of the typical purchasing steps should be
eliminated including generating a requisition, preparing a purchase order,
matching a packing slip to a purchase order, matching invoices with purchasing
requisitions, individual payments of invoices, and the like.
•    What is the procedure when I pay for something with my commercial card?
Essentially, the process is the same as when using your personal credit card.
You must always ask for a receipt for your records, particularly for online,
phone, fax and mail orders.
•    Are there any restrictions associated with the use of my card?
Yes, in addition to our city policy stating the type of products you can buy
and our preferred vendor list, other controls and limits may be placed on your
card including:
•    Monthly dollar limit
•    Daily dollar limit
•    Per transaction dollar limit
•    "Blocked" merchant categories
Please see your Department Head or Program Administrator for your specific
restrictions.
•    How will I know if I have exceeded my monthly limit?
You can check you balance and expenditures online at any time. You may also
call the toll-free Wells Fargo Bank Customer Service number on the back of your
card.
•    What should I do if a supplier does not accept the WellsOne Commercial
Card?
Please contact your Program Administrator and provide him or her with the
supplier's name, address and phone number.
•    How will I know if the city is getting billed correctly for the purchases
I have made?
You will be able to check all transactions online at any time. You will also
review your statements at the end of each period. This statement is for your
review only and allows you to reconcile your purchases. You must review the
statement in a timely manner, as any disputed or fraudulent transactions must
be reported to Wells Fargo Bank in a timely manner.
•    How will my monthly commercial card bills be paid?
You are not responsible for the payment of your commercial card bills. The
monthly statement you receive is for your review and reconcilement only.
Accounts Payable will make one monthly payment to Wells Fargo Bank covering
expenses for all city employees using the card.
•    Who in our city may I talk to if I have questions going forward?
We have designated the following individual(s) as Program Administrators) (PA).
Administrative Services Director, the PA should be contracted for any questions
you have regarding limits, usage and other issues.
Only the PA has the authority to change any existing information or
restrictions to a cardholder's account.
•    What should I do if I have a problem associated with something I bought
with my WellsOne Commercial Card?
Please refer to the "Disputed or Fraudulent Charges" section of this guide for
complete details. It is extremely important that you address these items
immediately.
•    Once I receive the card, can I begin using it immediately?
Once you receive your card, you will be instructed to call Wells Fargo Bank's
toll-free number and provide certain information (e.g., Social Security Number
or other meaningful data) to activate the card. This procedure ensures a secure
card issuance process and helps to prevent fraud.
•    What should I do if my card is lost or stolen?
It is extremely important to call Wells Fargo Bank's Customer Service toll-free
number (1-800-932-0036) immediately in the event your card is lost or stolen.
You must also notify your Program Administrator.
•    Can another employee utilize my card for purchases?
Each WellsOne Commercial Card will be embossed with the individual employee's
name. The employee is responsible for the proper use of his or her card. At no
time should another individual utilize your card.
•    Can the WellsOne Commercial Card be used throughout the United States?
Yes, the WellsOne Commercial Card is accepted worldwide. Purchases can be made
in any currency and billed in U.S. Dollars.
•    What should I do if I need to change my monthly or single purchase limits?
You may request a credit limit change online under the Personal Profile tab or
contact your Program Administrator.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
APPENDIX E, ATTACHMENT I: CARDHOLDER USER AGREEMENT
You are being entrusted with a City of Somerton purchasing credit card, issued
by Wells Fargo Bank. The card is provided to you based on your need to operate
locally on a daily basis and to purchase materials for the city. It is not an
entitlement nor reflective of title or position. The card may be revoked at any
time without your permission. Your signature below indicates that you have read
and will comply with the terms of this agreement.
1.    I understand that I will be making financial commitments on behalf of the
City of Somerton and will strive to obtain the best value for the city.
2.    I have read and will follow the Purchasing Card Policies and Procedures.
Failure to do so could be considered a misappropriation of City of Somerton
funds. Failure to comply with this Agreement may result in either revocation of
my use privileges or other corrective action, up to and including termination.
3.    I understand that under no circumstances will I use the Purchasing Card
to make personal purchases, either for myself or for others. Using the card for
personal charges could be considered misappropriation of city funds and could
result in corrective action, up to and including termination of employment.
4.    I agree that should I violate the terms of this Agreement and use the
Purchasing Card for personal use, the City of Somerton shall have the right to
deduct any amounts owed, including but not limited to charges incurred from
collection agencies, internal administration costs, court costs, etc, from my
paycheck or final paycheck. The laws of the state of Arizona shall govern the
enforce ability of this agreement.
5.    The Purchasing Card is issued in my name. I will not allow any other
person to use the card. I am considered responsible for any and all charges
against the card.
6.    The Purchasing Card is city property. As such, I understand that I may be
periodically required to comply with internal control procedures designed to
protect City of Somerton assets. This may include being asked to produce the
card to validate its existence and account number.
7.    If the card is lost or stolen, I will immediately notify Wells Fargo Bank
by telephone at 800-932-0036 and the Program Administrator.
8.    I will receive a monthly statement, which will report all purchasing
activity during the statement period. Since I am responsible for all charges
(but not for payment) on the card, I will reconcile the statement each month,
make any coding changes to the expenses if needed, and resolve any
discrepancies by either contacting the merchant or Wells Fargo Bank myself.
9.    I agree to surrender the Purchasing Card immediately upon termination of
employment, whether for retirement, voluntary, or involuntary reasons.
                                                                                   
Employee Name (Print)    Last 8 Digits of Card Number
                                                            
Employee Signature       Date
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
APPENDIX E, ATTACHMENT II: PURCHASING CARD ACCOUNT MAINTENANCE FORM
Type of Request (Circle One):
A.    New Account    E.    Staff Relocation - New GL:
                                          
B.    Address Change    F.    Temporary Increase, Amount:
                                      
C.    Account Closure       Reason:
                                                                       
D.    Name Change          Date:
                                                                    
            G.   Single Transaction Increase:
                                       
            H.   Other: Describe
                                                   
To Add a New Account (Request "A"):
1. Circle "New Account under Type of Request Above"
2. Complete the section under "Card Information"
To Change Information on an Existing Account (all Other requests):
1.    Indicate Type of Request Above
2.    Fill in Last 8 Digits of Account Number:
                                                 
3.    Fill In Current Name on Card:
                                                              
4.    Complete only the Fields to be Changed in Card
Information Section:
                                                                                                                 
Name (24 Characters) Embossed on Card   Last 5 Digits of Card Holder's Number
                                                                                                                 
Address (36 Characters Maximum)      Job Title
                                                                                                                 
City (25 Characters Maximum)      Dept/GL Information
                                                
State (2 Characters)      Zip Code
Authorization:
                                                                           
Employee Signature          Date
                                                                           
Approving Director Signature      Date
                                                                           
Program Administrator Signature   Date
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
APPENDIX E, ATTACHMENT III: PREFERRED VENDORS LIST
See Program Administrator for updated vendors list.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
APPENDIX E, ATTACHMENT IV: WELLS FARGO BANK COMMERCIAL CARD DISPUTE FORM
   Wells Fargo must receive transaction dispute within 60 days of posting to
your account.
   Attn: Dispute and Loss Specialist
Date:                                         
Company Name:                                               City of Somerton
                                               
Account Number:
                                                                                                                      
Transaction Date:                     Amount:
                                                                               
Merchant Description:
                                                                                                                 
Please take a moment and check the appropriate statement that validates your
dispute. Please attach any supporting documentation that validates your
dispute, such as: credit memos, letter to merchants, sales slips or proof of
payments.
______I certify that the transaction disputed was not made by me or the person
authorized by me to use the card, nor were the goods or services represented by
this transaction received by myself or a person authorized by me.
______Although I did engage in the above transaction, I am disputing the entire
charge, or a portion in the amount of $________. I have contacted the merchant
and requested a credit to my account for the reason explained in the attached
letter.
______The enclosed sales slip for $_________ appeared on my statement as
$_________.
______The enclosed credit memo:_________ has not posted to my account OR was
listed as a purchase on my statement/activity report.
______I did not receive the service and/or merchandise. I have contacted the
merchant and they have not resolved my dispute. I expected to receive the
merchandise/services on  / / .
______I have already paid for the transactions shown above by: ______ check
______ cash
_______ money order _______ other credit card.
                                                                                                 
Your Signature       Date       Phone Number
Please return this form immediately. We appreciate your cooperation and urge
you to contact us at 800-932-0036, if you have any questions. Fax completed
form to 415-975-6635.
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
APPENDIX E, ATTACHMENT V: DECLARATION OF FORGERY OR UNAUTHORIZED USE
Re: Wells Fargo WellsOne Commercial Card
Account Number:                                        
I,                                         , have reported that my above
numbered card or account (please check and complete applicable section):
_____   With an expiration date of __________________ was not received by me.
_____   Was discovered missing on ________________________ .
_____   Was stolen on ______________, at ________________.
   I have notified the                              police, who took report
#_______________.
_____   May have been used without my authorization, though valid card was in
my possession at all times.
_____   Additional information enclosed on separate sheet.
I last used the said card on                    , 20      in the city of
                                       .
Any duplicate of this card has been destroyed.
The transaction(s) listed below or on the attached sheet and/or transaction
made after the date of the last usage were not made by me or by a person acting
with my authorization. I received no benefit whatsoever from such use. I
further authorize you to accept my telephone verification of any subsequent
transaction(s).
TRANSACTION DESCRIPTION       TRANSACTION DATE       AMOUNT
                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                           
I declare under penalty of perjury that the foregoing is true and correct, and
I will testify, declare, depose or certify to the truth hereof before any
competent tribunal, officer, or person in any case now or hereafter pending in
connection with the matters contained within this declaration.
                                                                                                       
Executed at (City/County and State)       Date
                                        
Signature of Cardholder
                                                                                                                           
Signature of Other Authorized User       Signature Of Other Authorized User
STATE OF ARIZONA    {'}'}
                  {'}'}ss.
County of Yuma          {'}'}
SUBSCRIBED AND SWORN before me this_______ day of__________, 20___ by
                                        .
Notary Public
My commission expires:                                        .
(Res. 2008-011, passed 2-19-2008)
APPENDIX E, ATTACHMENT VI: BUSINESS CARDHOLDER AGREEMENT
Policy:
Credit cards are issued at the discretion of the City of Somerton to City
Council members and employees who are granted a formal delegation purchasing
authority. Delegation of the City of Somerton purchasing authority governs the
use of the credit card as a tool for purchasing materials and services for less
than $2,500. The cardholder agrees to comply with all applicable city policies
and procedures and this Cardholder agreement. When signed and accepted, this
form acts to assign the formal delegation of purchase authority to a current
city employee.
Compliance with Policy, Violations and Consequences:
Employee violations to this agreement or to any policy regarding the purchase
of goods or services will be investigated and may result in either one or more
of the following actions: written warning, revocation of credit card
privileges, cancellation of delegation of purchasing authority, disciplinary
action, and termination and/or criminal prosecution. Human error and
extraordinary circumstances may be taken into consideration when investigating
any violation to this agreement.
Employee violations to this agreement or to any policy regarding the purchase
of goods or services will be investigated and may result in either one or more
of the following actions: written warning, revocation of credit card
privileges, cancellation of delegation of purchasing authority and/or
termination as a city employee. Human error and extraordinary circumstances may
be taken into consideration when investigating any violation to this agreement.
The Administrative Services Director has the authority to investigate and to
determine whether a violation of procurement policy has occurred, and to
recommend actions that may be taken because of such determinations. The City of
Somerton will consider the facts and circumstances of each incident, and will
take action as deemed appropriate.
Credit Card violations include but are not limited to:
   •   Purchase of items for personal use
   •   Purchase of items in violation of city policy
   •   Use of the credit card for cash advances
   •   Exceeding bank credit line limit
   •   Use of the credit card for purchase of more than $2,500 by splitting
purchases into more than one transaction
   •   Failure to return the credit card when an employee is reassigned,
terminated or upon request
   •   Failure to turn in packing slips, receipts or other backup documentation
to the Accounts Payable Clerk within ten days of the request from Accounts
Payable
Ownership and Cancellation of the Credit Card:
The credit card remains property of the Bank. It may not be transferred to,
assigned to, or used by anyone other than the designated Cardholder. The
Cardholder is accountable for the activity on the card. The bank or the city
may suspend or cancel Cardholder privileges at any time for any reason. The
Cardholder will surrender the credit card upon request to Administrative
Services Director or any authorized agent of the Bank.
Spending Limits:
Each credit card has a pre-set limit of $2,500 (including shipping, handling
and tax) that may not be exceeded under any circumstances.
Receipts:
It is the Cardholder's responsibility to obtain transaction receipts from the
merchant each time the credit card is used. Individual transaction receipts are
to be attached to periodic statements and submitted to Accounts Payable.
Disputed Items:
It is the Cardholder's responsibility to follow-up on any erroneous charges,
returns or adjustments to ensure proper credit is given on subsequent
statements.
Protecting the Credit Card:
The credit card is valuable property which requires proper treatment by the
Cardholder to protect it from misuse by unauthorized parties.
Validation and Safekeeping:
Sign the credit card immediately upon receipt. The credit card should always be
treated with the same care as personal credit cards, bankcards, cash and
checks. Keep your card(s) in an accessible, but secure location. When using the
credit card for internet purchases, cardholders should ensure that the site
utilizes industry recognized encryption transmission tools.
When the expiration date is passed and/or after you have received a new credit
card, cut the old credit card in half and dispose of it. Make sure the credit
card is returned to you after each charge and verify that the returned credit
card has your name on it.
Lost or Stolen Credit Cards:
If the credit card is lost or stolen, contact the Bank's 24-hour toll-free
number immediately and the Administrative Services Director.
Signed This Date:                             
                                                                                                                                               
Please Print             Title/Position
                                                        
Signature
(Res. 2008-018, passed 4-15-2008)
Click_here_to_view_Attachments_I-VI_in_a_PDF_document.
CHAPTER 4: POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS
      Article
         
4-1.   POLICE DEPARTMENT
         
4-2.   FIRE DEPARTMENT
         
4-3.   ADOPTION OF THE UNIFORM FIRE CODE
ARTICLE 4-1: POLICE DEPARTMENT
Section
   
4-1-1   Created; composition
   
4-1-2   Appointment of officers
   
4-1-3   Compensation of officers
   
4-1-4   Departmental rules and regulations
   
4-1-5   Duties of Police Department
   
4-1-6   Answering calls outside the city
§ 4-1-1 CREATED; COMPOSITION.
   There is hereby created a Police Department for the city which shall consist
of a Chief of Police, and as many police officers as may, from time to time, be
deemed necessary by the Council for the safety and good order of the city.
§ 4-1-2 APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS.
   The Chief of Police shall be appointed by the City Manager, whose
appointment shall be confirmed by the Council, and shall serve at the pleasure
of the City Manager on such terms and conditions as may be approved by the
Council. The Chief of Police shall be subject to the direction of the City
Manager. The City Manager shall provide for the appointment of as many police
officers as may from time to time be deemed necessary for the safety and good
order of the city.
(Ord. 2018-002, passed 8-7-2018)
§ 4-1-3 COMPENSATION OF OFFICERS.
   The Chief of Police and the police officers of the city shall be compensated
as determined by the City Manager. The Chief of Police shall not receive any
perquisites, commissions, or compensations for his or her services as Chief of
Police, City Marshal, or Collector of Taxes, except as the City Manager may
prescribe.
(Ord. 2018-002, passed 8-7-2018)
§ 4-1-4 DEPARTMENTAL RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Police Department shall be operated and managed in accordance with any
departmental rules and regulations as may, from time to time, be adopted by the
Council.
§ 4-1-5 DUTIES OF POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   It is the duty of the Police Department, under the direction of the Chief of
Police, to:
   A.   Enforce this code and the statutes of the state within jurisdictional
limits, as conferred by law, and to arrest and charge the violators thereof;
   B.   Deliver any persons who may be confined in the jail, upon conviction of
a crime committed under the jurisdiction of the Magistrate Court, to any
authorized officer of the city who shall at any time demand the prisoners;
   C.   Render the account of the Police Department, its duties, and receipts
as may be required by the City Manager or Council, and keep records of the
office open to inspection by the City Manager or Council at any time;
   D.   Direct traffic and ensure the orderly flow thereof, and investigate and
make reports of traffic accidents;
   E.   Inspect and ascertain the condition of traffic-control devices of every
description which have been erected within the city on the authority of the
Council, and to notify the appropriate department of any defects found therein;
and
   F.   Perform any additional duties as may be required by the City Manager.
(Ord. 2018-002, passed 8-7-2018)
§ 4-1-6 ANSWERING CALLS OUTSIDE THE CITY.
   The members of the Police Department of the city are duly authorized to
answer calls for aid and assistance beyond the corporate limits of the city,
pursuant to mutual aid agreements and state statutes.
ARTICLE 4-2: FIRE DEPARTMENT
Section
   
4-2-1   Created; composition
   
4-2-2   Departmental rules and regulations
   
4-2-3   Compensation
   
4-2-4   Appointment, powers, and duties of Chief
   
4-2-5   Appointment and duties of firefighters/EMS personnel
   
4-2-6   Entry upon adjacent property
   
4-2-7   Equipment
   
4-2-8   Providing fire protection outside the city
   
4-2-9   Acknowledgment of right-of-way
   
4-2-10   Alarms
   
4-2-11   Orders of Fire Chief
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see A.R.S. § 9-240(B)(7)
§ 4-2-1 CREATED; COMPOSITION.
   There is hereby created a Fire and Emergency Medical Service Department
(Fire Department) for the city. It will consist of a Chief and as many other
employees as may be deemed necessary by the City Council.
§ 4-2-2 DEPARTMENTAL RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Fire Department shall be operated and managed in accordance with any
departmental rules and regulations as may, from time to time, be adopted by the
Council.
§ 4-2-3 COMPENSATION.
   The Fire Chief and the firefighters/EMS personnel shall be compensated as
may be determined by the Council.
§ 4-2-4 APPOINTMENT, POWERS, AND DUTIES OF CHIEF.
   The Chief of the Fire Department, as a department head, shall be appointed
by the Manager and concurred in by the Council. The duties of the Fire Chief
shall be as indicated in the appropriate job description and include the duty
to enforce the adopted fire codes.
§ 4-2-5 APPOINTMENT AND DUTIES OF FIREFIGHTERS/EMS PERSONNEL.
   The appointment of firefighters/EMS personnel shall be as approved by
Council. Firefighters/EMS personnel shall be subject to supervision by the Fire
Chief or his or her officers.
§ 4-2-6 ENTRY UPON ADJACENT PROPERTY.
   It is lawful for any firefighter, acting under the direction of the Chief or
another officer in command, to enter upon the premises adjacent to or in the
vicinity of any building or other property that is on fire for the purpose of
extinguishing the fire, and no person shall hinder, resist, or obstruct any
firefighter in the discharge of his or her duty as hereinbefore provided.
Penalty, see
Article 1-8
§ 4-2-7 EQUIPMENT.
   The Department shall be equipped with the apparatus and other equipment as
may be required from time to time to maintain its efficiency and properly
protect life and property from fire. Recommendations concerning apparatus and
equipment needed shall be made by the Chief and, after approval by the Council,
the apparatus and equipment shall be purchased in accordance with standard city
purchasing procedures. No person shall use any fire apparatus or equipment for
any private purpose, nor shall any person willfully take away or conceal any
article used in any way by the Department. No person shall enter any place
where the fire apparatus is housed or handle any apparatus or equipment
belonging to the Department unless accompanied by, or having special permission
of, an officer or authorized member of the Department.
Penalty, see
Article 1-8
§ 4-2-8 PROVIDING FIRE PROTECTION OUTSIDE THE CITY.
   A.   The Council may enter into agreements or contracts to furnish fire
protection outside the city or enter into mutual aid agreements.
   B.   The Fire Department is authorized to render firefighting service
pursuant to the terms of those agreements or contracts.
§ 4-2-9 ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   All motor equipment of the Department shall have right-of-way over all other
traffic when responding to an alarm. No unauthorized vehicle shall follow
within 600 feet of any apparatus belonging to the Department. No person shall
park any vehicle, or otherwise cause any obstruction to be placed, within ten
feet of the entrance to any fire station or other place where fire apparatus is
stored, or within 15 feet of any fire hydrant. No person shall drive any
vehicle over a fire hose, except upon specific orders from the Chief or other
officer in charge where the hose is used.
Penalty, see
Article 1-8
§ 4-2-10 ALARMS.
   It is unlawful for any person knowingly to turn in or cause to be turned in
a false alarm.
Penalty, see
Article 1-8
§ 4-2-11 ORDERS OF FIRE CHIEF.
   It is unlawful for any firefighter/EMS personnel or citizen to refuse to
obey an order issued by the Fire Chief pursuant to his or her authority.
(Ord. 202, passed 5-22-1991)
ARTICLE 4-3: ADOPTION OF THE UNIFORM FIRE CODE
Section
   
4-3-1   Adoption; generally
   
4-3-2   Amendments
Cross-reference:
   Similar provisions, see §
7-1-1
§ 4-3-1 ADOPTION; GENERALLY.
   That certain document known as "NFPA-1, Fire Code 2012" including Annexes
"A", "B", "D", "E", and "G" published by the National Fire Protection
Association, three copies of which are on file in the office of the City Clerk,
which document was made public by Resolution No. 2016-012 of the city, together
with Ordinance No. 2016-003 which lists certain amendments, is hereby referred
to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this section.
(Ord. 290, passed 11-2-2004; Ord. 2016-003, passed 9-20-2016)
§ 4-3-2 AMENDMENTS.
   A.   Generally. This edition of NFPA-1, the Uniform Fire Code, adopted by §
4-3-1, is hereby amended, altered, and changed in the following respects.
Please note, the section numbers that follow are the reference sections found
in NFPA-1.
   B.   Chapter 1.
      1.   1.3.1. Application. Is hereby amended by the addition of the
following sentence: "All construction and/or alterations of a building, which
require a building permit, except for fire sprinkler and fire alarm systems
shall comply with the adopted building code of the City of Somerton."
      2.   1.3.2 Reference Standards. Is hereby amended as follows: "When
reference is made to the Building Code, it shall mean the most recent Building
Code adopted by the City of Somerton."
      3.   1.3.8 Conflicts. Is hereby amended as follows: "Repairs,
renovations, alterations, reconstruction, change of occupancy, and additions to
buildings shall conform with the adopted building code of the jurisdiction
except for repairs, renovation, alteration and reconstruction of fire sprinkler
and fire alarms. Those activities shall be regulated by the fire code adopted
by this ordinance."
      4.   1.7.10 Plans and Specifications. Is hereby amended by the addition
of the following paragraph: "All plans, specifications, and calculations shall
be sealed by a registrant licensed to practice in the state of Arizona.
Calculation sheets for fire sprinkler systems shall be submitted on the same
size paper as the layout drawings and made a permanent part of the submitted
design drawings."
      5.   1.10.1.1 Establishment of Board of Appeals. Is hereby amended by
striking the entire paragraph and replacing it with the following: "Whenever
reference is made to the "Board of Appeals" in the City Fire Code, it shall
mean the City of Somerton "Development Review Committee." Whenever the chief of
the fire department shall disapprove an application or refuses to grant license
or permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the code do
not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code has been misconstrued
or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal the decision of the chief of
the fire department to the "Development Review Committee", as established and
referred to in this Chapter 1 of this code; within thirty (30) days from the
date of the decision."
      6.   1.12 Permits and Approvals. The following shall be added to this
section.
         a.   1.12.2.5 Fees and Charges. "All "activity" permits required by
the fire code shall be subject to the table of fees. A fee in accordance with
the following schedule shall be paid to the City of Somerton at the time of
application for: (1) an installation or removal; (2) an activity permit; (3)
other service or special inspection. These fees are not charges for normal
business inspections but are used in the event that there is a change in
occupancy, addition or changes to occupancy during the business license year or
if a State mandated inspection is required beyond the normal business
inspection which occurs as a result of business license renewal. Failure to
apply for necessary permits or service can result in a double charge for such.
Fees are payable upon permit application."
Table 1.12.2.5
Activity Permit Fee Schedule:
Table 1.12.2.5
Activity Permit Fee Schedule:
Carnivals and fairs                      $66.00
Cutting and welding operations           $33.00
Display fireworks                        $66.00
Exhibit and trade shows                  $66.00
Explosives or blasting                   $100.00
Fuel tank installation or removal        $66.00
Liquefied petroleum gas installation     $66.00
Installation less than 500 gallons       $33.00
Membrane structures, tents, and canopies
   Permanent or temporary             $33.00
Open burning                             $66.00
Pyrotechnics before a proximate audience $100.00
Torch applied roofing operations         $66.00
Fire inspections mandated by state for licensing
   Hazardous work                     $66.00
   Day care-commercial                $100.00
   Day care-home based                $33.00
   Adult care-commercial              $66.00
   Adult care-home based              $33.00
Fire sprinkler alterations   1-25 head$33.00
            26-50 heads      $66.00
Fire alarm         1-10 devices $33.00
            11-25 devices    $66.00
            26-50 devices    $132.00
 
         b.   1.12.2.6 Standard Hourly Fee. "This is a special fee should there
be a need for special service or re-inspections. This standard hourly fee is
not a fee in addition to permit fees listed above.
      a.   After normal working hours: There shall be a standard hourly fee of
thirty three dollars ($33.00), with a one-hour minimum, charged for all
special, after-hours service, inspections and plan review work. This is
provided to accommodate the developer who may need a higher level of service
and is willing to pay an additional fee for that service.
      b.   Special services: In addition, the standard hourly fee is
established for special requests for service such as the following: a review
for the use of alternate methods, consultation, fire watch, stand-by service,
and hydrant flow testing.
      c.   Re-inspections: Another application for the standard hourly fee is
for the commercial fire inspection program. There will be no charge for the
initial annual commercial fire inspection and one follow-up, however, should
the business require more than one follow-up re-inspection that business shall
be charged at the standard hourly fee with a half-hour minimum charge for each
additional re-inspection."
      7.   1.14.1 Plan Review. Is hereby amended by the addition of the
following sentence: "All buildings required by the Code to have Fire Sprinklers
and Alarm Plans, shall not be allowed to defer said plans; but shall include
such plans with the initial submittal of all building plans."
   C.   Chapter 2 Reference Publications, 2.2 NFPA Publications. Is hereby
amended as follows: "Any references to the 2003 Edition of NFPA 5000 shall be
changed to name the most currently adopted Building Code, which is the official
building code of reference."
   D.   Chapter 3 Definitions, 3.3.125.1 Combustible Liquid. Is hereby amended
by addition of the following paragraph: "NOTE: Storage and use of combustible
liquids with a flash point under 141 degrees F. in outdoors areas and areas
without climatic controls will be treated as Class 1-C flammable liquids
throughout the code."
   E.   Chapter 4 General Requirements, 4.5.7 Changes of Occupancy. Is hereby
amended as follows: "In order to determine when a change of occupancy will
initiate a fire sprinkler retrofit, the following will be added to sub-section
(1): (1) For the purpose of determining if a change of occupancy will be a more
hazardous operation requiring the retrofit of a fire sprinkler system, the 2003
Edition of the International Existing Building Code, Table 812.4.1 will be
referenced. See Chapter 10.3.4."
   F.   Chapter 10 General Fire Safety.
      1.   10.3.4 Changes of Occupancy. All of 10.3.4 is replaced with the
following: "Changes made in the character or use of an occupancy shall be in
accordance with the Building Code provided a new certificate of occupancy is
issued. See Chapter 4.5.7."
      2.   10.13.1.1 Premises Identification. Is hereby amended by addition of
the following paragraph: "NFPA 704, figure 9.1.c shall be used to determine the
size of address lettering and numbering."
      3.   Chapter 13.3 Automatic Sprinklers. Is hereby amended as follows:
"13.3.2 to 13.3.2.24 Where Required. All references to Existing facilities
remain. All references to "New" occupancies is hereby amended to read as
follows:
         A.   An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout all
levels of all buildings here after constructed, except for Group U and R-
3 occupancies.
            Exception 1: Buildings housing a group A-1, A-2, A-3, A-4, A-5, B,
E, F-2, M, or S-2 occupancy having a calculated fire flow less than or equal to
seven hundred fifty (750) gallons per minute.
            NOTE 1: For the purposes of this section, the accepted method of
calculating required fire flow shall be the Insurance Service Office's "Needed
Fire Flow" (NFFi 1980) as outlined in the "Fire Suppression Rating Schedule"
(1993).
            NOTE 2: For the purposes of this article, fire resistive area
separation walls will not be considered a barrier creating a separate building.
            Exception 2: Temporary use of Modular or factory-built structures
shall not be required to provide an automatic fire sprinkler system, provided
that the use of the structure and the "Certificate of Occupancy" is limited to
one year from the time of set-up to removal.
            Exception 3: Open canopy structure. When automatic fire sprinklers
are not required by the most currently adopted Building Code and when the
structure meets each of the following criteria, fire sprinklers will not be
required.
               a.   The structure shall not exceed 10,000 square feet.
               b.   The entire covered area is open on all sides void of
interior walls or full length partitions.
               c.   Setbacks from property lines or other structures are in
accordance with the Somerton Zoning Code.
               d.   The building use is not classified as hazardous or assembly
occupancy.
               e.   Portable fire extinguishers shall be provided in accordance
with NFPA 10.
               f.   Open flames and devices emitting flames or creating a glow
capable of igniting combustible materials shall not be used in or adjacent to
the structure.
               g.   Flammable or combustible liquids and LP-Gas shall not be
stored in or adjacent to the structure except for automobile fueling islands.
               h.   An approved water supply capable of supplying the required
fire flow shall be provided.
               NOTE: Any changes to the canopy structure or its base may result
in the loss of this exception and may require a retrofit of an automatic fire
sprinkler system.
         B.   Retrofit of fire sprinklers to existing structures. An existing
building that undergoes a "change of occupancy" as outlined in Chapter 4.5.7
whereby that new occupancy is deemed a greater hazard than the previous
occupancy, the building will be treated as a new building and may require the
installation of fire sprinklers.
         C.   Any building, except Group U and R-3 occupancies, which undergoes
a renovation in excess of 50% of value as assessed by the building code, shall
meet the requirements of this section.
         D.   Any building that increases in size by a total summation of 50%
as a result of one or more expansions will require a retrofit of an automatic
fire sprinkler. For the purposes of this code, the current size of the building
at the time of this code adoption will constitute the starting point."
   G.   Chapter 18 Occupancy Fire Safety. 18.2.2.2.1.3 Location of Access Road
in Reference to Structures, is hereby added to read: "When required, the
apparatus access road shall be located no closer than fifty (50) feet from any
structure unless authorized by the chief."
   H.   Chapter 66 Flammable Combustible Liquids. 66.2.2 Design and
Construction of Tanks, is hereby amended by addition of the following
paragraph: "Any permanent tank installation over 500 gallons will require that
the foundation and anchorage be engineered by a design professional registered
in the State of Arizona."
   I.   Chapter 69 Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG).
      1.   69.1 General Provisions Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG). Is hereby
amended by addition of the following paragraph: "Any permanent tank
installation over 500 gallons will require that the foundation and anchorage be
engineered by a design professional registered in the State of Arizona."
      2.   69.4.2.1 Transfer Personnel. Is hereby amended to read as follows:
"Dispensing of LP gases shall be performed by a qualified attendant. In-service
training for attendants shall be conducted annually and current records of such
training be maintained on-site."
(Res. 860, passed 11-2-2004; Ord. 2008-006, passed 5-6-2008)
CHAPTER 5: MAGISTRATE
      Article
         
5-1.   MAGISTRATE COURT ESTABLISHED; JURISDICTION
         
5-2.   PRESIDING OFFICER
         
5-3.   PROCEEDINGS OF COURT
         
5-4.   JAIL SERVICES RECOVERY FEE
ARTICLE 5-1: MAGISTRATE COURT ESTABLISHED; JURISDICTION
   There is hereby established in the city a Magistrate Court, which shall have
jurisdiction of all violations of this code, and jurisdiction concurrently with
justices of the peace of precincts in which the city is located, or violation
of laws of the state committed within the limits of the city.
ARTICLE 5-2: PRESIDING OFFICER
Section
   
5-2-1   City Magistrate
   
5-2-2   Powers and duties of City Magistrate
§ 5-2-1 CITY MAGISTRATE.
   The presiding officer of the Magistrate Court shall be the City Magistrate,
who shall be appointed by City Council.
§ 5-2-2 POWERS AND DUTIES OF CITY MAGISTRATE.
   The powers and duties of the magistrate shall include:
   A.   The powers and duties set forth and conferred upon him or her under the
provisions of the State Constitution, state statutes, Arizona Rules of
Procedure, this code, and the ordinances and resolutions of the city;
   B.   The keeping of a docket in which shall be entered each action and the
proceedings of the Court therein;
   C.   The responsibility for fixing and receiving all bonds and bails and
receiving all fines, penalties, fees, and other moneys as provided by law;
   D.   Payment of all fees, fines, penalties, and other moneys collected by
the Court to the Treasurer;
   E.   Submitting a monthly report to the Council summarizing Court activities
for that month; and
   F.   Preparation of a schedule of traffic violations, not involving the
death of a person, listing specific bail for each violation.
ARTICLE 5-3: PROCEEDINGS OF COURT
   A.   The proceedings shall be conducted in accordance with the State
Constitution, the applicable state statutes, and rules of the State Supreme
Court pertaining to police courts. The proceedings shall also be conducted in
accordance with the Rules of Criminal Procedure for the Superior Court, unless
otherwise prescribed, and provided this code and resolutions of the city are
not in conflict therewith.
   B.   The Magistrate Court proceedings shall be commenced by complaint under
oath and in the name of the state, setting forth the offense charged with and
the particulars of time, place, person, and property as to enable the defendant
to understand distinctly the character of the offense complained of and to
answer the complaint.
   C.   If the Magistrate is satisfied that the offense complained of has been
committed by the person charged, he or she shall issue a summons or a warrant
of arrest. Before issuing a summons or warrant of arrest on a complaint, the
Magistrate may subpoena and examine witnesses as to the truth of the complaint.
ARTICLE 5-4: JAIL SERVICES RECOVERY FEE
Section
   
5-4-1   Payment of costs of confinement
   
5-4-2   Waiver of costs for indigents
   
5-4-3   Municipal Court Fund
   
5-4-4   Municipal court fees
§ 5-4-1 PAYMENT OF COSTS OF CONFINEMENT.
   A.   Any person who is convicted of a misdemeanor criminal offense in the
Magistrate Court and who, as a consequence, is incarcerated in the County Jail
may, as part of any sentence imposed by the Magistrate Court, be required to
reimburse the city for its actual expenses incurred to the county by reason of
the confinement. The expense is presently $40 per day.
   B.   In the event the daily prisoner cost charges billed to the city by the
county should increase or decrease following the effective date of this
article, then the fee imposed herein shall similarly be increased or decreased.
§ 5-4-2 WAIVER OF COSTS FOR INDIGENTS.
   No person shall be required to pay the fee established by this article who
is found by the Magistrate Court to be indigent. The Court may waive the fees
required by this article, if the Court expressly finds that the defendant has
an income which is insufficient or barely sufficient to meet the daily
essentials of life and includes no surplus disposable income that could be
budgeted for payment of the jail services recovery fee. Prior to determining
that a person is indigent for purposes of this section, the Magistrate Court
shall require a sworn statement from the defendant seeking a waiver of the jail
services recovery fee, which includes, at minimum, the following information:
   A.   All income received by the defendant from any source on a monthly
basis;
   B.   The defendant's monthly expenses;
   C.   A list of assets owned by the defendant, including the estimated fair
market value; and
   D.   A list of debts owed by the defendant.
§ 5-4-3 MUNICIPAL COURT FUND.
   A.   There is hereby established a Municipal Court Fund, which shall be used
exclusively to recover legitimate court costs and to enhance the technological,
operational, security and collections capabilities of the Somerton Municipal
Court.
   B.   The Municipal Court Fund shall be established as a designated fund
account with the City Treasurer. Somerton Municipal Court shall collect
designated Municipal Court Fees and deposit them in the Municipal Court Fund
account. The City Treasurer shall invest the monies in the fund in the same
manner as other city funds. Interest earned on fund monies shall be deposited
in the fund.
   C.   Somerton Municipal Court, with the concurrence of the Somerton City
Council, shall administer the fund and may make expenditures from the fund for
the purpose provided in this section.
   D.   The Municipal Court Fees shall be administrative in nature, separate
from and in addition to any sentence imposed by the Municipal Court in a
criminal case, or any civil penalty in cases where a civil penalty is imposed.
The Municipal Court shall set forth the requirements and amounts of such court
fees as separate items in all orders and judgments.
   E.   If the defendant pays some or all of his or her fine, surcharges,
restitution or other fees over time, the Municipal Court Fees shall be
collected in proportion with any fine, surcharge, other fees, except
restitution and time payment fees, which must be collected first.
(Ord. 2011-015, passed 12-20-2011)
§ 5-4-4 MUNICIPAL COURT FEES.
   A.   Municipal Court enhancement fee. Persons convicted of criminal traffic
or misdemeanor offenses, or found responsible for civil traffic offenses, with
an offense date of the effective date of this section or after, shall pay a
Municipal Court enhancement fee in the amount of $30 for each offense.
   B.   Municipal Court default cost recovery fee. A default cost recovery fee
in the amount of $40 shall be imposed on each default judgment entered for
failure to appear in a civil traffic case, or for failure to satisfy in full a
civil sanction imposed in a civil traffic case.
   C.   Municipal Court warrant cost recovery fee.  When a City Magistrate
issues a warrant for non-compliance with court orders, failure to pay a fine or
failure to pay any other fees, the City Magistrate shall impose a Municipal
Court warrant cost recovery fee in the amount of $125 upon the person for whom
the arrest warrant is issued; and this fee shall be added to the amount set
forth in the arrest warrant.
   D.   Municipal Court deferred prosecution cost recovery fee. A deferred
prosecution fee in the amount of $200 shall be imposed on each criminal charge
for which the court defers prosecution pursuant to Rule 38 of the Arizona Rules
of Criminal Procedure (or its substitute).
(Ord. 2011-015, passed 12-20-2011)
CHAPTER 6: ANIMALS
      Article
         
6-1.   RULES AND REGULATIONS
         
6-2.   DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS
         6-3.   PENALTY
ARTICLE 6-1: RULES AND REGULATIONS
Section
   
6-1-1   Dangerous animals
   
6-1-2   Killing dangerous animals
   
6-1-3   Noises
   
6-1-4   Swine, livestock, poultry, fowl, and bees
§ 6-1-1 DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
   It is unlawful to permit any dangerous, vicious animals of any kind to run
at large within the city and such animals shall be immediately impounded by the
Animal Control Division. Exhibitions or parades of animals which are ferae
naturae in the eyes of the law may be conducted only upon securing a permit
from the Chief of Police. Any person found guilty of violating this section
shall be guilty of a class one misdemeanor. Each day a violation continues
shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 2025-004, passed 10-7-2025) Penalty, see
Article 6-3
§ 6-1-2 KILLING DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
   The members of the Police Department are authorized to kill any dangerous
animals of any kind when it is necessary for the protection of any person or
property.
§ 6-1-3 NOISES.
   It is unlawful to harbor or keep any animals which disturb the peace by loud
noises at any time of the day or night.
Penalty, see
Article 6-3
§ 6-1-4 SWINE, LIVESTOCK, POULTRY, FOWL, AND BEES.
   A.   It is unlawful to keep, maintain, or harbor any live swine or pigs,
livestock, poultry, fowl, or bees in the city without first obtaining a permit
from the Chief of Police for approval for the issuance thereof, unless allowed
by right under the City Zoning Code or as provided by state law. A resident of
a single-family detached residence on a lot that is one-half acre or less in
size is permitted to keep no more than six fowl in the backyard of the
property.
   B.   A resident of the city may harbor and maintain livestock or poultry
only upon written request to the Chief of Police, except when such keeping is
allowed by right under the City Zoning Code or when permitted by state law. The
request must include the approval of all neighbors immediately adjoining the
property of the resident requesting the permission. This privilege of harboring
livestock or poultry shall be revoked should maintenance of the livestock or
poultry violate any state or county health regulations. Further, should any
three residents present a written complaint regarding the livestock or poultry,
the privilege of maintaining the livestock or poultry may be revoked after
review by the Chief of Police.
   C.   If fowl is permitted on a property, the following conditions must be
met. Notwithstanding anything in this section, the city prohibits the keeping
of male fowl, including roosters:
      1.   All fowl shall be kept in an enclosure located in the rear or side
yard of the property at least 20 feet from a neighboring property. The size of
the enclosure shall be a maximum of 200 square feet with a maximum height of
eight feet, provided that any enclosure on a lot less than one acre in size to
be shorter than the fence line of the property. The enclosure shall be
maintained and manure picked up and disposed of or composted at least twice
weekly.
      2.   Any composted manure shall be kept in a way that prevents migration
of insects.
      3.   All water sources for fowls shall have adequate overflow drainage.
      4.   All feed for fowls shall be stored in insect-proof and rodent-proof
containers.
      5.   All fowl are prohibited from running at large.
(Ord. 135, passed 6-16-1981; Ord. 2025-004, passed 10-7-2025) Penalty, see
Article 6-3
ARTICLE 6-2: DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS
Section
   
6-2-1   Definitions
   
6-2-2   License required; issuance of dog tags
   
6-2-3   Anti-rabies vaccination required
   
6-2-4   Rabies control and quarantine; reporting incidents of biting; handling
of biting animals
   
6-2-5   Restrictions as to dogs running at large
   
6-2-6   Impoundment time, notice, and costs regarding dogs running at large
   
6-2-7   Unlawful interference with Animal Control Officer
   
6-2-8   Unlawful disturbances
   
6-2-9   Appointment of Animal Control Officer
   
6-2-10   Unlawful feeding of dogs or cats
§ 6-2-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL. Any species of mammal, bird, amphibian or reptile.
   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. Persons designated by the city who are responsible
for the enforcement of this chapter and the regulations promulgated hereunder.
   AT LARGE. On or off the premises of the owner and not under the control of
the owner, or other persons acting for the owner. Any dog in a suitable
enclosure shall not be considered to be running AT LARGE.
   CAT. A member of the felis catus family.
   COLLAR. A band, chain, harness, or suitable device worn around the neck of a
dog to which a license may be affixed.
   DOG. A member of the Canis familiaris family.
   FREE-ROAMING. Any cat or dog that is not under the physical control of a
person and does not appear to be owned, regardless of whether the cat or dog
was formerly domesticated or born in the wild.
   OWNER. Any person owning, keeping, possessing, harboring, or maintaining a
dog.
   POUND. Any establishment authorized by the City of Somerton Council for the
confinement, maintenance, safekeeping, and control of dogs that come into the
custody of the Animal Control Officer in the performance of his or her official
duties.
   VACCINATION. An anti-rabies vaccination using a type of vaccine approved by
the State Veterinarian.
   VETERINARIAN. Any veterinarian licensed to practice in the state or any
veterinarian employed in the state by a governmental agency.
   VETERINARY HOSPITAL. Any establishment operated by a veterinarian licensed
to practice in the state that provides clinical facilities and houses animals
or birds for dental, medical, or surgical treatment. A VETERINARY HOSPITAL may
have adjacent to it or in conjunction with it, or as an integral part of it,
pens, stalls, cages, or kennels for quarantine, observation, or boarding.
   WILD ANIMALS. Animals of ferae naturae.
(Ord. 2012-004, passed 6-19-2012; Ord. 2025-004, passed 10-7-2025)
§ 6-2-2 LICENSE REQUIRED; ISSUANCE OF DOG TAGS.
   A.   All dogs kept, harbored, or maintained in the city must be licensed and
registered pursuant to A.R.S. § 11-1010, as amended. The provisions of this
section shall not apply to dogs brought into the city for the purpose of any
dog show. Service animals, as defined under state or federal law, must be
vaccinated and licensed pursuant to A.R.S. § 11-1010, but are exempt from any
licensing fee.
   B.   Dog licenses shall be issued for a period of one year and every owner
must provide each dog with a collar or a harness to which the license tag
furnished must be affixed, and must see that the collar or harness and tag are
constantly worn.
   C.   Dog tags and licenses are not transferable from one dog to another or
from one owner to another.
   D.   It is unlawful for a person to counterfeit or attempt to counterfeit a
dog tag certificate or vaccination or license certificate, or to take from a
dog a tag legally placed upon it, or place a dog tag upon a dog unless the tag
was specifically issued for that particular dog.
   E.   The Animal Control Officer shall apprehend and impound any dog found
without a current valid license tag. Whenever the ownership of a dog has been
changed, the new owner must secure a new license.
(Ord. 2025-004, passed 10-7-2025) Penalty, see
Article 6-3
§ 6-2-3 ANTI-RABIES VACCINATION REQUIRED.
   Every owner of a dog within the corporate limits of the city shall have a
valid license, issued pursuant to A.R.S. § 11-1008, after presentation of a
valid vaccination certificate. The Animal Control Officer may establish an
administrative procedure to permit any licensed veterinarian to issue dog
licenses and tags for dogs that have been vaccinated. In addition, the Animal
Control Officer may make provisions for low-cost vaccination clinics as deemed
necessary. The vaccinations shall be performed by a veterinarian.
(Ord. 2025-004, passed 10-7-2025) Penalty, see
Article 6-3
§ 6-2-4 RABIES CONTROL AND QUARANTINE; REPORTING INCIDENTS OF BITING; HANDLING
OF BITING ANIMALS.
   A.   If a dog is impounded and found to be unvaccinated, the Animal Control
Officer is hereby authorized to cause the dog to be vaccinated at a cost to be
borne by the owner. The vaccination shall be performed by a veterinarian, who
shall issue a certificate of vaccination.
   B.   An unlicensed or unvaccinated dog that bites any person shall be
confined and quarantined in a pound or, upon request of and at the expense of
the owner, at a veterinary hospital for a period of not less than ten days. A
dog properly licensed and vaccinated pursuant to this chapter, that bites any
person, may be confined and quarantined at the home of the owner or wherever
the dog is harbored and maintained with the consent of and in a manner
prescribed by the Animal Control Officer. Any person found guilty of violating
this division shall be guilty of a class one misdemeanor.
   C.   Any animal, other than a dog or wild animal, that bites any person
shall be confined and quarantined in a pound or, upon the request of and at the
expense of the owner, at a veterinary hospital for a period of not less than 14
days, provided that livestock shall be confined and quarantined for a 14-day
period in a manner regulated by the State Livestock Sanitary Board. If the
animal is a caged rodent, it may be confined and quarantined at the home of the
owner or where it is harbored or maintained, for the required period of time,
with the consent of and in a manner prescribed by the Animal Control Officer.
Any person found guilty of violating this division shall be guilty of a class
one misdemeanor. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
   D.   Any wild animal which bites any person may be killed and submitted to
the Animal Control Officer, or his or her deputies, for transmission to an
appropriate diagnostic laboratory. Any person found guilty of violating this
division shall be guilty of a class one misdemeanor. Each day a violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
   E.   Whenever an animal bites any person, the incident shall be reported to
the City Enforcement Agent immediately by any person having direct knowledge.
   F.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to preempt the requirements
of the state’s rabies control statutes, A.R.S. §§ 11-1001 et seq.
(Ord. 2012-004, passed 6-19-2012; Ord. 2025-004, passed 10-7-2025) Penalty, see
Article 6-3
§ 6-2-5 RESTRICTIONS AS TO DOGS RUNNING AT LARGE.
   A.   No person owning, keeping, possessing, harboring, or maintaining a dog
shall allow that dog to be at large. A dog is not deemed to be at large:
      1.   If the dog is restrained by a leash, chain, rope, or cord of
sufficient strength to control the action of the dog, or if confined in a
suitable enclosure;
      2.   While the dog is actively engaged in dog-obedience training,
accompanied by and under the control of his or her owner or trainer, provided
that the person training the dog has in his or her possession a dog leash of
sufficient strength to control the dog;
      3.   While the dog is being exhibited at an American Kennel Club-approved
show;
      4.   While the dog is engaged in races approved by the State Racing
Commission; and/or
      5.   While the dog is actively engaged in livestock control.
   B.   The Animal Control Officer may apprehend and impound any dog found
running at large contrary to the provisions of this section or he or she may,
in lieu of impoundment, cite the owner into any court of competent
jurisdiction. The Animal Control Officer shall have the right to enter upon
private property when it be necessary to do so in order to apprehend any dog
that has been running at large. The entrance upon private property shall be in
reasonable pursuit of the dog. It is unlawful to permit any dangerous or
vicious animal to run at large within the city and the animal shall be
immediately impounded by the Animal Control Officer.
   C.   The Animal Control Officer is hereby authorized to issue at his or her
discretion a warning or warnings for an offense under this section if
circumstances warrant a warning rather than a citation (i.e., a dog
inadvertently escaping through no fault of the owner).
   D.   If any dangerous, vicious, or fierce dog cannot, in the discretion of a
police officer, be safely taken up and impounded, the dog may be immediately
slain. Any police officer may, at his or her discretion, for any humane reason,
immediately kill any dog found at large within the city that is in violation of
this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-004, passed 6-19-2012; Ord. 2025-004, passed 10-7-2025) Penalty, see
Article 6-3
§ 6-2-6 IMPOUNDMENT TIME, NOTICE, AND COSTS REGARDING DOGS RUNNING AT LARGE.
   A.   It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer to apprehend any dog
running at large contrary to the provisions of this chapter and to impound the
dog.
      1.   Each unlicensed dog impounded shall be kept and maintained at the
city’s temporary kennels while a good faith effort is made to locate the owner
unless a person claiming ownership furnishes proof of rights to the dog and
pays all pound fees. If no person claims the dog, the Animal Control Officer
will transport the dog to a city contracted pound.
      2.   Any licensed dog impounded may be reclaimed, provided that a person
reclaiming the dog furnishes proof of the right to do so and pays all
established pound fees.
   B.   Impoundment costs for dogs picked up in the city shall include an
assessment for each time the dog is impounded and an assessment for board each
day the dog is cared for and fed while impounded, and the fees shall be set by
resolution approved by the City Council and posted at the office of the Animal
Control Officer.
   C.   Any licensed or unlicensed dog impounded, which is apparently suffering
from serious injuries or is in great pain or probably would not recover, or
which has evidence of any infectious disease which is a danger to the other
dogs or to humans, may be destroyed by the Animal Control Officer or police
officer of the city in as humane a manner as possible after reasonable efforts
to notify the owner have failed.
   D.   Upon the impounding of a licensed dog, the owner shall be immediately
notified in person or by telephone, and he or she may reclaim the dog upon
payment of all costs and charges incurred in the impounding and maintaining of
the dog.
(Ord. 2012-004, passed 6-19-2012; Ord. 2025-004, passed 10-7-2025)
§ 6-2-7 UNLAWFUL INTERFERENCE WITH ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER.
   It is unlawful for any person to intervene with, impede, prevent, or attempt
to intervene with, impede, prevent, obstruct, or intimidate the Animal Control
Officer in the discharge of their duties in taking up, or attempting to take
up, and impound any and all animals which it shall be their duty to impound
under the provisions of this chapter, or to rescue or attempt to rescue any
animal so taken up by the Animal Control Officer, or to release any animal so
impounded. Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be guilty of
a class one misdemeanor. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
(Ord. 2025-004, passed 10-7-2025) Penalty, see
Article 6-3
§ 6-2-8 UNLAWFUL DISTURBANCES.
   It is unlawful for any person to keep or harbor within the city any animal
which barks, howls, or makes other noises by day or night and disturbs the
peace and quiet of any person or family.
(Ord. 2012-004, passed 6-19-2012) Penalty, see
Article 6-3
§ 6-2-9 APPOINTMENT OF ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER.
   An Animal Control Officer shall be appointed by Council, with the
understanding that the position, along with all rights, duties,
responsibilities, and authorities, can be delegated by the Council by way of
contract to a County Enforcement Agent or a local, nonprofit humane society,
incorporated for that specific purpose. In any event, the County Enforcement
Agent, whether individual, corporation, or agency, shall receive their
compensation for the enforcement of this chapter through contract with the
city. The City Manager, with the approval of the Mayor and Council, may enter
into the contract for the establishment and operation of a pound, designate the
Animal Control Officer, and do all things necessary to ensure the enforcement
of this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-004, passed 6-19-2012; Ord. 2025-004, passed 10-7-2025)
§ 6-2-10 UNLAWFUL FEEDING OF DOGS OR CATS.
   It shall be unlawful to feed any free-roaming dog or cat, except pending
return to a lawful owner or immediate transfer to the City Enforcement Agent or
Animal Control Officer. The City Enforcement Agent, at his or her discretion,
may issue a warning for the first offense. It is not a violation of this
section for any person to feed or shelter free-roaming dogs or cats while
acting under the direction of, or in coordination with, a licensed
veterinarian, animal control agency, or similar group spaying or neutering such
animals.
(Ord. 2025-004, passed 10-7-2025)
ARTICLE 6-3: PENALTY
   Unless otherwise stated, any violation of this chapter shall be a class
three misdemeanor. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Ord. 2025-004, passed 10-7-2025)
CHAPTER 7: BUILDINGS
      Article
         
7-1.   COMPREHENSIVE BUILDING SAFETY CODE
         
7-2.   ROADWAY NAMING AND ADDRESSING POLICY
         
7-3.   IMPACT FEES
         
7-4.   NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM
ARTICLE 7-1: COMPREHENSIVE BUILDING SAFETY CODE
Section
   
7-1-1   Building reference codes
   
7-1-2   Rules and regulations
   
7-1-3   Advisory Board
   
7-1-4   Continuity
   
7-1-5   Administration
   
7-1-6   Rules and regulations
   
7-1-7   Permits
   
7-1-8   Fees
   
7-1-9   Severability
   
7-1-10   Enforcement
   
7-1-11   Violation and penalties
   
7-1-12   Permit requirements
   
7-1-13   Other regulations
§ 7-1-1 BUILDING REFERENCE CODES.
   The following described documents containing the following described codes
are hereby adopted by reference as if fully set out herein, as the building
code of the city, pursuant to A.R.S. Title 9, Chapter 7, Art. 1, §§ 9-801 et
seq.:
   A.   International Building Code, 2018 Edition, with Appendices, as
published by the International Code Council, and with certain amendments.
   B.   International Residential Code for one and two-family dwellings, 2018
Edition, with Appendices, as published by the International Code Council, and
with certain amendments.
   C.   International Existing Building Code, 2018 Edition, with Appendices, as
published by the International Code Council, and with certain amendments.
   D.   International Property Maintenance Code, 2018 Edition, with Appendices,
as published by the International Code Council, and with certain amendments.
   E.   International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2018 Edition, with
Appendices, as published by the International Code Council, and with certain
amendments.
   F.   National Fire Protection Association Code, 2018 Edition, with
Appendices, as published by the National Fire Protection Association, and with
certain amendments.
   G.   National Electrical Code NFPA-70, 2014 Edition, with Appendices, as
published by the National Fire Protection Association, and with certain
amendments.
   H.   International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 Edition, with Appendices, as
published by the International Code Council, and with certain amendments.
   I.   International Mechanical Code, 2012 Edition, with Appendices, as
published by the International Code Council, and with certain amendments.
   J.   International Plumbing Code, 2012 Edition, with Appendices, as
published by the International Code Council, and with certain amendments.
   K.   International Energy Conservation Code, 2009 Edition, with Appendices,
as published by the International Code Council, and with certain amendments.
(Ord. 222, passed 8-15-1995; Ord. 290, passed 11-2-2004; Ord. 312, passed 11-7-
2006; Am. Ord. 2011- 006, passed 7-19-2011; Ord. 2016-003, passed 9-20-2016;
Ord. 2019-002, passed 9-17-2019)
Cross-reference:
   Adoption of the Uniform Fire Code, see
Article 4-3
§ 7-1-2 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   A.   The term BUILDING CODES, as used hereinafter, shall mean the codes
referred to in §
7-1-1.
   B.   Terms used in this article shall be defined as provided in the codes
adopted in §
7-1-1, except as herein otherwise provided.
   C.   Whenever the terms GOVERNING BODY or CITY or TOWN or MUNICIPALITY are
used in the building codes, they shall mean the City of Somerton, Arizona.
   D.   Whenever the terms MAYOR, APPOINTING AUTHORITY, COMMISSION, CITY
COUNCIL, or MANAGER are used in the building codes, they shall mean the Mayor
and City Council.
   E.   Whenever the terms ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY, BUILDING OFFICIAL, CHIEF,
or ADMINISTRATOR are used in the adopted building codes, they shall mean the
Community Development Director of the city, or his or her representative,
except in matters regarding fire prevention and enforcement of the adopted fire
codes, whereby these terms shall apply to the Fire Chief, or his or her
representative.
   F.   Whenever the terms OTHER CODES or OTHER CODE are used in the building
codes, they shall mean other code or other codes adopted by either the city, or
the state. If there is a conflict between the other code or codes and this
article, the more restrictive shall prevail.
   G.   Reference to chapters, articles, sections, subsections or paragraphs,
and to tables thereof are to the building codes.
   H.   Certificates:
      1.   Zoning certificate. May be part of the building permit. (The
issuance or approval of zoning use permits, variance use permits, temporary use
permits, and special use permits shall not be construed to be functions of the
Department of Building Safety but shall be continued to be processed as
otherwise provided by law.) A fee shall be charged for a separate issue of a
zoning certificate if not a part of the building permit or if not including a
structure;
      2.   Certificate of use and occupancy. For new construction and also
considering land use. Certificate of inspection may be a separate individual
trade inspection approval. Temporary certificate may be a substantial
compliance inspection. Final inspection certificate may be a certificate of
approval that may include the entire structure, partial work, additions, or
alterations;
      3.   Certificate of compliance. For existing structures. May be
associated with pre-moving, renovation, use change, addition, and existing
structure or housing code. A letter of certification (duplicate certification)
may be for other than the original issue; and
      4.   Certificate of fitness; for hazards and safety. A document issued by
the Building Official authorizing by permit to maintain, store, or handle
materials, or to conduct processes, which produce conditions hazardous to life
and property, or to install equipment used in connection with the activities in
accordance with the provision of this article. It shall not be transferable,
and any change in use or occupancy of premises shall require a new permit for
certificate. May include plan check for exits, assembly, fuels, special use,
and/or for periodic inspection "prevention" enforcement by another recognized
authority. May be used when new construction "fitness" is a change of use and
occupancy.
   I.   The Building Safety Department shall administer this article. The
executive official in charge thereof shall be known as the Director of the
Building Safety Department.
   J.   Every building, whether existing or hereafter erected, shall be
classified by the Building Official according to its use or the character of
its occupancy as set forth in the building code and pursuant to the state laws
or the Uniform Fire Code.
   K.   Section
7-1-1 shall be used as the administrative rules for administering this article,
except as otherwise hereinafter provided.
(Ord. 290, passed 11-2-2004; Ord. 312, passed 11-7-2006)
§ 7-1-3 ADVISORY BOARD.
   A.   Whenever the terms BOARD OF APPEALS, ADJUSTMENT BOARD, or BOARD are
used in the building codes, they shall mean the Advisory Board and the Advisory
Board shall be organized pursuant to A.R.S. Title 11, Chapter 6, Article 3, §
11-862.
   B.   The functions and duties of the Advisory Board shall be specified by
regulations adopted by the City Council which may further provide for
appointment of review committee for electrical, mechanical, and plumbing, the
review committees to include experienced tradespeople and contractors.
   C.   Other than the Community Development Director, whose term shall be
continuous, each Advisory Board Member shall serve for a term of four years,
except that of the members first appointed, one each shall serve for a term of
one, two, three, and four years. A vacancy for an unexpired term shall be
filled in the same manner as the original appointment, and the appointee shall
serve for the unexpired term only. The Advisory Board shall adopt its own
reasonable rules and procedures for its proceedings.
(Ord. 312, passed 11-7-2006)
§ 7-1-4 CONTINUITY.
   The International Conference of Building Officials and other publishers
identified in §
7-1-1 issue each edition of the building codes periodically which is maintained
by annual supplements. In order that this article maintains its continuity, it
shall be the responsibility of the Building Official to review and present all
the supplements to the Planning and Zoning Commission for appropriate action.
(Ord. 312, passed 11-7-2006)
§ 7-1-5 ADMINISTRATION.
   A.   Generally. All department officials and public employees of the city,
vested with the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses, shall comply
with the provisions of this article and shall issue no permit or license for
any use, building, or purpose in conflict with the provision of this article.
Any permit or license so issued in conflict with the provisions of this article
shall be null and void and be of no effect whatsoever.
   B.   Filing plans. Every application for a zoning certificate, which is a
part of the building permit, shall be accompanied by plans and specifications.
One copy of the plans shall be returned to the owner when plans are approved by
the Building Official together with the zoning certificate as may be granted.
   C.   Plans and specifications. With each application for a building permit,
and also when otherwise required by the Building Official for enforcement of
any provisions of this article, two sets of specifications and plans and one
set of reproducible plans (reverse reading sepia prints) may be submitted. The
Building Official may, where the complexity of the plans clearly so warrant,
require plans and specifications to be prepared and designed by an engineer or
architect licensed by the state to practice as such. The Building Official may
further require that plans for new construction indicate existing and finished
grade elevations based on city datum with existing and finished drainage flow
patterns.
§ 7-1-6 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   A.   The Building Official may adopt rules and regulations in the interest
of public safety, health, and general welfare, to implement the provisions of
this article to secure the intent thereof; but no such rules shall have the
effect of waiving technical provisions specifically provided in the building
codes or of violating accepted engineering practice involving public safety.
   B.   Provided, however, that the rules and regulations shall be operative
only after the passage of 15 days from the time the rules and regulations have
been published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city.
(Ord. 312, passed 11-7-2006)
§ 7-1-7 PERMITS.
   A.   Permits shall be required as associated with the issuance of
certificates and collection of fees.
   B.   Exemptions from permit requirements or the issuance of certificates and
collection of fees shall be subject to each of the adopted building codes, with
certain amendments and its exemptions as adopted in Article
7-1-1 of the Somerton City Code.
(Ord. 2019-002, passed 9-17-2019)
§ 7-1-8 FEES.
   Building permit fees, plan check fees, and all other fees relating to the
Comprehensive Building Safety Code shall be as set forth in Table No. 3-A of
the Building Code, current edition, or by resolution passed by the City Council
from time to time.
(Ord. 312, passed 11-7-2006)
§ 7-1-9 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this
article or any part of the adopted codes is, for any reason, held to be invalid
or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, the
decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof.
§ 7-1-10 ENFORCEMENT.
   It shall be the duty of the Building Official to administer and enforce this
article. All other city law enforcement officials and agencies shall, whenever
requested by the Building Official, participate in and assist the Building
Official in the enforcement of this article to the extent that they are
lawfully authorized to do so.
§ 7-1-11 VIOLATION AND PENALTIES.
   Any person, persons, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
exceeding $2,500 or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days or by both the
fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court. Each day that a violation
of any of the provisions of this article shall continue shall be deemed and
constitute a separate offense.
Cross-reference:
   Table of fees, see §
7-1-8
§ 7-1-12 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   A.   Zoning permits and fees in effect prior to the effective date of this
article shall continue to be required.
   B.   Nothing in this article shall be construed to require changes in the
plans, construction, or designated use of a building for which a lawful permit
has been heretofore issued or otherwise lawfully authorized. Beginning with the
effective date of this article, building permits as set forth in this article
shall be required.
§ 7-1-13 OTHER REGULATIONS.
   The Council may from time to time, by resolution, prescribe any additional
regulations and requirements governing connections to and the use of the sewer
system as may be proper or expedient and shall, by resolution, make any changes
in the fee schedule as is necessary from time to time.
(Ord. 138, passed 8-18-1981; Ord. 197, passed 5-15-1990)
ARTICLE 7-2: ROADWAY NAMING AND ADDRESSING POLICY
   This article, as set forth in its entirety in that public record entitled
"Roadway Naming and Addressing Policy," as adopted by Resolution 2008-021, is
incorporated by reference in its entirety.
(Ord. 2008-007, passed 6-3-2008)
ARTICLE 7-3: IMPACT FEES
Section
   
7-3-1   Title
   
7-3-2   Legislative intent and purpose
   
7-3-3   Definitions
   
7-3-4   Applicability
   
7-3-5   Authority for development impact fees
   
7-3-6   Administration of development impact fees
   
7-3-7   Land use assumptions
   
7-3-8   Infrastructure Improvement Plan
   
7-3-9   Adoption and modification procedures
   
7-3-10   Five-year validity of the Infrastructure Improvements Plan and the
land use assumptions
   
7-3-11   Collection of development impact fees
   
7-3-12   Development impact fee credits and credit agreements
   
7-3-13   Development agreements
   
7-3-14   Appeals
   
7-3-15   Refunds of development impact fees
   
7-3-16   Oversight of development impact fee program
§ 7-3-1 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the "2014 Development Impact Fee Ordinance of
the City of Somerton," and may be cited as such.
(Ord. 2014-004, passed 6-17-2014)
§ 7-3-2 LEGISLATIVE INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   This chapter is adopted for the purpose of promoting the health,
safety and general welfare of the residents of the city by:
      (1)   Requiring new development to pay its proportionate share of the
costs incurred by the city that are associated with providing necessary public
services to new development.
      (2)   Setting forth standards and procedures for creating and assessing
development impact fees consistent with the requirements of A.R.S. § 9-463.05,
including requirements pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-463.05, Subsection K, that, on or
before August 1, 2014, the city replace its development impact fees that were
adopted prior to January 1, 2012, with development impact fees adopted pursuant
to the requirements of A.R.S. § 9-463.05 as amended by the state legislature in
SB 1525, Fiftieth Legislature, First Regular Session.
      (3)   Providing for the temporary continuation of certain development
impact fees adopted prior to January 1, 2012, until otherwise replaced pursuant
to this chapter, or longer where such development impact fees were pledged to
support financing or debt for a grandfathered facility as permitted by A.R.S. §
9-463.05, Subsections K, R, and S.
      (4)   Setting forth procedures for administering the development impact
fee program, including mandatory offsets, credits, and refunds of development
impact fees. All development impact fee assessments, offsets, credits, or
refunds must be administered in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   This chapter shall not affect the city's zoning authority or its
authority to adopt or amend its general plan, provided that planning and zoning
activities by the city may require amendments to development impact fees as
provided in §
7-3-7.
(Ord. 2014-004, passed 6-17-2014)
§ 7-3-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPLICANT. A person who applies to the city for a building permit.
   APPURTENANCE. Any fixed machinery or equipment, structure or other fixture,
including integrated hardware, software or other components, associated with a
capital facility that are necessary or convenient to the operation, use, or
maintenance of a capital facility, but excluding replacement of the same after
initial installation.
   AQUATIC CENTER. A facility primarily designed to host non-recreational
competitive functions generally occurring within water, including, but not
limited to, water polo games, swimming meets, and diving events. Such facility
may be indoors, outdoors, or any combination thereof, and includes all
necessary supporting amenities, including but not limited to, locker rooms,
offices, snack bars, bleacher seating, and shade structures.
   BUILDING PERMIT.  Any permit issued by the city that authorizes vertical
construction, increases square footage, authorizes changes to land use, or
provides for the addition of a residential or nonresidential point of demand to
a water or wastewater system.
   CAPITAL FACILITY. An asset having a useful life of three or more years that
is a component of one or more categories of necessary public service provided
by the city. A CAPITAL FACILITY may include any associated purchase of real
property, architectural and engineering services leading to the design and
construction of buildings and facilities, improvements to existing facilities,
improvements to or expansions of existing facilities, and associated financing
and professional services. Wherever used herein, INFRASTRUCTURE shall have the
same meaning as CAPITAL FACILITIES .
   CATEGORY OF DEVELOPMENT. A specific category of residential, commercial, or
industrial development against which a development impact fee is calculated and
assessed. The city assesses development impact fees against the following
categories of development: commercial, residential, industrial, office and
other service and institutional.
   CATEGORY OF NECESSARY PUBLIC SERVICE. A CATEGORY OF NECESSARY PUBLIC
SERVICES for which the city is authorized to assess development impact fees, as
further defined in §
7-3-8(A)(1).
   CITY. The City of Somerton, Arizona.
   COMMERCIAL LAND USE. A land use category consisting of an area for service,
retail and other intensive types of commercial uses. Uses permitted pursuant to
the current city zoning ordinance.
   CREDIT.  A reduction in an assessed development impact fee resulting from
developer contributions to, payments for, construction of, or dedications for
capital facilities included in an Infrastructure Improvements Plan pursuant to
§
7-3-12 (or as otherwise permitted by this chapter).
   CREDIT AGREEMENT. A written agreement between the city and the developers of
subject development that allocates credits to the subject development pursuant
to §
7-3-12. A CREDIT AGREEMENT may be included as part of a development agreement
pursuant to §
7-3-13.
   CREDIT ALLOCATION. A term used to describe when credits are distributed to a
particular development or parcel of land after execution of a credit agreement,
but are not yet issued.
   CREDIT ISSUANCE. A term used to describe when the amount of an assessed
development impact fee attributable to a particular development or parcel of
land is reduced by applying a credit allocation.
   DEVELOPER. An individual, group of individuals, partnership, corporation,
limited liability company, association, municipal corporation, state agency, or
other person or entity undertaking land development activity, and their
respective successors and assigns.
   DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT. An agreement prepared in accordance with the
requirements of §
7-3-13, A.R.S. § 9-500.05, and any applicable requirements of the city code.
   DIRECT BENEFIT. A benefit to an EDU resulting from a capital facility that
addresses the need for a necessary public service created in whole or in part
by the EDU and meets either of the following criteria:
      (1)   The capital facility is located in the immediate area of the EDU
and is needed in the immediate area of the EDU to maintain the level of
service; or
      (2)   The capital facility substitutes for, or eliminates the need for a
capital facility that would have otherwise been needed in the immediate area of
the EDU to maintain the city's level of service.
   DWELLING UNIT. A house, apartment, mobile home or trailer, group of rooms,
or single room occupied as separate living quarters or, if vacant, intended for
occupancy as separate living quarters.
   EQUIPMENT. Machinery, tools, materials, and other supplies, not including
vehicles, that are needed by a capital facility to provide the level of service
specified by the Infrastructure Improvement Plan, but excluding replacement of
the same after initial development of the capital facility.
   EQUIVALENT DEMAND UNIT (EDU).  A unit of development within a particular
category of development, defined in terms of a standardized measure of the
demand that a unit of development in that category of development generates for
necessary public services in relation to the demand generated by a detached
single-family dwelling unit. For all categories of necessary public services,
the EDU factor for a detached single-family dwelling unit is one, while the EDU
factor for a unit of development within another category of development is
represented as a ratio of the demand for each category of necessary public
services typically generated by that unit as compared to the demand for such
services typically generated by a detached single-family dwelling unit. An EDU
shall be a service unit for purposes of A.R.S. § 9-463.05, paragraph (T),
subparagraph (10).
   EXCLUDED LIBRARY FACILITY.  Library facilities for which development impact
fees may not be charged pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-463.05, including that portion
of any library facility that exceeds 10,000 square feet, and equipment,
vehicles or appurtenances associated with library operations.
   EXCLUDED PARK FACILITY.  Park and recreational facilities for which
development impact fees may not be charged pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-463.05,
including amusement parks, aquariums, aquatic centers, auditoriums, arenas,
arts and cultural facilities, bandstand and orchestra facilities, bathhouses,
boathouses, clubhouses, community centers greater than 3,000 square feet in
floor area, environmental education centers, equestrian facilities, golf course
facilities, greenhouses, lakes, museums, theme parks, water reclamation or
riparian areas, wetlands, or zoo facilities.
   FEE REPORT. A written report developed pursuant to §
7-3-9 that identifies the methodology for calculating the amount of each
development impact fee, explains the relationship between the development
impact fee to be assessed and the plan-based cost per EDU calculated in the
Infrastructure Improvements Plan, and which meets other requirements set forth
in A.R.S. § 9-463.05.
   FINANCING or DEBT.  Any debt, bond, note, loan, interfund loan, fund
transfer, or other debt service obligation used to finance the development or
expansion of a capital facility.
   FIRE PROTECTION.  A category of necessary public services that includes fire
stations, fire equipment, fire vehicles and all appurtenances for fire
stations. FIRE PROTECTION does not include vehicles or equipment used to
provide administrative services, or helicopters or airplanes. FIRE PROTECTION
does not include any facility that is used for training firefighters from more
than one station or substation.
   GENERAL PLAN. Refers to the most recently adopted city general plan.
   GRANDFATHERED FACILITIES. Capital facilities provided through financing or
debt incurred before June 1, 2011, for which a development impact fee has been
pledged towards repayment as described in §
7-3-5(C).
   GROSS IMPACT FEE. The total development impact fee to be assessed against a
subject development on a per unit basis, prior to subtraction of any credits.
   INDUSTRIAL LAND USE. Light industrial parks/uses and limited commercial uses
as well as heavy industrial uses. Uses permitted pursuant to the current city
zoning ordinance.
   INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENTS PLAN.  Document or series of documents that meet
the requirements set forth in A.R.S. § 9-463.05, including those adopted
pursuant to §
7-3-9 to cover any category or combination of categories of necessary public
services.
   INSTITUTIONAL LAND USE. A category of non-residential land use that includes
private schools, hospitals, religious facilities, day care centers and other
similar public and quasi-public uses when not elsewhere classified in other
land use categories in the fee schedule.
   INTERIM FEE SCHEDULE.  Any development impact fee schedule established prior
to January 1, 2012, in accordance with then-applicable law, and which shall
expire not later than August 1, 2014, pursuant to §
7-3-11.
   LAND USE ASSUMPTIONS.  Projections of changes in land uses, densities,
intensities and population for a service area over a period of at least ten
years as specified in §
7-3-7.
   LEVEL OF SERVICE. A quantitative and/or qualitative measure of a necessary
public service that is to be provided by the city to development in a
particular service area, defined in terms of the relationship between service
capacity and service demand, accessibility, response times, comfort or
convenience of use, or other similar measures or combinations of measures.
Level of service may be measured differently for different categories of
necessary public services, as identified in the applicable Infrastructure
Improvements Plan.
   LIBRARY FACILITIES. A category of necessary public services in which
literary, musical, artistic, or reference materials are kept (materials may be
kept in any form of media such as electronic, magnetic, or paper) for non-
commercial use by the public in a facility providing a direct benefit to
development. Libraries do not include excluded library facilities, although a
library may contain, provide access to, or otherwise support an excluded
library facility.
   NECESSARY PUBLIC SERVICES. Shall have the meaning prescribed in A.R.S. § 9-
463.05, Subsection T, paragraph 5.
   OFFSET.  An amount which is subtracted from the overall costs of providing
necessary public services to account for those capital components of
infrastructure or associated debt that have been or will be paid for by a
development through taxes, fees (except for development impact fees), and other
revenue sources, as determined by the city pursuant to §
7-3-8.
   PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES. A category of necessary public services
including but not limited to parks, swimming pools and related facilities and
equipment located on real property not larger than 30 acres in area, as well as
park facilities larger than 30 acres where such facilities provide a direct
benefit. PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES do not include excluded park
facilities, although PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES may contain, provide
access to, or otherwise support an excluded park facility.
   PLAN-BASED COST PER EDU. The total future capital costs listed in the
Infrastructure Improvements Plan for a category of necessary public services
divided by the total new equivalent demand units projected in a particular
service area for that category of necessary public services over the same time
period.
   PLEDGED.  Where used with reference to a development impact fee, a
development impact fee shall be considered PLEDGED  where it was identified by
the city as a source of payment or repayment for financing or debt that was
identified as the source of financing for a necessary public service for which
a development impact fee was assessed pursuant to the then-applicable
provisions of A.R.S. § 9-463.05.
   POLICE FACILITIES.  A category of necessary public services, including
vehicles and equipment, that are used by law enforcement agencies to preserve
the public peace, prevent crime, detect and arrest criminal offenders, protect
the rights of persons and property, regulate and control motorized and
pedestrian traffic, train sworn personnel, and/or provide and maintain police
records, vehicles, equipment, and communications systems. POLICE FACILITIES do
not include vehicles and equipment used to provide administrative services, or
helicopters or airplanes.  POLICE FACILITIES do not include any facility that
is used for training officers from more than one station or substation.
   PRIVATE SCHOOL.  An institution of learning offering education for children
which charges students tuition, including some or all of the grades from
kindergarten through 12th grade. The site may contain athletic, dining,
assembly and recreation facilities.
   PUBLIC SCHOOL. An institution of learning offering free education for all
children, including some or all of the grades from kindergarten through 12th
grade. The site may contain athletic, dining, assembly and recreation
facilities.
   QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL. Any one of the following:
      (1)   Professional engineer, surveyor, financial analyst or planner, or
other licensed professional providing services within the scope of that
person's education or experience related to city planning, zoning, or impact
development fees and holding a license issued by an agency or political
subdivision of the State of Arizona;
      (2)   A financial analyst, planner, or other non-licensed professional
that is providing services within the scope of the person's education or
experience related to city planning, zoning, or impact development fees; or
      (3)   Any other person operating under the supervision of one or more of
the above.
   RESIDENTIAL LAND USE.  Includes all uses from single family residential,
detached, attached, multi-family, age restricted residential and other uses as
permitted in the city zoning ordinance.
   SERVICE AREA.  Any specified area within the boundaries of the city within
which the city will provide a category of necessary public services to
development at a planned level of service, and within which a substantial nexus
exists between the capital facilities to be provided and the development to be
served, or in the case of library facilities or a park facility larger than 30
acres, a direct benefit exists between the library facilities or park
facilities and the development to be served, each as prescribed in the
Infrastructure Improvements Plan. Some or all of the capital facilities
providing service to a SERVICE AREA may be physically located outside of that
SERVICE AREA provided that the required substantial nexus or direct benefit is
demonstrated to exist.
   STREET FACILITIES.  A category of necessary public services including
arterial or collector streets or roads, traffic signals, rights-of-way, and
improvements thereon, bridges, culverts, irrigation tiling, storm drains, and
regional transportation facilities.
   STORM DRAINAGE. A category of necessary public services including but not
limited to storm sewers constructed in sizes needed to provide for stormwater
management for areas beyond major street projects and stormwater detention/
retention basins, tanks, pump stations and channels necessary to provide for
proper stormwater management, including any appurtenances for those facilities.
   SUBJECT DEVELOPMENT. A land area linked by a unified plan of development,
which must be contiguous unless the land area is part of a development
agreement executed in accordance with §
7-3-13.
   SUBSTANTIAL NEXUS.  A SUBSTANTIAL NEXUS exists where the demand for
necessary public services that will be generated by an EDU can be reasonably
quantified in terms of the burden it will impose on the available capacity of
existing capital facilities, the need it will create for new or expanded
capital facilities, and/or the benefit to the development from those capital
facilities.
   SWIMMING POOL. A public facility primarily designed and/or utilized for
recreational noncompetitive functions generally occurring within water,
including, but not limited to, swimming classes, open public swimming sessions,
and recreational league swimming/diving events. The facility may be indoors,
outdoors, or any combination thereof, and includes all necessary supporting
amenities.
   USEFUL LIFE.  The period of time in which an asset can reasonably be
expected to be used under normal conditions, whether or not the asset will
continue to be owned and operated by the city over the entirety of such period.
   VEHICLE. Any device, structure, or conveyance utilized for transportation in
the course of providing a particular category of necessary public services at a
specified level of service, excluding helicopters and other aircraft.
   WASTEWATER. A category of necessary public services including but not
limited to sewers, lift stations, reclamation plants, wastewater treatment
plants, and all other facilities for the collection, interception,
transportation, treatment and disposal of wastewater, and any appurtenances for
those facilities.
   WATER.  A category of necessary public services including but not limited to
those facilities necessary to provide for water services to development,
including the acquisition, supply, transportation, treatment, purification and
distribution of water, and any appurtenances to those facilities.
(Ord. 2014-004, passed 6-17-2014)
§ 7-3-4 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided herein, from and after August 1, 2014,
this chapter shall apply to all new development within any service area
excluding the development of any city-owned facility.
   (B)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all of the territory
within the corporate limits of the city and/or within the city's water and
wastewater service areas.
   (C)   The City Manager or his/her designee is authorized to make
determinations regarding the application, administration and enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2014-004, passed 6-17-2014)
§ 7-3-5 AUTHORITY FOR DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES.
   (A)   Fee report and implementation. The city may assess and collect a
development impact fee for costs of necessary public services, including all
professional services required for the preparation or revision of an
Infrastructure Improvements Plan, fee report, development impact fee, and
required reports or audits conducted pursuant to this chapter. Development
impact fees shall be subject to the following requirements:
      (1)   The city shall develop and adopt a fee report that analyzes and
defines the development impact fees to be charged in each service area for each
capital facility category, based on the Infrastructure Improvements Plan and
the plan-based cost per EDU calculated pursuant to §
7-3-8(A)(12).
      (2)   Development impact fees shall be assessed against all new
commercial, residential, and industrial developments, provided that the city
may assess different amounts of development impact fees against specific
categories of development based on the actual burdens and costs that are
associated with providing necessary public services to that category of
development. No development impact fee shall exceed the plan-based cost per EDU
for any category of development.
      (3)   No development impact fees shall be charged, or credits issued, for
any capital facility that does not fall within one of the categories of
necessary public services for which development impact fees may be assessed as
identified in §
7-3-8(A)(1).
      (4)   Costs for necessary public services made necessary by new
development shall be based on the same level of service provided to existing
development in the same service area. Development impact fees may not be used
to provide a higher level of service to existing development or to meet
stricter safety, efficiency, environmental, or other regulatory standards to
the extent that these are applied to existing capital facilities that are
serving existing development.
      (5)   Development impact fees may not be used to pay the city's
administrative, maintenance, or other operating costs.
      (6)   Projected interest charges and financing costs can only be included
in development impact fees to the extent they represent principal and/or
interest on the portion of any financing or debt used to finance the
construction or expansion of a capital facility identified in the
Infrastructure Improvements Plan.
      (7)    Except for any fees included on interim fee schedules, all
development impact fees charged by the city must be included in a fee schedule
prepared pursuant to this chapter and included in the fee report; example
versions of all fee schedules are provided in Appendix A.
      (8)   All development impact fees shall meet the requirements of A.R.S. §
9-463.05.
   (B)   Costs per EDU. The fee report shall summarize the costs of capital
facilities necessary to serve new development on a per EDU basis as defined and
calculated in the Infrastructure Improvements Plan, including all required
offsets, and shall recommend a development impact fee structure for adoption by
the city. The actual impact fees to be assessed shall be disclosed and adopted
in the form of impact fee schedules.
   (C)   Carry-over of previously-established development impact fees and
grandfathered facilities. Notwithstanding the requirements of this chapter,
certain development impact fees adopted by the city prior to the effective date
of this chapter shall continue in effect as follows:
      (1)   Until August 1, 2014, or the date a new development impact fee is
effective for the applicable category of necessary public services in a service
area pursuant to this chapter, whichever occurs first, development impact fees
established prior to January 1, 2012, shall continue in full force and effect
to the extent that the development impact fee is used to provide a category of
necessary public services that is authorized by §
7-3-8. Development impact fees collected prior to January 1, 2012, shall be
expended on capital facilities within the same category of necessary public
services for which they were collected.
      (2)   The city may continue to collect and use any development impact fee
established before January 1, 2012, even if the development impact fee would
not otherwise be permitted to be collected and spent pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-
463.05, as amended by the state legislature in SB 1525, Fiftieth Legislature,
First Regular Session, if either of the following apply:
         (a)   Both of the following conditions are met:
            1.   Prior to June 1, 2011, the development impact fee was pledged
towards the repayment of financing or debt incurred by the city to provide a
capital facility.
            2.   The applicable capital facility was included in the city's
Infrastructure Improvements Plan, or other city planning document prepared
pursuant to applicable law, prior to June 1, 2011.
         (b)   Before August 1, 2014, the city uses the development impact fee
to finance a capital facility in accordance with A.R.S. § 9-463.05, Subsection
(S).
      (3)   Defined terms in any previously established fee schedule shall be
interpreted according to the ordinance in effect at the time of their adoption.
(Ord. 2014-004, passed 6-17-2014)
§ 7-3-6 ADMINISTRATION OF DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES.
   (A)   Separate accounts. Development impact fees collected pursuant to this
chapter shall be placed in separate, interest-bearing accounts for each capital
facility category within each service area.
   (B)   Limitations on use of fees. Development impact fees and any interest
thereon collected pursuant to this chapter shall be spent to provide capital
facilities associated with the same category of necessary public services in
the same service area for which they were collected, including costs of
financing or debt used by the city to finance such capital facilities and other
costs authorized by this chapter that are included in the Infrastructure
Improvements Plan.
   (C)   Time limit. Development impact fees collected after July 31, 2014,
shall be used within ten years of the date upon which they were collected for
all categories of necessary public services except for water and wastewater
facilities. For water facilities or wastewater facilities collected after July
31, 2014, development impact fees must be used within 15 years of the date upon
which they were collected.
(Ord. 2014-004, passed 6-17-2014)
§ 7-3-7 LAND USE ASSUMPTIONS.
   The Infrastructure Improvements Plan shall be consistent with the city's
current land use assumptions for each service area and each category of
necessary public services as adopted by the city pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-463.05.
   (A)   Reviewing the land use assumptions. Prior to the adoption or amendment
of an Infrastructure Improvements Plan, the city shall review and evaluate the
land use assumptions on which the Infrastructure Improvements Plan is to be
based to ensure that the land use assumptions within each service area conform
with the general plan.
   (B)   Evaluating necessary changes. If the land use assumptions upon which
an Infrastructure Improvements Plan is based have not been updated within the
last five years, the city shall evaluate the land use assumptions to determine
whether changes are necessary. If, after general evaluation, the city
determines that the land use assumptions are still valid, the city shall issue
the report required in §
7-3-10.
   (C)   Required modifications to land use assumptions. If the city determines
that changes to the land use assumptions are necessary in order to adopt or
amend an Infrastructure Improvements Plan, it shall make such changes as
necessary to the land use assumptions prior to or in conjunction with the
review and approval of the Infrastructure Improvements Plan pursuant to §
7-3-10.
(Ord. 2014-004, passed 6-17-2014)
§ 7-3-8 INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENT PLAN.
   (A)   Infrastructure Improvements Plan contents. The Infrastructure
Improvements Plan shall be developed by qualified professionals and may be
based upon or incorporated within the city's Capital Improvements Plan. The
Infrastructure Improvements Plan shall:
      (1)   Specify the categories of necessary public services for which the
city will impose a development impact fee, which may include any or all of the
following:
         (a)   Water;
         (b)   Wastewater;
         (c)   Stormwater, drainage, and flood control;
         (d)   Libraries;
         (e)   Street facilities;
         (f)   Fire protection;
         (g)   Police; or
         (h)   Parks.
      (2)   Define and provide a map of one or more service areas within which
the city will provide each category of necessary public services for which
development impact fees will be charged. Each service area must be defined in a
manner that demonstrates a substantial nexus between the capital facilities to
be provided in the service area and the EDUs to be served by those capital
facilities. For libraries and for parks larger than 30 acres, each service area
must be defined in a manner that demonstrates a direct benefit between the
capital facilities and the EDUs to be served by those capital facilities. The
city may cover more than one category of capital facilities in the same service
area provided that there is an independent substantial nexus or direct benefit,
as applicable, between each category of necessary public services and the EDUs
to be served.
      (3)   Identify and describe the land use assumptions upon which the
Infrastructure Improvements Plan is based in each service area.
      (4)   Analyze and identify the existing level of service provided by the
city to existing EDUs for each category of necessary public services in each
service area.
      (5)   Identify the level of service to be provided by the city for each
category of necessary public services in each service area based on the
relevant land use assumptions and any established city standards or policies
related to required levels of service. If the city provides the same category
of necessary public services in more than one service area, the Infrastructure
Improvements Plan shall include a comparison of the levels of service to be
provided in each service area.
      (6)   For each category of necessary public services, analyze and
identify the existing capacity of the capital facilities in each service area,
the utilization of those capital facilities by existing EDUs, and the available
excess capacity of those capital facilities to serve new EDUs including any
existing or planned commitments or agreements for the usage of such capacity.
The Infrastructure Improvements Plan shall additionally identify any changes or
upgrades to existing capital facilities that will be needed to achieve or
maintain the planned level of service to existing EDUs, or to meet new safety,
efficiency, environmental, or other regulatory requirements for services
provided to existing EDUs.
      (7)   Identify any grandfathered facilities and the impact thereof on the
need for necessary public services in each affected service area.
      (8)   Estimate the total number of existing and future EDUs within each
service area based on the city's land use assumptions and projected new EDUs in
each service area.
      (9)   Based on the analysis in divisions (3) through (6) above, provide a
summary table or tables describing the level of service for each category of
necessary public services by relating the required capital facilities to EDUs
in each service area, and identifying the applicable EDU factor associated with
each category of development.
      (10)   For each category of necessary public services, analyze and
identify the projected utilization of any available excess capacity in existing
capital facilities, and all new or expanded capital facilities that will be
required to provide and maintain the planned level of service in each service
area as a result of the new projected EDUs in that service area, for a period
not to exceed ten years. Nothing in this division shall prohibit the city from
additionally including in its Infrastructure Improvements Plan projected
utilization of, or needs for, capital facilities for a period longer than ten
years, provided that the costs of such capital facilities are excluded from the
calculation of the plan-based cost per EDU.
      (11)   For each category of necessary public services, estimate the total
cost of any available excess capacity and/or new or expanded capital facilities
that will be required to serve new EDUs, including costs of land acquisition,
improvements, engineering and architectural services, studies leading to
design, design, construction, financing, and administrative costs, as well as
projected costs of inflation. Such total costs shall not include costs for
ongoing operation and maintenance of capital facilities, nor for replacement of
capital facilities to the extent that such replacement is necessary to serve
existing EDUs. If the Infrastructure Improvements Plan includes changes or
upgrades to existing capital facilities that will be needed to achieve or
maintain the planned level of service to existing EDUs or to meet new
regulatory requirements for services provided to existing EDUs, such costs
shall be identified and distinguished in the Infrastructure Improvements Plan.
      (12)   Forecast the revenues from taxes, fees, assessments or other
sources that will be available to fund the new or expanded capital facilities
identified in the Infrastructure Improvements Plan, which shall include
estimated state-shared revenue, highway users revenue, federal revenue, ad
valorem property taxes, construction contracting or similar excise taxes and
the capital recovery portion of utility fees attributable to development based
on the approved land use assumptions. The Infrastructure Improvements Plan
shall additionally estimate the time required to finance, construct and
implement the new or expanded capital facilities.
      (13)   Calculate required offsets as follows:
         (a)   From the forecasted revenues in division (12) above, identify
those sources of revenue that are attributable to new development and will
contribute to paying for the capital costs of necessary public services.
         (b)   For each source and amount of revenue identified pursuant to
division (a) above, calculate the relative contribution of each category of
development to paying for the capital costs of necessary public services in
each service area.
         (c)   Based on the relative contributions identified pursuant to
division (b) above, for each category of necessary public services, calculate
the total offset to be provided to each category of development in each service
area.
         (d)   For each category of necessary public services, convert the
total offset to be provided to each category of development in each service
area into an offset amount per EDU by dividing the total offset for each
category of development by the number of EDUs associated with that category of
development.
         (e)   Beginning August 1, 2014, for purposes of calculating the
required offset, if the city imposes a construction, contracting, or similar
excise tax rate in excess of the percentage amount of the transaction privilege
tax rate that is imposed on the majority of other transaction privilege tax
classifications in the city, the entire excess portion of the construction,
contracting, or similar excise tax shall be treated as a contribution to the
capital costs of necessary public services provided to new development unless
the excess portion is already utilized for such purpose pursuant to this
section.
         (f)   In determining the amount of required offset for land included
in a community facilities district established under A.R.S. Title 48, Chapter
4, Article 6, the city shall take into account any capital facilities provided
by the district that are included in the Infrastructure Improvements Plan and
the capital costs paid by the district for such capital facilities, and shall
offset impact fees assessed within the community facilities district
proportionally.
      (14)   Calculate the plan-based cost per EDU by:
         (a)   Dividing the total projected costs to provide capital facilities
to new EDUs for each category of necessary public services in each service area
as determined pursuant to division (9) above into the number of new EDUs
projected for that service area over a period not to exceed ten years,
considering the specific EDU factor(s) associated with such EDUs for each
category of necessary public services.
         (b)   Subtracting the required offset per EDU calculated pursuant to
division (11) above.
   (B)   Multiple plans. An Infrastructure Improvements Plan adopted pursuant
to this division may address one or more of the city's categories of necessary
public services in any or all of the city's service areas. Each capital
facility shall be subject to no more than one Infrastructure Improvements Plan
at any given time.
   (C)   Reserved capacity. The city may reserve capacity in an Infrastructure
Improvements Plan to serve one or more planned future developments, including
capacity reserved through a development agreement pursuant to §
7-3-13. All reservations of existing capacity must be disclosed in the
Infrastructure Improvements Plan at the time it is adopted.
(Ord. 2014-004, passed 6-17-2014)
§ 7-3-9 ADOPTION AND MODIFICATION PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Adopting or amending the Infrastructure Improvements Plan. The
Infrastructure Improvements Plan shall be adopted or amended subject to the
following procedures:
      (1)   Major amendments to the Infrastructure Improvements Plan. Except as
provided in division (A)(2) below, the adoption or amendment of an
Infrastructure Improvement Plan shall occur at one or more public hearings
according to the following schedule, and may occur concurrently with the
adoption of an update of the city's land use assumptions as provided in §
7-3-7:
         (a)   Sixty days before the first public hearing regarding a new or
updated Infrastructure Improvements Plan, the city shall provide public notice
of the hearing and post the Infrastructure Improvements Plan and the underlying
land use assumptions on its website. The city shall additionally make available
to the public the documents used to prepare the Infrastructure Improvements
Plan and underlying land use assumptions and the amount of any proposed changes
to the plan-based cost per EDU.
         (b)   The city shall conduct a public hearing on the Infrastructure
Improvements Plan and underlying land use assumptions at least 30 days, but no
more than 60 days, before approving or disapproving the Infrastructure
Improvements Plan.
      (2)   Minor amendments to the Infrastructure Improvements Plan.
Notwithstanding the other requirements of this section, the city may update the
Infrastructure Improvements Plan and/or its underlying land use assumptions
without a public hearing if all of the following apply:
         (a)   The changes in the Infrastructure Improvements Plan and/or the
underlying land use assumptions will not add any new category of necessary
public services to any service area.
         (b)   The changes in the Infrastructure Improvements Plan and/or the
underlying land use assumptions will not increase the level of service to be
provided in any service area.
         (c)   Based on an analysis of the fee report and the city's adopted
development impact fee schedules, the changes in the Infrastructure
Improvements Plan and/or the underlying land use assumptions would not,
individually or cumulatively with other amendments undertaken pursuant to this
division, have caused a development impact fee in any service area to have been
increased by more than 5% above the development impact fee that is provided in
the current development impact fee schedule.
         (d)   At least 30 days prior to the date that the any amendment
pursuant to this section is adopted, the city shall post the proposed
amendments on the city website.
   (B)   Amendments to the fee report. Any adoption or amendment of a fee
report and fee schedule shall occur at one or more public hearings according to
the following schedule:
      (1)   The first public hearing on the fee report must be held at least 30
days after the adoption or approval of and Infrastructure Improvements Plan as
provided in division (A) above. The city must give at least 30 days notice
prior to the hearing, provided that this notice may be given on the same day as
the approval or disapproval of the Infrastructure Improvements Plan.
      (2)   The city shall make the Infrastructure Improvements Plan and
underlying land use assumptions available to the public on the city's website
30 days prior to the public hearing described in division (B)(1) above.
      (3)   The fee report may be adopted by the city no sooner than 30 days,
and no later than 60 days, after the hearing described in division (B)(1)
above.
      (4)   The development fee schedules in the fee report adopted pursuant to
this division shall become effective 75 days after adoption of the fee report
by the city.
(Ord. 2014-004, passed 6-17-2014)
§ 7-3-10 FIVE-YEAR VALIDITY OF THE INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENTS PLAN AND THE
LAND USE ASSUMPTIONS.
   (A)   Renewing the Infrastructure Improvements Plan. Except as provided in
division (B) below, not later than every five years the city shall update the
applicable Infrastructure Improvements Plan and fee report related to each
category of necessary public services pursuant to §
7-3-9. Such five-year period shall be calculated from the date of the adoption
of the Infrastructure Improvements Plan or the date of the adoption of the fee
report, whichever occurs later.
   (B)   Determination of no changes. Notwithstanding division (A) above, if
the city determines that no changes to an Infrastructure Improvements Plan,
underlying land use assumptions, or fee report are needed, the city may elect
to continue the existing Infrastructure Improvements Plan and fee report
without amendment by providing notice as follows:
      (1)   Notice of the determination shall be published at least 180 days
prior to the end of the five-year period described in division (A) of this
section.
      (2)   The notice shall identify the Infrastructure Improvements Plan and
fee report that shall continue in force without amendment.
      (3)   The notice shall provide a map and description of the service area
(s) covered by such Infrastructure Improvements Plan and fee report.
      (4)   The notice shall identify an address to which any resident of the
city may submit, within 60 days, a written request that the city update the
Infrastructure Improvements Plan, underlying land use assumptions, and/or fee
report and the reasons and basis for the request.
   (C)   Response to comments. The city shall consider and respond within 30
days to any timely requests submitted pursuant to division (B)(4) of this
section.
(Ord. 2014-004, passed 6-17-2014)
§ 7-3-11 COLLECTION OF DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES.
   (A)   Collection. Development impact fees, together with administrative
charges assessed pursuant to division (A)(6) of this section, shall be
calculated and collected prior to issuance of permission to commence
development, specifically:
      (1)   Unless otherwise specified pursuant to a development agreement
adopted pursuant to §
7-3-13, development impact fees shall be paid prior to issuance of a building
permit according to the current development impact fee schedule for the
applicable service area(s) as adopted pursuant to this chapter, or according to
any other development impact fee schedule as authorized in this chapter.
      (2)   If a building permit is not required for the development, but water
or wastewater connections are required, any and all development impact fees due
shall be paid at the time the water service connection is purchased. If only a
wastewater connection is required, the development impact fees shall be paid
prior to approval of a connection to the sewer system. Wastewater development
impact fees shall be assessed if a development connects to the public sewer, or
as determined by the Public Works Director, is capable of discharging sewage to
a city public sewer.
      (3)   If the development is located in a service area with a stormwater,
drainage, and flood control development impact fee, and neither a building
permit, water, or sewer service connection is required, the storm drainage
development impact fee due shall be paid at the time a civil or site permit is
issued for the development.
      (4)   No building permit, water or sewer connection, or certificate of
occupancy shall be issued if a development impact fee is not paid as directed
in the previous paragraphs.
      (5)   If the building permit is for a change in the type of building use,
an increase in square footage, a change to land use, or an addition to a
residential or nonresidential point of demand to the water or wastewater
system, the development impact fee shall be assessed on the additional service
units resulting from the expansion or change, and following the development
impact fee schedule applicable to any new use type.
      (6)   For issued permits that expire or are voided, development impact
fees and administrative charges shall be as follows:
         (a)   If the original permittee is seeking to renew an expired or
voided permit, and the development impact fees paid for such development have
not been refunded, then the permittee shall pay the difference between any
development impact fees paid at the time the permit was issued and those in the
fee schedule at the time the permit is reissued or renewed.
         (b)   If a new or renewed permit for the same development is being
sought by someone other than the original permittee, the new permit applicant
shall pay the full development impact fees specified in the fee schedule in
effect at the time that the permits are reissued or renewed. If the original
permittee has assigned its rights under the permits to the new permit
applicant, the new permit applicant shall pay development impact fees as if it
were the original permittee.
   (B)   Exceptions. Development impact fees shall not be owed under either of
the following conditions:
      (1)   Development impact fees have been paid for the development and the
permit(s) which triggered the collection of the development impact fees have
not expired or been voided.
      (2)   The approval(s) that trigger the collection of development impact
fees involve modifications to existing residential or non-residential
development that do not add new EDUs, increase the impact of existing EDUs on
existing or future capital facilities, or change the land-use type of the
existing development to a different category of development for which a higher
development impact fee would have been due. To the extent that any modification
does not meet the requirements of this division, the development impact fee due
shall be the difference between the development impact fee that was or would
have been due on the existing development and the development impact fee that
is due on the development as modified.
   (C)   Temporary exemptions from development impact fee schedules. New
developments in the city shall be temporarily exempt from increases in
development impact fees that result from the adoption of new or modified
development impact fee schedules as follows:
      (1)   Residential uses. On or after the day that the first building
permit is issued for a single-family residential development, the city shall,
at the permittee's request, provide the permittee with an applicable
development impact fee schedule that shall be in force for a period of 24
months beginning on the day that the first building permit is issued, and which
shall expire at the end of the first business day of the twenty-fifth month
thereafter. During the effective period of the applicable development impact
fee schedule, any building permit issued for the same single-family residential
development shall not be subject to any new or modified development impact fee
schedule.
      (2)   Commercial, industrial and multi-family uses. On or after the day
that the final approval, as defined in A.R.S. § 9-463.05(T)(4), is issued for a
commercial, industrial or multi-family development, the city shall provide an
applicable development impact fee schedule that shall be in force for a period
of 24 months beginning on the day that final development approval of a site
plan or final subdivision plat is given, and which shall expire at the end of
the first business day of the twenty-fifth month thereafter. During the
effective period of the applicable development impact fee schedule, any
building permit issued for the same development shall not be subject to any new
or modified development impact fee schedule.
      (3)   Other development. Any category of development not covered under
divisions (C)(1) and (C)(2) above shall pay development impact fees according
to the fee schedule that is current at the time of collection as specified in
division (A).
      (4)   Changes to site plans and subdivision plats. Notwithstanding the
other requirements of this division, if changes are made to a development's
final site plan or subdivision plat that will increase the number of service
units after the issuance of a grandfathered development impact fee schedule,
the city may assess any new or modified development impact fees against the
additional service units. If the city reduces the amount of an applicable
development impact fee during the period that a grandfathered development
impact fee schedule is in force, the city shall assess the lower development
impact fee.
   (D)   Option to pursue special fee determination. Where a development is of
a type that does not closely fit within a particular category of development
appearing on an adopted development impact fee schedule, or where a development
has unique characteristics such that the actual burdens and costs associated
with providing necessary public services to that development will differ
substantially from that associated with other developments in a specified
category of development, the city may require the applicant to provide the City
Community Development Director or authorized designee with an alternative
development impact fee analysis. Based on a projection of the actual burdens
and costs that will be associated with the development, the alternative
development impact fee analysis may propose a unique fee for the development
based on the application of an appropriate EDU factor to the applicable plan-
based cost per EDU, or may propose that the development be covered under the
development impact fee schedule governing a different and more analogous
category of development. The City Community Development Director or authorized
designee shall review the alternative impact fee analysis and shall make a
determination as to the development impact fee to be charged. Such decision
shall be appealable pursuant to §
7-3-14. The City Community Development Director or authorized designee may
require the applicant to pay an administrative fee to cover the actual costs of
reviewing the special fee determination application.
(Ord. 2014-004, passed 6-17-2014)
§ 7-3-12 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE CREDITS AND CREDIT AGREEMENTS.
   (A)   Eligibility of capital facility. All development impact fee credits
must meet the following requirements:
      (1)   One of the following is true:
         (a)   The capital facility, or the financial contribution toward a
capital facility that will be provided by the developer and for which a credit
will be issued, must be identified in an adopted infrastructure improvements
plan and fee report as a capital facility for which a development impact fee
was assessed; or
         (b)   The applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city
that, given the class and type of improvement, the subject capital facility
should have been included in the Infrastructure Improvements Plan in lieu of a
different capital facility that was included in the Infrastructure Improvements
Plan and for which a development impact fee was assessed. If the subject
capital facility is determined to be eligible for a credit in this manner, the
city shall amend the Infrastructure Improvements Plan to include the subject
replacement facility and delete the capital facility that will be replaced.
      (2)   Credits shall not be available for any infrastructure provided by a
developer if the cost of such infrastructure will be repaid to the developer by
the city through another agreement or mechanism. To the extent that the
developer will be paid or reimbursed by the city for any contribution, payment,
construction, or dedication from any city funding source including an agreement
to reimburse the developer with future collected development impact fees
pursuant to §
7-3-13, any credits claimed by the developer shall be deducted from any amounts
to be paid or reimbursed by the city or reduced by the amount of such payment
or reimbursement.
   (B)   Eligibility of subject development. To be eligible for a credit, the
subject development must be located within the service area of the eligible
capital facility.
   (C)   Calculation of credits. Credits will be based on that portion of the
costs for an eligible capital facility identified in the adopted Infrastructure
Improvements Plan for which a development fee was assessed pursuant to the fee
report. If the gross impact fee for a particular category of necessary public
service is adopted at an amount lower than the plan-based cost per EDU, the
amount of any credit shall be reduced in proportion to the difference between
the plan-based cost per EDU and the gross impact fee adopted. A credit shall
not exceed the actual costs the applicant incurred in providing the eligible
capital facility.
   (D)   Allocation of credits. Before any credit can be issued to a subject
development (or portion thereof), the credit must be allocated to that
development as follows:
      (1)   The developer and the city must execute a credit agreement
including all of the following:
         (a)   The total amount of the credits resulting from provision of an
eligible capital facility.
         (b)   The estimated number of EDUs to be served within the subject
development.
         (c)   The method by which the credit values will be distributed within
the subject development.
      (2)   It is the responsibility of the developer to request allocation of
development impact fee credits through an application for a credit agreement
(which may be part of a development agreement entered into pursuant to §
7-3-13).
      (3)   If a building permit is issued or a water/sewer connection is
purchased, and a development impact fee is paid prior to execution of a credit
agreement for the subject development, no credits may be allocated
retroactively to that permit or connection. Credits may be allocated to any
remaining permits for the subject development in accordance with this chapter.
      (4)   If the entity that provides an eligible capital facility sells or
relinquishes a development (or portion thereof) that it owns or controls prior
to execution of a credit agreement or development agreement, credits resulting
from the eligible capital facility will only be allocated to the development if
the entity legally assigns such rights and responsibilities to its successor(s)
in interest for the subject development.
      (5)   If multiple entities jointly provide an eligible capital facility,
both entities must enter into a single credit agreement with the city, and any
request for the allocation of credit within the subject development(s) must be
made jointly by the entities that provided the eligible capital facility.
      (6)   Credits may only be reallocated from or within a subject
development with the city's approval of an amendment to an executed credit
agreement, subject to the following conditions:
         (a)   The entity that executed the original agreement with the city,
or its legal successor in interest and the entity that currently controls the
subject development are parties to the request for reallocation.
         (b)   The reallocation proposal does not change the value of any
credits already issued for the subject development.
      (7)   A credit agreement may authorize the allocation of credits to a
non-contiguous parcel only if all of the following conditions are met:
         (a)   The entity that executed the original agreement with the city or
its legal successor in interest, the entity that currently controls the subject
development, and the entity that controls the non-contiguous parcel are parties
to the request for reallocation.
         (b)   The reallocation proposal does not change the value of any
credits already issued for the subject development.
         (c)   The non-contiguous parcel is in the same service area as that
served by the eligible capital facility.
         (d)   The non-contiguous parcel receives a necessary public service
from the eligible capital facility.
         (e)   The credit agreement specifically states the value of the
credits to be allocated to each parcel and/or EDU, or establishes a mechanism
for future determination of the credit values.
         (f)   The credit agreement does not involve the transfer of credits to
or from any property subject to a development agreement.
   (E)   Credit agreement. Credits shall only be issued pursuant to a credit
agreement executed in accordance with division (D) of this section. The City
Manager or authorized designee is authorized by this chapter to enter into a
credit agreement with the controlling entity of a subject development, subject
to the following:
      (1)   The developer requesting the credit agreement shall provide all
information requested by the city to allow it to determine the value of the
credit to be applied.
      (2)   An application for a credit agreement shall be submitted to the
city by the developer within one year of the date on which ownership or control
of the capital facility passes to the city.
      (3)   The developer shall submit a draft credit agreement to the City
Manager or authorized designee(s) for review in the form provided to the
applicant by the city. The draft credit agreement shall include, at a minimum,
all of the following information and supporting documentation:
         (a)   A legal description and map depicting the location of the
subject development for which credit is being applied. The map shall depict the
location of the capital facilities that have been or will be provided.
         (b)   An estimate of the total EDUs that will be developed within the
subject development depicted on the map and described in the legal description.
         (c)   A list of the capital facilities, associated physical
attributes, and the related costs as stated in the Infrastructure improvements
Plan.
         (d)   Documentation showing the date(s) of acceptance by the city, if
the capital facilities have already been provided.
         (e)   The total amount of credit to be applied within the subject
development and the calculations leading to the total amount of credit.
         (f)   The credit amount to be applied to each EDU within the subject
development for each category of necessary public services.
      (4)   The credit agreement shall be approved by the City Council prior to
its execution. The city's determination of the credit to be allocated is final.
      (5)   Upon execution of the credit agreement by the city and the
applicant, credits shall be deemed allocated to the subject development.
      (6)   Any amendment to a previously approved credit agreement must be
initiated within two years of the city's final acceptance of the eligible
capital facility for which the amendment is requested.
      (7)   Any credit agreement approved as part of a development agreement
shall be amended in accordance with the terms of the development agreement and
§
7-3-13.
   (F)   Issuance of credits. Credits allocated pursuant to division (D) of
this section may be issued and applied toward the gross impact fees due from a
development, subject to the following conditions:
      (1)   Credits issued for an eligible capital facility may only be applied
to the development impact fee due for the applicable category of necessary
public services, and may not be applied to any fee due for another category of
necessary public services.
      (2)   Credits shall only be issued when the eligible capital facility
from which the credits were derived has been accepted by the city or when
adequate security for the completion of the eligible capital facility has been
provided in accordance with all terms of an executed development agreement.
      (3)   Where credits have been issued pursuant to division (F)(2) above,
an impact fee due at the time a building permit is issued shall be reduced by
the credit amount stated in or calculated from the executed credit agreement.
Where credits have not yet been issued, the gross impact fee shall be paid in
full, and a refund of the credit amount shall be due when the developer
demonstrates compliance with division (F)(2) above in a written request to the
city.
      (4)   Credits, once issued, may not be rescinded or reallocated to
another permit or parcel, except that credits may be released for reuse on the
same subject development if a building permit for which the credits were issued
has expired or been voided and is otherwise eligible for a refund under §
7-3-15(A)(2)(a).
      (5)   Notwithstanding the other provisions of this §
7-3-12, credits issued prior to January 1, 2012, may only be used for the
subject development for which they were issued. Such credits may be transferred
to a new owner of all or part of the subject development in proportion to the
percentage of ownership in the subject development to be held by the new owner.
(Ord. 2014-004, passed 6-17-2014)
§ 7-3-13 DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS.
   Development agreements containing provisions regarding development impact
fees, development impact fee credits, and/or disbursement of revenues from
development impact fee accounts shall comply with the following:
   (A)   Development agreement required. A development agreement is required to
authorize any of the following:
      (1)   To issue credits prior to the city's acceptance of an eligible
capital facility.
      (2)   To allocate credits to a parcel that is not contiguous with the
subject development and that does not meet the requirements of division (D)(7)
of §
7-3-12.
      (3)   To reimburse the developer of an eligible capital facility using
funds from development impact fee accounts.
      (4)   To allocate different credit amounts per EDU to different parcels
within a subject development.
      (5)   For a single family residential dwelling unit, to allow development
impact fees to be paid at a later time than the issuance of a building permit
as provided in this section.
   (B)   General requirements. All development agreements shall be prepared and
executed in accordance with A.R.S. § 9-500.05 and any applicable requirements
of the city code. Except where specifically modified by this section, all
provisions of §
7-3-12 shall apply to any credit agreement that is authorized as part of a
development agreement.
   (C)   Early credit issuance. A development agreement may authorize the
issuance of credits prior to acceptance of an eligible capital facility by the
city when the development agreement specifically states the form and value of
the security (i.e. bond, letter of credit, and the like) to be provided to the
city/town prior to issuance of any credits. The city shall determine the
acceptable form and value of the security to be provided.
   (D)   Non-contiguous credit allocation. A development agreement may
authorize the allocation of credits to a non-contiguous parcel only if all of
the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The non-contiguous parcel is in the same service area as that
served by the eligible capital facility.
      (2)   The non-contiguous parcel receives a necessary public service from
the eligible capital facility.
      (3)   The development agreement specifically states the value of the
credits to be allocated to each parcel and/or EDU, or establishes a mechanism
for future determination of the credit values.
   (E)   Uneven credit allocation. The development agreement must specify how
credits will be allocated amongst different parcels on a per-EDU basis, if the
credits are not to be allocated evenly. If the development agreement is silent
on this topic, all credits will be allocated evenly amongst all parcels on a
per-EDU basis.
   (F)   Use of reimbursements. Funds reimbursed to developers from impact fee
accounts for construction of an eligible capital facility must be utilized in
accordance with applicable law for the use of city funds in construction or
acquisition of capital facilities, including A.R.S. § 34-201 et seq.
   (G)   Deferral of fees. A development agreement may provide for the deferral
of payment of development impact fees for a residential development beyond the
issuance of a building permit, provided that a development impact fee may not
be paid later than the 15 days after the issuance of the certificate of
occupancy for that dwelling unit. The development agreement shall provide for
the value of any deferred development impact fees to be supported by
appropriate security, including a surety bond, letter of credit, or cash bond.
   (H)   Waiver of fees. If the city agrees to waive any development impact
fees assessed on development in a development agreement, the city shall
reimburse the appropriate development impact fee account for the amount that
was waived
   (I)   No obligation. Nothing in this section obligates the city to enter
into any development agreement or to authorize any type of credit agreement
permitted by this section.
(Ord. 2014-004, passed 6-17-2014)
§ 7-3-14 APPEALS.
   A development impact fee determination by city staff may be appealed in
accordance with the following procedures:
   (A)   Limited scope. An appeal shall be limited to disputes regarding the
calculation of the development impact fees for a specific development and/or
permit and calculation of EDU's for the development.
   (B)   Form of appeal. An appeal shall be initiated on such written form as
the city may prescribe, and submitted to the Director of the Community
Development Department.
   (C)   Department action. The Community Development Department Director shall
act upon the appeal within 30 calendar days of the filing of the appeal with
the Community Development Department, and the applicant shall be notified of
the Director's decision in writing.
   (D)   Appeal to Manager City Council. The applicant may further appeal the
decision of the Community Development Department Director to the City Council
within 14 calendar days of the decision.
   (E)   Action by Manager. The City Manager or authorized designee shall act
upon the appeal within 14 calendar days of receipt of the appeal, and the
applicant shall be notified of the City Manager or authorized designee's
decision in writing.
   (F)   Final decision. The City Manager or authorized designee's decision
regarding the appeal is final.
   (G)   Fees during pendency. Building permits may be issued during the
pendency of an appeal if the applicant pays the full impact fee calculated by
the city at the time the appeal is filed or provides the city with financial
assurances in the form acceptable to the City Manager or authorized designee
equal to the full amount of the impact fee. Upon final disposition of an
appeal, the fee shall be adjusted in accordance with the decision rendered, and
a refund paid if warranted. If the appeal is denied by the City Manager or
authorized designee, and the applicant has provided the city with financial
assurances as set forth above, the applicant shall deliver the full amount of
the impact fee to the city within ten days of the City Manager or designee's
final decision on the appeal. If the applicant fails to deliver the full amount
of the impact fees when required by this division, the city may draw upon such
financial assurance instrument(s) as necessary to recover the full amount of
the impact fees due from the applicant.
(Ord. 2014-004, passed 6-17-2014)
§ 7-3-15 REFUNDS OF DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES.
   (A)   Refunds. A refund (or partial refund) will be paid to any current
owner of property within the city who submits a written request to the city and
demonstrates that:
      (1)   The permit(s) that triggered the collection of the development
impact fee have expired or been voided prior to the commencement of the
development for which the permits were issued and the development impact fees
collected have not been expended, encumbered, or pledged for the repayment of
financing or debt; or
      (2)   The owner of the subject real property or its predecessor in
interest paid a development impact fee for the applicable capital facility on
or after August 1, 2014, and one of the following conditions exists:
         (a)   The capital facility designed to serve the subject real property
has been constructed, has the capacity to serve the subject real property and
any development for which there is reserved capacity, and the service which was
to be provided by that capital facility has not been provided to the subject
real property from that capital facility or from any other infrastructure.
         (b)   After collecting the fee to construct a capital facility, the
city fails to complete construction of the capital facility within the time
period identified in the Infrastructure Improvements Plan, as it may be
amended, and the corresponding service is otherwise unavailable to the subject
real property from that capital facility or any other infrastructure.
         (c)   For a category of necessary public services other than water or
wastewater facilities, any part of a development impact fee is not spent within
ten years of the city's receipt of the development impact fee.
         (d)   Any part of a development impact fee for water or wastewater
facilities is not spent within 15 years of the city's receipt of the
development impact fee.
         (e)   The development impact fee was calculated and collected for the
construction cost to provide all or a portion of a specific capital facility
serving the subject real property and the actual construction costs for the
capital facility are less than the construction costs projected in the
Infrastructure Improvements Plan by a factor of 10% or more. In such event, the
current owner of the subject real property shall, upon request as set forth in
this division (A), be entitled to a refund for the difference between the
amounts of the development impact fee charged for and attributable to such
construction cost and the amount the development impact fee would have been
calculated to be if the actual construction cost had been included in the fee
report. The refund contemplated by this division shall relate only to the costs
specific to the construction of the applicable capital facility and shall not
include any related design, administrative, or other costs not directly
incurred for construction of the capital facility that are included in the
development impact fee as permitted by A.R.S. § 9-463.05.
   (B)   Earned interest. A refund of a development impact fee shall include
any interest actually earned on the refunded portion of the development impact
fee by the city from the date of collection to the date of refund. All refunds
shall be made to the record owner of the property at the time the refund is
paid.
   (C)   Refund to government. If a development impact fee was paid by a
governmental entity, any refund shall be paid to that governmental entity.
(Ord. 2014-004, passed 6-17-2014)
§ 7-3-16 OVERSIGHT OF DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE PROGRAM.
   (A)   Annual report. Within 90 days of the end of each fiscal year, the city
shall file with the City Clerk an unaudited annual report accounting for the
collection and use of the fees for each service area and shall post the report
on its website in accordance with A.R.S. § 9-463.05, Subsections N and O, as
amended.
   (B)   Biennial audit. In addition to the annual report described in division
(A) above, the city shall provide for a biennial, certified audit of the city's
land use assumptions, Infrastructure Improvements Plan and development impact
fees.
      (1)   An audit pursuant to this division shall be conducted by one or
more qualified professionals who are not employees or officials of the city and
who did not prepare the Infrastructure Improvements Plan.
      (2)   The audit shall review the collection and expenditures of
development fees for each project in the plan and provide written comments
describing the amount of development impact fees assessed, collected, and spent
on capital facilities.
      (3)   The audit shall describe the level of service in each service area,
and evaluate any inequities in implementing the Infrastructure Improvements
Plan or imposing the development impact fee.
      (4)   The city shall post the findings of the audit on the city's website
or on the website of the League of Arizona Cities and Towns and shall conduct a
public hearing on the audit within 60 days of the release of the audit to the
public.
      (5)   For purposes of this section, a CERTIFIED AUDIT shall mean any
audit authenticated by one or more of the qualified professionals conducting
the audit pursuant to division (B)(1) above.
(Ord. 2014-004, passed 6-17-2014)
ARTICLE 7-4: NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM
Section
   
7-4-1   Role of City Manager
   
7-4-2   Flood Insurance Study and Flood Insurance Rate Maps
   
7-4-3   County regulations
§ 7-4-1 ROLE OF CITY MANAGER.
   The City Manager is designated as the Floodplain Manager for the city and
will serve as the community point of contact on National Flood Insurance
Program issues for county, state, and federal officials.
(Ord. 305, passed 5-16-2006; Ord. 2022-002, passed 5-3-2022)
§ 7-4-2 FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY AND FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAPS.
   Those public records as adopted by Resolution 2022-003 entitled “Flood
Insurance Study for Yuma County, Arizona and Incorporated Areas dated January
16, 2014” and “Flood Insurance Rate Maps dated January 16, 2014,” and all
subsequent amendments and/or revisions, three copies of which shall be kept on
file in the office of the City Clerk, are hereby adopted by reference, as the
basis for establishing the special flood hazard areas for floodplain management
in the city. The special floodplain hazard areas documented in the Flood
Insurance Study and Flood Insurance Rate Maps are the minimum area of
applicability of the floodplain management regulations and may be supplemented
by studies for other areas as allowed in the regulations.
(Ord. 305, passed 5-16-2006; Ord. 2022-002, passed 5-3-2022)
§ 7-4-3 COUNTY REGULATIONS.
   The public record in the floodplain management regulations for Yuma County,
adopted August 21, 2006, three copies of which shall be kept on file in the
office of the City Clerk, as adopted in Resolution in 2022-003, is hereby
adopted as the legal basis for implementing floodplain management in this
community.
(Ord. 305, passed 5-16-2006; Ord. 2022-002, passed 5-3-2022)
CHAPTER 8: BUSINESS
      Articles
         
8-1.   PEDDLERS
         
8-2.   TAXATION
         
8-3.   BUSINESS LICENSE TAX
         
8-4.   PAWNBROKERS, SECONDHAND DEALERS, AND JUNK DEALERS
ARTICLE 8-1: PEDDLERS
Section
   
8-1-1   Registration required
   
8-1-2   Application to Chief of Police
   
8-1-3   Issuance of registration cards
   
8-1-4   Revocation of registration cards
   
8-1-5   Peddling without registration cards prohibited
   
8-1-6   Permission required for selling on streets or sidewalks
   
8-1-7   Newsboys and newsgirls exempt
§ 8-1-1 REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   Any person operating as a solicitor, peddler, hawker, salesperson, or vendor
of goods, wares, merchandise, newspapers, magazines, or services, who goes from
house to house, or to only one house, in the city, shall register with the
Police Department and obtain an identification card showing that registration.
Penalty, see
Article 1-8
§ 8-1-2 APPLICATION TO CHIEF OF POLICE.
   A.   The applicants for solicitor license shall be required to furnish to
the Police Department a complete description of the product to be sold in the
city, together with information regarding sales methods to be used and
references that will enable the Chief of Police to determine whether or not the
applicant is qualified to receive a registration card as provided in §
8-1-3.
   B.   Investigation by the Chief of Police under the provisions of this
chapter shall be completed within 15 days after the applicant has given the
required information.
§ 8-1-3 ISSUANCE OF REGISTRATION CARDS.
   Registration cards under this article shall be given without charge to all
applicants who have complied with §
8-1-2, unless the Chief of Police discovers that any such applicant is deemed
not to be a proper person to be permitted to go from house to house because of
any of the following reasons:
   A.   He or she has a criminal record;
   B.   He or she is associated with a company that has engaged in fraudulent
dealings; or
   C.   The proposed sales proposition includes some element of trickery,
fraud, or deceit, in which case, in the interest of public safety and
protection, the applicant shall not be registered.
§ 8-1-4 REVOCATION OF REGISTRATION CARDS.
   Registration cards under this article may be revoked by the city at any time
if deemed necessary in the interest of public safety and protection.
§ 8-1-5 PEDDLING WITHOUT REGISTRATION CARDS PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to take part in the act of soliciting,
peddling, hawking, selling, or vending of goods, wares, merchandise,
newspapers, magazines, or services from house to house, or to only one house,
in the city without having registered with the Police Department and without
having obtained a registration card; without having the card in possession; or
failing to exhibit that card when request is made for the registration card by
any resident of the city.
Penalty, see
Article 1-8
§ 8-1-6 PERMISSION REQUIRED FOR SELLING ON STREETS OR SIDEWALKS.
   It is unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any booth, stand, or
counter on any sidewalk in the city for the purpose of barter, sale, or trade,
or keep or maintain upon the streets or alleys any wagon, cart, wheel, vehicle,
movable booth, or stand for the purpose of barter or trade without obtaining
permission of the Council.
Penalty, see
Article 1-8
§ 8-1-7 NEWSBOYS AND NEWSGIRLS EXEMPT.
   Newsboys and newsgirls are exempt from the provisions of this article for
the sale of newspaper subscriptions.
ARTICLE 8-2: TAXATION
Section
   
8-2-1   Tax Code adopted and amendments
   
8-2-2   Effective dates
   
8-2-3   Penalty
   
8-2-4   Retail sales from marijuana and marijuana products
§ 8-2-1 TAX CODE ADOPTED AND AMENDMENTS.
   That certain document known as “the City Tax Code of the City of Somerton”,
three copies of which are on file in the office of the City Clerk of the city,
was adopted by Ordinance No. 173 on December 7, 1987, and any amendments, which
document was made a public record by Resolution No. 319 of the city, is hereby
referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this
section, including all amendments adopted through 2011 are hereby reaffirmed.
(Ord. 2011-007, passed 6-21-2011; Ord. 2012-003, passed 4-17-2012; Ord. 2013-
002, passed 6-4-2013)
§ 8-2-2 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   The provisions hereof become effective from the date the City Tax Code was
originally passed and the effective date of all amendments through 2011.
(Ord. 2011-007, passed 6-21-2011; Ord. 2012-003, passed 4-17-2012; Ord. 2013-
002, passed 6-4-2013)
§ 8-2-3 PENALTY.
   Any person found guilty of violating any provision of these amendments to
the Tax Code shall be guilty of a class one misdemeanor. Each day that a
violation continues shall be a separate offense punishable as hereinabove
described.
(Ord. 2011-007, passed 6-21-2011)
§ 8-2-4 RETAIL SALES FROM MARIJUANA AND MARIJUANA PRODUCTS.
   To the fullest extent allowable by law, the sale of marijuana and marijuana
products is authorized within the city from a marijuana establishment and is
tangible personal property as defined in A.R.S. § 42- 5001 and subject to the
transaction privilege tax in the retail classification and use tax.
(Ord. 2021-003, passed 6-15-2021)
ARTICLE 8-3: BUSINESS LICENSE TAX
Section
   
8-3-1   License required
   
8-3-2   Issuance of license
   
8-3-3   Payment
   
8-3-4   Posting of license
   
8-3-5   Exhibition of license required
   
8-3-6   License not transferable
   
8-3-7   Exemption
   
8-3-8   Business license types
   
8-3-9   Liquor license types
§ 8-3-1 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person to carry on any trade, calling, profession,
occupation, or business specified in this article without having procured a
license from the city and complying with any and all regulations of that trade,
calling, profession, business, or occupation specified in this article. Any
person, firm, corporation, or other entity leasing or renting for a
consideration three or more units of real property or three or more building
units for occupancy, or any such person holding any such number of parcels of
real property or units for occupancy, shall be deemed a business, upon which a
business license shall be required and for which business a business license
tax shall be paid.
(Ord. 165, passed 9-2-1986) Penalty, see
Article 1-8
§ 8-3-2 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   A.   It shall be the duty of the Clerk to prepare and to issue a license
under this article for every person, firm, company, or corporation liable to
pay a license hereunder, and to state in each license the amount thereof; the
period of time covered; the name of the person, firm, or corporation for whom
issued; the trade, calling, profession, occupation, or business licensed; and
the location or place of business where the trade, calling, profession,
occupation, or business is carried on.
   B.   In no case shall any mistake of the Clerk in stating the amount of a
license prejudice the collection for the city of what shall be actually due
from anyone carrying on a trade, calling, profession, occupation, or business,
subject to license under this article.
(Ord. 165, passed 9-2-1986)
§ 8-3-3 PAYMENT.
   A.   All business license taxes shall be paid at the office of the Clerk or
in any manner as may be specified by the Clerk. Payment of the annual license
tax is due by the last day of the month of the expiration date. The licenses
are valid for a 12-month period from date of issue.
   B.   A separate license must be obtained for each branch establishment or
separate place of business in which any trade, calling, profession, occupation,
or business is carried on. Each license shall authorize the person obtaining
the license to carry on, pursue, or conduct only that trade, calling,
profession, occupation, or business described in the license and only at the
location or place of business which is indicated.
   C.   Every person engaged in more than one business in the same location for
which license fees are hereinafter provided shall pay the fee for the chief
business which is engaged at the location.
(Ord. 165, passed 9-2-1986; Ord. 174, passed 1-4-1988)
§ 8-3-4 POSTING OF LICENSE.
   Every person, firm, company, or corporation having a license under the
provisions of this article, and carrying on a trade, calling, profession,
occupation, or business at a fixed place of business, shall keep the license
posted and exhibited, while in force, in some conspicuous part of the place of
business. Every person having such a license, and not having a fixed place of
business, shall carry the license with him or her at all times while carrying
on that trade, calling, profession, occupation, or business for which the same
was granted. Every person, firm, company, or corporation having a license under
the provisions of this article shall produce and exhibit the same, when
applying for a renewal thereof, and whenever requested to do so by any police
officer or by any other officer authorized to issue, inspect, or collect
licenses.
(Ord. 165, passed 9-2-1986) Penalty, see
Article 1-8
§ 8-3-5 EXHIBITION OF LICENSE REQUIRED.
   A.   The Chief of Police shall have and exercise the power to make arrests
and to cause complaints to be filed against all persons violating the
provisions of this article.
   B.   The Chief of Police or any duly authorized official shall have the
power to enter free of charge at any time any place of business for which a
license is required by this article, and to demand the exhibition of the
license for the current term, from any person engaged or employed in the
transaction of any such business, and if the person shall then and there fail
to exhibit the license, the person shall be in violation of this code.
(Ord. 165, passed 9-2-1986) Penalty, see
Article 1-8
§ 8-3-6 LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE.
   No license granted or issued under the provisions of this article shall be
in any manner assignable or transferable to any other person, firm, company, or
corporation, other than as herein mentioned or named, without written consent
from the Council.
(Ord. 165, passed 9-2-1986)
§ 8-3-7 EXEMPTION.
   Any person wishing to sell any form of agricultural product produced by
himself or herself within the city shall be exempted from paying any license
tax hereunder for the privilege of selling those products only. Before
receiving the exemption, an affidavit of the facts entitling the seller to an
exemption must be filed with the Clerk.
(Ord. 165, passed 9-2-1986)
§ 8-3-8 BUSINESS LICENSE TYPES.
   All businesses, occupations, professions, trades, or callings shall pay a
license tax annually (nonrefundable), which shall be set by the City Council by
separate resolution. The asterisk (*) indicates those licenses that also must
have a general business license issued for the business to operate. General
business licenses must be issued or approved prior to the issuance or approval/
recommendation is given for other licenses.
   A.   Circuses, carnivals, theatrical or other similar exhibitions, and
amusements shall pay a business license fee on a per day basis.*
   B.   Each stand, concession, or game located in a circus, carnival,
theatrical or other exhibition, and amusement shall pay a business license fee
on a per quarter basis.
   C.   Fortune tellers, clairvoyants, astrologers, palmists, and similar
undertakings shall pay a business license fee on a per month basis.*
   D.   Hawkers and peddlers shall pay a business license fee on a per quarter
basis.*
   E.   Itinerant photographers shall pay a license tax on a per quarter
basis.*
   F.   Cottage enterprise license shall pay a license fee on a annual basis.
   G.   Special events merchandising license shall pay a license fee on a per
event basis.
   H.   Day care facilities for adults and children as businesses required to
have business licenses, and to allow a credit to day care providers who are
able to document that they have paid a fee for fire, health and/or building
inspections over the previous 12-month period. The amount of the credit would
not exceed the cost of an annual business license.
(Ord. 165, passed 9-2-1986; Ord. 185, passed 2-21-1989; Am. Ord. 2008-009,
passed 10-7-2008) Penalty, see
Article 1-8
§ 8-3-9 LIQUOR LICENSE TYPES.
   All liquor license applicants and holders shall pay a license fee on an
annual basis (nonrefundable), set by the City Council by separate resolution.
All of the below listed licenses also must have a general business license
issued for the business to operate. A general business license must be issued
or approved prior to the issuance or approval/recommendation is given for other
licenses.
   A.   To sell beer and wine in containers only and for consumption off
premises where sold;
   B.   To sell beer and wine only for consumption on premises where sold,
which shall include occasional sales in containers for off-premises
consumption;
   C.   To sell liquors other than beer and wine in original containers for
consumption off premises where sold;
   D.   To sell liquors other than beer and wine for consumption upon the
premises where sold; and
   E.   For on-sale and off-sale of liquors of all kinds.
(Ord. 165, passed 9-2-1986; Ord. 185, passed 2-21-1989) Penalty, see
Article 1-8
ARTICLE 8-4: PAWNBROKERS, SECONDHAND DEALERS, AND JUNK DEALERS
Section
   
8-4-1   Definitions
   
8-4-2   License required
   
8-4-3   Pawnbroker's report
   
8-4-4   Report of secondhand dealers and junk dealers
   
8-4-5   Record to be kept
   
8-4-6   Refusal to file report
   
8-4-7   Sales restricted
   
8-4-8   Exemptions to junk dealers
   
8-4-9   Hours of business
   
8-4-10   Other businesses
§ 8-4-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   JUNK DEALER. A person either having or not having a fixed place of business
in the city and engaged in, conducting, managing, or carrying on the business
of buying, selling, or otherwise dealing in, either at wholesale or retail, any
rags, sacks, bottles, cans, papers, metal, wood, or other articles commonly
known as junk.
   PAWNBROKER. A person engaged in, conducting, managing, or carrying on the
business of pawnbroking, or the business of loaning money for himself or
herself, or for any other person, firm, or corporation, upon personal property,
personal security, pawns, or pledges, or the business of purchasing articles of
personal property and reselling or agreeing to resell those articles to the
vendors, or their assignees, at prices ageed upon at or before the time of the
purchase.
   PAWNSHOP. Any room, store, or place in which the business of pawnbroking is
engaged in, carried on, or conducted.
   SECONDHAND DEALER. A person engaged in, conducting, managing, or carrying on
the business of buying, selling, or otherwise dealing in secondhand goods,
wares, merchandise, or property.
§ 8-4-2 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct, manage, or carry
on the business of pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, or junk dealer without first
applying for and receiving a license therefor, in writing, from the Clerk.
   B.   The license may be obtained during business hours at the City Hall upon
the payment of an annual license fee of $60, and upon completion of the
application upon the form prescribed by the Clerk, which form is hereby
authorized by this article.
   C.   The license shall thereafter be renewed annually upon the anniversary
date of the original application, by the payment of the required fee, and in
the same manner as the original application.
   D.   By applying for and receiving the license, each applicant shall thereby
expressly consent to inspection by any police officer of the city in the manner
stated in this article.
Penalty, see
Article 1-8
§ 8-4-3 PAWNBROKER'S REPORT.
   A.   Every pawnbroker shall, on Monday of each week, before the hour of 10:
00 a.m., deliver to the Chief of Police a full, true, and complete report of
all goods, wares, merchandise, or things received on deposit, pledged, or
purchased during the week preceding the filing of the report.
   B.   The report shall show the hour of the day when each article was
received on deposit, pledged, or purchased and the true name and address, as
nearly as the same is known to or can be ascertained by the pawnbroker, of the
person or persons by whom the article were left on deposit, pledged, or sold,
together with a description of those persons. The description of every such
person shall include the height, age, sex, complexion, and other identifiable
characteristics such as style of dress, scars, disfigurements, physical
disabilities, and beards or mustaches. The report shall also show the number of
the pawn ticket and a complete description of each article left on deposit,
pledged, or purchased.
   C.   If any article left on deposit, pledged, or purchased has engraved
thereon any number, word, or initial, or contains any settings of any kind, the
description of that article in the report shall contain the number, word, or
initial, and shall show the kind of settings, and the number of each kind.
Penalty, see
Article 1-8
§ 8-4-4 REPORT OF SECONDHAND DEALERS AND JUNK DEALERS.
   A.   Every secondhand dealer and junk dealer shall, on Monday of each week,
before the hour of 10:00 a.m., make out and deliver to the Chief of Police a
full, true, and complete report of all goods, wares, and merchandise or things
purchased or received during the week, ending at 12:00 a.m. on Sunday next
preceding the filing of the report.
   B.   The report shall show the date and the hour of the day when each
article was purchased or received and the true name and address, as nearly as
the same is known to or can be ascertained by the secondhand dealer or junk
dealer, of the person or persons by whom the article was sold or delivered,
together with a description of the person or persons. The description of every
such person shall include the height, age, sex, complexion, and other
identifiable characteristics such as style of dress, scars, disfigurements,
physical disabilities, and beards or mustaches. The report shall also show the
amount purchased or received.
   C.   If any article so purchased or received has engraved thereon any
number, word, or initial, or contains any settings of any kind, the description
of the article in the report shall contain the number, word, or initial, and
shall show the kind of setting of any kind.
   D.   The report shall also contain a full, true, and complete description of
all goods, wares, merchandise, or things sold or otherwise disposed of, and the
true name and address, as nearly as the same is known to or can be ascertained
by the secondhand dealer or junk dealer, of the person or persons by whom the
article was purchased or to whom the same was delivered, together with a
description of the person or persons. The description to be given of every such
person shall be the same as that required by this section to be given of
persons from whom goods, wares, and merchandise are purchased or received, and
the description of every article sold or otherwise disposed of shall be the
same as that required by this section to be given of articles purchased or
received.
Penalty, see
Article 1-8
§ 8-4-5 RECORD TO BE KEPT.
   A.   Every pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, and junk dealer shall keep a
complete record of all goods, wares, merchandise, or things pledged to or
purchased or received by him or her, or sold or otherwise disposed of.
   B.   The record shall contain all of the matters required to be shown in the
reports referred to and described in §§
8-4-2 and
8-4-4.
   C.   Every such record and all goods, wares, merchandise, and things pledged
to or purchased or received by any such pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, or junk
dealer, shall be open, at all times during business hours, to the inspection of
any police officer of the city. The record referred to in this section shall be
kept, maintained, and preserved for one year from the date of purchase of the
goods.
Penalty, see
Article 1-8
§ 8-4-6 REFUSAL TO FILE REPORT.
   A.   It is unlawful for any person engaged in, conducting, managing, or
carrying on the business of pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, or junk dealer, or
for any agent or employee of any such person, to fail, refuse, or neglect to
file any report in accordance with the requirements of this article.
   B.   It is unlawful to fail, refuse, or neglect to keep any record in the
form and in the manner required by this article, or to fail, refuse, or neglect
to exhibit to any police officer of the city, immediately upon demand for the
privilege of the inspection, any such record of any goods, wares, merchandise,
or things pledged to, purchased, or received by the person, firm, or
corporation.
Penalty, see
Article 1-8
§ 8-4-7 SALES RESTRICTED.
   It is unlawful for any pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, or junk dealer to sell
or otherwise dispose of any article or thing within one week after the article
or thing has been purchased or received by the pawnbroker, secondhand dealer,
or junk dealer.
Penalty, see
Article 1-8
§ 8-4-8 EXEMPTIONS TO JUNK DEALERS.
   A.   The provisions contained in §§
8-4-4 and
8-4-5 shall not be deemed to apply to the purchase or the sale by junk dealers
of rags, bottles, secondhand sacks other than cement sacks, barrels, cans,
shoes, lamps, stoves, or household furniture, or the purchase or sale by
secondhand dealers of household furniture.
   B.   Appliances, sewing machines, all musical instruments, typewriters, or
other business machines are not exempted from the provisions of this article.
§ 8-4-9 HOURS OF BUSINESS.
   It is unlawful for any person engaged in, conducting, managing, or carrying
on the business of pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, or junk dealer, or for any
agent or employee of any such person, to accept any pledge of or to loan any
money upon personal property or to purchase or receive any goods, wares, or
merchandise or any article of things. It is unlawful to engage in or conduct
any such business in any manner whatsoever between the hour of 10:00 p.m. of
any day, and the hour of 7:00 a.m. of the following day, or to purchase any
articles or things from any minor under 18 years of age, without permission in
writing from the parents of the minor.
Penalty, see
Article 1-8
§ 8-4-10 OTHER BUSINESSES.
   A.   If any person shall engage in conduct, manage, or carry on, at the same
time, more than one of the businesses defined and referred to in this article,
that person shall be deemed to be engaged in, conducting, managing, and
carrying on each such business, separate and apart from the other such
business.
   B.   The person shall comply in all respects with the provisions of this
article relating to each business, and it is unlawful for any person, firm, or
corporation to fail, refuse, or neglect so to do.
Penalty, see
Article 1-8
CHAPTER 9: HEALTH AND SANITATION
      Article
         
9-1.   GARBAGE AND TRASH COLLECTION
         
9-2.   PREPARATION OF REFUSE FOR COLLECTION
         
9-3.   FEES, RATES, AND SERVICE; LIENS FOR COLLECTION CHARGES; UNLAWFUL ACTS;
PENALTIES
         
9-4.   REMOVAL OF LITTER
         
9-5.   AUTHORITY TO INSPECT; NOTICE TO REMOVE REFUSE, LITTER, AND DEBRIS
(NONEMERGENCY); RIGHT TO APPEAL; COMPULSORY REMOVAL AND SANCTIONS
         
9-6.   DUST COMPLAINT SIGN REGULATION
         
9-7.   POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM; STORM WATER PHASE II PERMIT
PROGRAM
ARTICLE 9-1: GARBAGE AND TRASH COLLECTION
Section
   
9-1-1   Definitions
   
9-1-2   Collection agency
   
9-1-3   Collection hours
   
9-1-4   Rates
§ 9-1-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ASSESSMENT. The fee imposed for recovery of garbage collection costs
incurred for benefitting a particular property of any person which is levied
pursuant to this chapter.
   BRUSH. Tree limbs and shrubbery clippings exceeding three feet in length.
   BULK RUBBISH. Wooden and cardboard boxes, crates, appliances, large items of
household furniture, and other refuse items which by size and shape are not
readily containerable.
   COLLECTION EMPLOYEE. Any individual employed by the city for the purpose of
effectuating the provisions of this chapter.
   CONSTRUCTION WASTE. Material from construction, remodeling, and construction
site preparation, including, but not limited to, rocks, trees, debris, dirt,
brick, fill, plaster, and all types of scrap building materials.
   CONTAINERABLE RUBBISH. Putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes,
including, but not limited to, wrapped garbage, wrapped small dead animals,
wrapped or boxed ashes, wastepaper, excelsior, rags, bottles, crockery,
bedding, clothing, carpets, leather, tin cans, metal scraps, small mechanical
parts, shavings, floor sweepings, grass and weed clippings, twigs, tree limbs
not exceeding three feet in length, and other similar waste or debris.
   DAYS. When used as a number of days, shall mean calendar days, unless
otherwise specified.
   FILTH. Manure, excrement, or similar substance.
   GARBAGE. All putrescible and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking, and consumption of food.
   LIEN. A charge which attaches, in favor of the city, to real property
benefitted by the collection of any brush, trash, bulk rubbish, containerable
rubbish, filth, construction waste, or refuse; the lien also attaches to any
other real or personal property of a person or any refuse generator, owning or
in charge of benefitted property, to secure the payment of unpaid monthly
collection costs as hereinafter described.
   LITTER. Any rubbish, trash, weeds, filth, and debris which shall constitute
a hazard to public health and safety and shall include all putrescible and
nonputrescible solid wastes, including garbage, trash, ashes, street cleanings,
dead animals, abandoned automobiles, and solid market and industrial waste; and
deposit, accumulation, pile, or heap of brush, grass, debris, weeds, cans,
cloth, paper, wood, rubbish or other unsightly or unsanitary matter of any kind
whatsoever, and any growth of weeds, brush, grass, or other vegetable growth to
a height of over six inches.
   OPEN AREA. Any park, street, gutter, sidewalk, sewer, boulevard, alley,
greenbelt, square, vacant lot, space, ground, or other area where refuse
material may accumulate.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, institution, or
other entity acting as principal, agent, officer, servant, or employee for
himself, herself, or itself, or for any other individual, firm, partnership,
corporation, institution, or other entity, who owns, leases, rents, or occupies
any real property within the city limits.
   PRIVATE PREMISES. Any dwelling, house, building, or other structure designed
or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether
inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall
include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, or vestibules
belonging or appurtenant to the dwelling, house, building, or other structures.
   PROHIBITED SUBSTANCE. Any liquid, solid, or gas with an ignition temperature
or flash point of less than 200°F, including, but not limited to, gasoline,
benzine, naphtha, or other flammable or explosive; any material having a pH
lower than five and one-half or higher than nine or having any other corrosive
property that could be injurious or hazardous to city collection employees or
which could cause damage to equipment; any noxious or malodorous substance
offensive to the senses and depriving a neighborhood or a considerable number
of persons of the comfortable enjoyment of life or property; or any hypodermic
needle or syringe.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys, or other
public ways, and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds, and
buildings.
   PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR. The head of the Public Works Department, which
includes the sanitation operation, or his or her duly authorized agent.
   REFUSE. All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body
wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, trash, litter, street cleanings,
dead animals; abandoned, wrecked, or junked vehicles or parts thereof; and
brush and containerable rubbish, filth, construction waste, and prohibited
substances when these terms are not specifically noted in this chapter.
   REFUSE GENERATOR, COMMERCIAL. Any person in charge of owning, leasing,
renting, or occupying any business, industrial or commercial, building other
than a private residence, including, but not limited to, a store, office,
factory, hotel, tourist court, motel, motor hotel, trailer court, apartment
hotel, or residential building.
   REFUSE GENERATOR, RESIDENTIAL. Any person in charge of, owning, leasing,
renting, or occupying any building or buildings used solely for a family or
private residential domicile, including, but not limited to, single- and
multiple-family dwelling units, apartments, townhouses, cooperatives,
condominiums, and board and rooming houses.
   TRASH. Rubbish, waste, debris, or refuse.
§ 9-1-2 COLLECTION AGENCY.
   The city or other collectors authorized by the city shall collect all refuse
within the city. No person, except as provided in this chapter, shall collect
or gather refuse within the city.
Penalty, see
Article 1-8
§ 9-1-3 COLLECTION HOURS.
   A.   Residential collection. Residential refuse shall be collected twice per
week. The area north of Main Street will be picked up Monday and Thursday and
the area south of Main Street will be picked up Tuesday and Friday of each
week. No collections will be made on official city-designated holidays. Hours
of service will be between 6:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday
weekly.
   B.   Commercial collection. Commercial refuse collection frequency shall be
a base of twice weekly on the same schedule as for residential, or frequency
shall be as contracted by the customer user, and collection may be made on any
day of the week, except Sunday. Hours of collection for commercial are between
5:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. and are normally done prior to start of residential
route collection.
§ 9-1-4 RATES.
   The monthly rates to be charged and collected by the Sanitation Department
for service provided to customers are hereby fixed as follows:
   A.   Residential. Includes the following:
 
Type of Pickup                                                                    Fee
                                                                                  $16.33
Individual residents using curbside pickup (two pickups per week)                 per
                                                                                  month
Front load bins (two cu. yd.) when placed for residential use to include the
following:
   Duplex or other building containing two family or two buildings on same lot $16.33
housing two family units                                                          per
                                                                                  unit
                                                                                  $16.33
   Apartment courts, auto and trailer courts containing three or more units    per
                                                                                  unit
Commercial and service establishments shall be charged $16.33 (the residential rate) per
90-gallon container with two pickups per week, unless it is determined by the Public
Works Director that a larger bin is required.
 
   B.   Commercial.  All other commercial accounts requiring front load
container sizes of two, four, or six cubic yards shall be charged based upon
the number of containers and pick-ups per week. There shall be no less than two
pickups per week for any size container, except for special pickups. The
schedule of these charges is established as follows:
 
No. of Pickups/Week Size of Containers
                    2-Yard  4-Yard  6-Yard
2                   $67.58  $135.15 $202.73
3                   $101.36 $202.73 $304.09
4                   $135.15 $270.30 $405.45
5                   $168.94 $337.88 $506.81
6                   $202.73 $405.45 $608.18
 
Example: A commercial establishment with two 4-yard containers picked up twice
per week would be charged a fee of $270.30. (2 x 135.15 = $270.30)
Example: A commercial establishment with two 4-yard containers picked up twice
per week would be charged a fee of $297.34. (2 x 148.67 = $297.34)
   C.   Additional containers. Where there have been continued occurrences of
an overflow of garbage due to an insufficient number of containers and the
overflow results in a public nuisance, the Public Works Director shall make a
site inspection. Upon review he or she will be authorized to place additional
containers that shall be charged to the customer.
   D.   Special or additional pickups.  
      1.   All additional pickups, not using a container, shall be charged at
the rate of $60 per hour, with a minimum charge of $25.
      2.   Special pickups with containers shall be charged at the base rate
per container with one pickup per week.
   E.   Charges for lost or damaged containers.
      1.   In the event that containers are lost or severely damaged, a
replacement fee will be charged to the customer.
         a.   Residential.  A replacement fee of $75 shall be charged.
         b.   Commercial.  A replacement fee of $175 shall be charged.
      2.   Where vandalism is demonstrated by a police report, the Public Works
Director shall investigate and report to the City Manager. A decision will be
rendered to determine if the customer or the city will incur the charges to
replace a container.
   F.   Equipment replacement.  To ensure future funding for replacement and/or
purchase of sanitation trucks, the Finance Director is charged with directing a
portion of operation revenues, sufficient in amount, to meet annual debt
service requirements for the lease/purchase of the vehicles.
   G.   Initial containers.  
      1.   The intent of the Sanitation Department is to be self-funding.
Accordingly, new users to the Department shall be assessed the cost of initial
containers as follows:
         a.   Residential. A container fee of $75 shall be charged.
         b.   Commercial. A container fee of $300 shall be charged for a two-
yard, $415 for a four-yard, and $535 for a six-yard container.
      2.   The above initial container fees are to be paid as part of the
building permit.
(Res. 2008-042, passed 12-16-2008)
Cross-reference:
   Similar/additional provisions, see §
9-3-1
ARTICLE 9-2: PREPARATION OF REFUSE FOR COLLECTION
Section
   
9-2-1   Refuse to be placed in receptacles or containers; specifications
   
9-2-2   Residential refuse generators; collection procedures; city-owned
containers
   
9-2-3   Commercial refuse generators; duties generally; use of city-owned
containers
   
9-2-4   City services
   
9-2-5   Special refuse and hazardous waste; prohibited substances; method of
collection; exception
   
9-2-6   New containers; developments and subdividers
   
9-2-7   Condemnation and removal of receptacles
§ 9-2-1 REFUSE TO BE PLACED IN RECEPTACLES OR CONTAINERS; SPECIFICATIONS.
   A.   It shall be the duty of every person, and commercial or residential
refuse generator, to place or cause to be placed all refuse accumulated on the
premises in suitable receptacles or containers provided by the city.
      1.   Garbage, trash, and rubbish.
         a.   Garbage must be drained of liquids and shall be sacked or wrapped
in a plastic bag before being placed in container.
         b.   Rubbish and trash may be placed in containers specified for
garbage. All boxes, cartons, and crates shall be collapsed before being placed
in containers. Also, large boxes and cartons will be required to be cut up
before placing in the containers.
         c.   The city's regular refuse service (using mechanized collection
system) will collect only the refuse (garbage, trash, rubbish, and the like)
which is contained in the city-supplied refuse containers.
         d.   City residential customers may dispose of grass clippings,
leaves, small tree cuttings, and similar material in city-supplied containers
as long as there is room for the regular garbage and rubbish and limbs do not
extend more than two feet above the container opening or do not interfere with
the emptying of the container in any way.
         e.   Residential customers may dispose of small amounts of building
material from time to time, provided it is placed in a container as described
above and contains no concrete, masonry, rocks, or soil-like materials.
         f.   To ensure optimal use of the city-owned containers and the
ancillary equipment used therewith, the contents of the individual containers
shall not exceed 300 pounds weight limit.
         g.   Where rubbish or trash, including yard rubbish, grass clippings,
leaves, small tree cuttings, and similar materials, cannot be conveniently
handled in the regular refuse container, the occupant of the property may
utilize the city's brush and bulk refuse service as indicated in division A.2.
below or by special collection requiring an additional fee. This refuse shall
be contained in securely tied bundles, cardboard boxes, and cartons, or other
disposable containers not in excess of 30-gallon capacity, and the combined
weight of container and contents or bundle does not exceed 60 pounds. Bottles,
jars, broken glass, and tin cans shall be placed in regular refuse containers
as specified for garbage.
      2.   Brush and bulk refuse.
         a.   Uncontainered refuse, brush, and bulk refuse shall be collected
by the city for properties paying for regular refuse service. This collection
shall include human-made materials, such as appliances, household furniture,
and small auto parts. This collection shall be free of charge, once a year, or
by special collection requiring additional fees.
         b.   All brush, tree limbs, and cuttings up to ten inches in diameter
shall be cut into four-foot lengths. No tree limbs or trunks shall be more than
four feet in length.
         c.   These uncontainered and bulk refuse items will not be permitted
to remain on the public right-of-way or in the alley before notification of
collection due in the area.
         d.   Items must be placed in neat, separated stacks, one foot apart
and parallel to the street or alley adjacent to the owner's property line for
collection.
         e.   Stacked trash may not be placed on sidewalks or curbing in any
manner as to interfere with or be hazardous to pedestrians or vehicles, or with
any mechanized collection container in such a manner as to interfere with its
being emptied. Bulk trash, to include human-made materials, such as appliances,
household furniture, and small auto parts, may be placed adjacent to the yard
rubbish.
         f.   Not accepted for collection will be leftover, disposable, or
unwanted material resulting from construction, repair, or demolition of the
premises, large auto parts, used oil, tires, rocks, soil-like materials, and
vegetation over four feet in length. These items must be disposed of at the
landfill by the owner, lessee, or occupant, or collected by a private refuse
collector with a city permit.
         g.   No more than four loose yards of brush shall be collected from a
single residence on a scheduled brush collection. They may be picked up by
special request for a service charge per sanitation fee schedule resolution.
         h.   Century plants, cacti, and similar plants hazardous to collection
employees shall be contained in lengths of three feet or less.
      3.   Animal waste.
         a.   Wastes from small animals or pets shall be placed in a bag,
securely tied, and then placed in the regular containers used for garbage.
         b.   Waste from larger animals, such as horses or other livestock,
shall be disposed of by owner.
      4.   Location for pickup. All containers and piles of refuse shall be so
located as to not block the alley, sidewalk, gutter, water meter or fire
hydrants, or otherwise be a hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
   B.   All refuse containers shall be waterproof and equipped with
tightfitting covers resistant to disturbance by animals and insects.
Penalty, see
Article 1-8
§ 9-2-2 RESIDENTIAL REFUSE GENERATORS; COLLECTION PROCEDURES; CITY-OWNED
CONTAINERS.
   A.   Rubbish consisting only of cardboard or wooden boxes, brush, leaves,
weeds, and cuttings from trees, lawns, shrubs, and gardens may be kept
separately without depositing in the containers, provided that bulk materials,
such as leaves, shall be in a can, box, sack, or receptacle for ease of loading
and that brush and cuttings shall be tied in bundles not to exceed four feet in
length. Compost piles may be maintained for fertilization purposes, and matter
used for fertilization purposes only may be transported, kept, and used.
Nothing in this section shall be construed as to permit the violation of any
provisions of this code, any ordinance, or any rule or regulation of the Fire
Department.
   B.   Where unusual or inordinate waste material is generated, special
collections shall be arranged therefor with the city.
§ 9-2-3 COMMERCIAL REFUSE GENERATORS; DUTIES GENERALLY; USE OF CITY-OWNED
CONTAINERS.
   Commercial establishments shall receive city refuse collection services and
city-owned containers. These containers shall be positioned by the city,
generally no more than 300 feet from an entrance to the commercial structure as
designated by the commercial refuse generator; provided, however, that
collection employees shall at all times have convenient accessibility to the
containers. The City Public Works Director shall have final authority as to
container location in case of dispute between business and collection crews.
§ 9-2-4 CITY SERVICES.
   A.   Generally. The services provided for in this chapter are limited to the
city's equipment availability, ability, and capacity.
   B.   Residential services.
      1.   Regular refuse services.
         a.   Except those exempt, the city shall supply twice per week regular
refuse service to all city residences, using a mechanical collection system.
Only that refuse which is contained in the city's supplied containers will be
collected during regular refuse service.
         b.   Containers as provided by the city shall be used for curbside
collection and for alley collection.
         c.   Refuse collection services shall not be made on national or local
holidays.
      2.   Brush and bulk refuse services. The city shall collect brush and
bulk refuse once a year, free of charge to all residential customers. The
locations and times of collections shall be clearly publicized by the city.
      3.   Special collection requests. A special collection for yard rubbish,
brush, and bulk items will be made for an additional fee. Requests for this
service shall be made by the customer to the Public Works Department. Time for
service charges commences when the people and equipment arrive at the location
and commence operations.
   C.   Commercial services.
      1.   The city will provide refuse service to commercial, industrial, and
institutional customers utilizing the containers furnished by the city and
mechanical collection system whenever practical, as prescribed by the Public
Works Director.
      2.   Container size and number required shall be prescribed by the Public
Works Director.
      3.   A special service, hereafter called "on-property collection," for
the collection of refuse on private property will be provided after an
agreement has been signed by the property owner. The agreement shall give the
city the right to enter the property, but not any building, and hold the city
harmless from any damage to the property as a result of removal of refuse. A
special fee will be assessed on "on-property collection," where the containers
are more than 200 feet from the property entrance.
      4.   Collection equipment and employees shall at all times have
convenient accessibility to refuse containers.
      5.   Where unusual or inordinate waste material is generated, special
collection, as per the collection fee resolution, may be arranged by calling
the Public Works Director.
§ 9-2-5 SPECIAL REFUSE AND HAZARDOUS WASTE; PROHIBITED SUBSTANCES; METHOD OF
COLLECTION; EXCEPTION.
   A.   Generally. No person shall deposit, or cause to be deposited, in any
refuse container which is serviced by the city any prohibited substance, as
defined in §
9-1-1. All prohibited substances shall be separated from containers used for
regular collections and placed in special containers, and the contents therefor
shall be clearly labeled.
   B.   Special collection. Every refuse generator having these types of items
for collection shall call the Public Works office for special collection. This
section shall not apply to any refuse generator who has secured the written
approval of the city for otherwise disposing of prohibited substances.
   C.   Hazardous and dangerous waste.
      1.   Generally. Hazardous wastes shall be placed in a proper container
and plainly and properly marked. The Public Works Director shall be notified
and shall instruct the customer as to the proper disposition of the waste in
accordance with transfer station and/or landfill instructions.
      2.   Right to deny service. The city reserves the right to deny refuse
collection service for refuse which the Public Works Director determines to be
hazardous and to require the customer to properly dispose of it by other means.
No person shall deposit, or cause to be deposited, in any refuse container
which is serviced by the city anything which will be dangerous or hazardous to
the city's collection equipment or a threat to the health, safety, and welfare
of the city employees or general public.
      3.   Landfill.
         a.   As the city utilizes the transfer station and/or landfill, we
must additionally abide by their rules and regulations, particularly when it
involves hazardous and dangerous waste.
         b.   The Public Works Director is required to work closely with the
transfer station and/or landfill personnel in regards to this specific matter.
      4.   Explosives and inflammable materials. Explosives such as arms
ammunition, war souvenirs, or explosive items or powder of any kind, and highly
inflammable materials, shall not be placed in any refuse container. Residents
shall dispose of these items by calling the City Public Works Department for
special instructions or pickup.
      5.   Acids, caustics, and rapid oxidizers. Acids, caustics, and rapid
oxidizers, including chemicals used in swimming pools, shall not be disposed of
in refuse containers. Residents shall dispose of these chemicals by calling the
City Public Works Department for containment instructions and/or special
pickup.
      6.   Coals and ashes. Warm or hot coals or ashes shall not be placed in
any refuse container.
   D.   Dead animals.
      1.   Small dead animals may be placed in plastic bags, tied and placed in
the regular refuse container, or should be properly disposed of by the owner by
other means. Livestock shall be disposed of by the owner.
      2.   Small dead animals in the public right-of-way will be removed and
disposed of by the County Humane Society. Persons shall call the City Police
Department and report the location and the dispatcher will handle arrangements
thereafter.
      3.   Condemned animals and parts of animals from slaughterhouses or
similar places regardless of size will not be collected by the city.
   E.   Byproducts. Any commercial or manufacturing establishment (including
fruit and vegetable packing houses or manufacturing or processing plants) which
by the nature of its operations create an unusual amount of byproduct refuse,
may be required by the city to dispose of its own waste as opposed to having
the city provide the service. This would generally be handled by mutual
agreement between the city and establishment at time of startup operations.
   F.   Soil and concrete waste. All owners, contractors, and builders of
structures shall, upon the completion of any such structure, remove, at their
sole cost and expense, all refuse of every nature, description, or kind which
has resulted from building of the structure, including lumber scraps, shingles,
plaster, brick, stone, concrete, and other building material, and shall place
the lot, and all nearby premises utilized in the construction, in a clean and
sightly condition.
   G.   Debris. Debris resulting from the construction, reconstruction,
demolition, or repair of premises shall not be placed with other refuse for
collection, but shall be disposed of directly by the contractor or by the
person owning, occupying, or leasing the premise wherein the debris is
accumulated. All the wastes shall be removed promptly and shall not be stored
in any location where it may be blown or otherwise dispersed beyond the
construction site.
   H.   Landscape contractor's waste. The city will not dispose of waste
generated by persons hired for the purpose of landscape work. This refuse shall
be disposed of directly by the contractor or by the person owning, occupying,
or leasing the premises. All the wastes shall be removed promptly and shall not
be stored where it will blow or otherwise disperse beyond the premises.
Arrangements can be made with the city for a special pickup.
Penalty, see
Article 1-8
§ 9-2-6 NEW CONTAINERS; DEVELOPMENTS AND SUBDIVIDERS.
   A.   Upon the enactment of this chapter, the city shall place a 90-gallon
receptacle at each residence having curbside pickup subject to this chapter,
and either a 90-gallon or metal receptacle, or any combination thereof,
according to need, at each commercial establishment or residence (generally
three or four residential units will be assigned one container) having alley
pickup and subject to the provisions herein. Thereafter, the placement of new
receptacles shall be provided at the costs as hereinafter set forth.
   B.   Each lot or combination of lots shall be supplied with a refuse
container, at the expense of the owner or developer, to be owned by the city.
These fees shall be collected as part of the building permit application fee
process. The type and size container(s) shall be determined at building permit
issuance time, containers shall be approved and issued by the city when
building permit is issued and which shall become the property of the city.
   C.   Final decision as to the number of receptacles, type, and placement
location for each residence or commercial establishment is the responsibility
of the Public Works Director.
§ 9-2-7 CONDEMNATION AND REMOVAL OF RECEPTACLES.
   All privately-owned containers, stands, racks, enclosures, or receptacles in
the alley, not of an approved type or that are no longer sanitary or are
hazardous to handle, shall be condemned by the Public Works Director. A tag
shall be affixed with the date of the action and a listing of the reasons for
the condemnation. If the container, stand, rack, enclosure, or receptacle is
not removed from service by the owner within seven days of notice of
condemnation, the city shall remove and destroy the receptacle. The property
owner many make a request to the Public Works Director for hearing within the
seven-day period objecting to the condemnation and, upon such request, a
hearing shall be held before the Public Works Director.
ARTICLE 9-3: FEES, RATES, AND SERVICE; LIENS FOR COLLECTION CHARGES; UNLAWFUL
ACTS; PENALTIES
Section
   
9-3-1   Collection rates; costs of containers; uniformity; time for payment;
penalty
   
9-3-2   Collection charges; personal debt; civil suit for payment; cumulative
remedy
   
9-3-3   Right to lien for collection charges; notice and claim of lien;
contents; form, perfection; duration; release
   
9-3-4   Unlawful acts
§ 9-3-1 COLLECTION RATES; COSTS OF CONTAINERS; UNIFORMITY; TIME FOR PAYMENT;
PENALTY.
   A.   Periodically, the City Council, by resolution published and posted, and
as set forth in §
9-1-4, shall establish appropriate rates for the various categories of refuse
collection services, and costs of new containers for residential and commercial
refuse generators.
   B.   Rates charged for collection service and containers shall be uniform
for the various classes of users.
   C.   A bill shall be rendered for each water and sewer connection, or refuse
collection services, and costs of containers. User charges will commence at the
time water and sewer service is begun. Billing time frame and late penalties
are set forth in §
13-1-1. The city reserves the right to vary the dates or length of billing
period, temporarily or permanently, if necessary or desirable.
   D.   Special collections of bulky, heavy, or uncontainerable refuse shall be
charged at the rate set by resolution. Prior agreement must be made between the
refuse generator and the Public Works Director or his or her designated
representative to initiate this service and the accompanying charges.
   E.   Notwithstanding any other provisions to the contrary, the City Manager,
through his or her duly authorized agent, is empowered with the authority to
establish special rates for unusual or unique situations and/or requirements
that may arise for extraordinary services, and the rates or charges shall be
based upon costs relevant to the service provided.
   F.   Commercial or industrial users desiring special storage or collection
equipment shall arrange those services prior to construction and installation
to assure compatibility with local service equipment. Service charges and
rental and collection rates shall be negotiated appropriate to services
provided and subject to approval of the City Manager and Public Works Director.
   G.   Periodic refuse removal projects may be undertaken at the pleasure of
the City Council without charge to the generator to encourage clean up of
property, but shall be subject to the limitations and instructions established
for that particular period.
Cross-reference:
   Rates and charges, see §
9-1-4
§ 9-3-2 COLLECTION CHARGES; PERSONAL DEBT; CIVIL SUIT FOR PAYMENT; CUMULATIVE
REMEDY.
   Every charge, rental, receptacle use fee, or collection fee levied pursuant
to §
9-3-1 shall become, from and after the time it is due and payable, a personal
debt of the person, or commercial or residential refuse generator, receiving
collection service, and may be collected by civil suit instituted in the name
of the city by its City Attorney, upon the request of the City Manager at any
time after the penalty, as provided in §
9-3-1C., attaches to the aforesaid charges, rentals, or fees. Notwithstanding
any other provision to the contrary, the remedy provided by this section shall
cumulate and supplement other remedies provided under this chapter.
§ 9-3-3 RIGHT TO LIEN FOR COLLECTION CHARGES; NOTICE AND CLAIM OF LIEN;
CONTENTS; FORM; PERFECTION; DURATION; RELEASE.
   A.   A right to a lien shall arise immediately upon the providing of
collection service. If the charge, rental, receptacle use fee, or collection
fee is not paid 30 days after it has become due and payable, the city may issue
a notice and claim of lien setting forth the following information:
      1.   Name of the person, or commercial or residential generator, owing
the charge, rental, receptacle, or collection fee;
      2.   The amount owed;
      3.   The penalty accrued to date;
      4.   The calendar period(s) for which the charges, rentals, or receptacle
or collection fees are due and owing; and
      5.   A statement that the city claims a lien therefor.
   B.   The notice and claim of lien shall be issued under the official seal of
the city, signed by the Mayor and recorded in the office of the County
Recorder. The amount stated in the lien shall be a lien upon all real and
personal property of the person, or commercial or residential refuse generator,
located in the county. The lien shall be subject and inferior to the lien for
general taxes and to all prior recorded mortgages and encumbrances of record.
   C.   A lien claimed under this section shall not continue for more than
three years after it has been recorded, unless an action is brought within the
period to enforce the lien.
   D.   Any lien claimed pursuant to this section shall, upon payment of the
entire amount due, be released by the city in the same manner as mortgages and
judgments are released.
   E.   A prior lien, recorded for the purposes of this section, shall not
constitute a bar to the recordation of a subsequent lien or liens for the
purposes.
§ 9-3-4 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   It is unlawful for any person to:
   A.   Place or cause to be placed any refuse upon any public or private
property not owned or under his or her control;
   B.   Place or cause to be placed any unwrapped putrescible waste in any
refuse container;
   C.   Place or cause to be placed more than a limited amount of filth in a
refuse container, limits to be set by the Public Works Director or his or her
agent;
   D.   Place or cause to be placed any unwrapped filth in any refuse
container, unless the container is used only for that purpose;
   E.   Place or cause to be placed any unwrapped, small dead animal in a
refuse container;
   F.   Fail to make arrangements for the removal of construction waste within
30 days after it is generated, but in no case before:
      1.   Final building inspection;
      2.   Clearance of public utilities; and/or
      3.   Issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
   G.   Place or cause to be placed refuse in a container not owned or
maintained by him or her;
   H.   Burn or cause to be burned any refuse without the written permission of
the city Fire Chief;
   I.   Permit or cause, willfully or negligently, the escape or flow of water
in the quantity as to result in flooding, and impeding of vehicular or
pedestrian traffic, thereby causing damage to public rights-of-way, private
premises not owned by the person responsible for the generation, and creating a
hazard to the traffic and a threat to the public health, safety, and welfare;
   J.   Fail to restrain any vicious animal and prevent interference with
collection employees acting in the course of their employment;
   K.   Close or obstruct any right-of-way or impeding the normal operation of
the various departments of the city, including, but not limited to, police,
fire, ambulance, sanitation, water, sewer, and other utilities, such as
electrical, gas, telephone, cable television, unless a special permit has been
granted by the Public Works Department at least three days prior to closing the
right-of-way;
   L.   Close or obstruct an alley unless the closing is for the purpose of
making utility installations. Prior notification shall be provided to the city
police in these instances;
   M.   Remove, haul, or cause to be removed any refuse, on or along any city
right-of-way, street, or alley, unless the same is contained in watertight
containers so constructed and load covered or protected so as to prevent any
such refuse from falling, leaking, or spilling therefrom;
   N.   Any person hauling any refuse along the streets of the city shall
immediately replace in the conveyance used for the hauling any refuse which may
fall upon any street;
   O.   Any person to place or cause to be placed any refuse upon any public or
private property within the city, except as specifically permitted in this
chapter;
   P.   No person shall deny the City Manager or his or her authorized
representative the right of ingress or egress to any premises for the purpose
of inspecting all places and containers where rubbish or garbage is accumulated
or kept;
   Q.   Failure for any person to maintain those areas in the streets or alleys
between his or her property lines and to the center line of the right-of-way
abutting his or her property free and clear of any litter, stored material,
construction material, trees, weeds, bushes, or other potential hazards to
public health, safety, and welfare;
   R.   Any person, firm, or corporation who shall place any refuse or debris
upon any private or public property not owned or under the control of the
person, firm, or corporation shall be guilty of violating this chapter and, in
addition to any fine which may be imposed for violation of any provision of
this code, shall be liable for all charges which may be assessed pursuant to
this section for the removal of the refuse or debris;
   S.   It is unlawful for any person not authorized by the city to remove any
solid waste from a receptacle or scatter the same upon a public alley, street,
or public place;
   T.   No person or commercial establishment within the city shall be
permitted to avoid or refuse to accept the solid waste collection and disposal
service, and the failure of any person to accept the service shall not exempt
the person from the payment of the charges herein set forth, unless his or her
or its solid waste is disposed of by a city-permitted private collector; and/or
   U.   Any condition wherein flies breed is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance. Any person who, upon written notification by the City Manager or his
or her authorized agent, fails purposely to abate the nuisance shall be guilty
of violating this chapter and, in addition to any fine which may be imposed for
violation of any provision of this code, shall be liable for all charges which
may be assessed pursuant to this section for the removal of the refuse or
debris.
Penalty, see
Article 1-8
ARTICLE 9-4: REMOVAL OF LITTER
Section
   
9-4-1   Litter on private property
   
9-4-2   Owner to maintain premises
   
9-4-3   Procedure to compel removal of refuse and/or litter
   
9-4-4   Notice to remove
   
9-4-5   Service of notice
   
9-4-6   Removal by city
   
9-4-7   Lien for removal
   
9-4-8   Placement of debris; liability
§ 9-4-1 LITTER ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied or unoccupied
private property within the city, whether owned by that person or not, except
that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized
private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be
prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any public
place. It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or to suffer or to
accumulate in or about any yard, lot, place, or premises, or upon any street,
alley, or sidewalk adjacent to the lot, any garbage or refuse so as to cause
the yard, lot, premises, or the street, alley, or sidewalk adjacent thereto, to
be or remain in the condition as to cause or create a nuisance or offensive
odor or atmosphere, or thereby to be or become, or cause or create, a public
nuisance.
Penalty, see
Article 1-8
§ 9-4-2 OWNER TO MAINTAIN PREMISES.
   The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times
maintain the premises free of litter, provided, however, that this section
shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized receptacles for
collection. It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or to suffer or to
accumulate in or about any yard, lot, place, or premises, or upon any street,
alley, or sidewalk adjacent to the lot, any garbage or refuse so as to cause
the yard, lot, premises, or the street, alley, or sidewalk adjacent thereto, to
be or remain in the condition as to cause or create a nuisance or offensive
odor or atmosphere, or thereby to be or become, or cause or create, a public
nuisance.
Penalty, see
Article 1-8
§ 9-4-3 PROCEDURE TO COMPEL REMOVAL OF REFUSE AND/OR LITTER.
   The Community Development Director shall enforce the provisions of §§
9-4-1 and
9-4-2 by prosecuting violators of those sections in the Magistrate Court,
pursuant to the criminal provisions of this code. If the prosecution fails to
secure compliance with the provisions of the sections, or in the event of
inability to prosecute violators by reason of failure to secure jurisdiction
over their persons, the Public Works Director shall compel the removal of
litter by the procedure outlined in §§
9-4-4 through
9-4-7.
§ 9-4-4 NOTICE TO REMOVE.
   A.   To compel the removal of litter through the provision of this section
and of §§
9-4-5 through
9-4-8, if a person owning or controlling any property fails, neglects or
refuses to remove or properly dispose of rubbish, trash, weeds or other
accumulation of filth, debris or dilapidated structures which constitute a
hazard to public health and safety from buildings, grounds, lots, contiguous
sidewalks, streets and alleys, then the Public Works Director shall give
written notice to the owner, the owner's authorized agent or the owner's
statutory agent and to the occupant or lessee.
   B.   The notice shall include the following:
      1.   Legal description of the property;
      2.   Cost of such removal to the city if the owner, occupant, or lessee
does not comply;
      3.   A statement that the owner has 30 days to comply from the date
notice was served;
      4.   A statement that unless the person owning or controlling the
property complies within 30 days from the date the written notice is served,
the city will, at the expense of the person owning or controlling the property,
perform the necessary work at a cost not to exceed the estimate given in the
notice; and
      5.   A statement that the person may appeal both the notice and the
assessments, unless the removal or abatement is ordered by court, in writing,
to the Council within 15 days from the date the notice was served and prior to
the date of compliance.
(Ord. 2009- , passed - -2009)
§ 9-4-5 SERVICE OF NOTICE.
   The notice shall be given not less than 30 days before the day set for
compliance. The notice shall be served either by personal service or by
certified mail. If notice is served by certified mail, the notice shall be
mailed to the last known address of the owner, the owner's authorized agent or
the owner's statutory agent and to the address to which the tax bill for the
property was last mailed. The city may record the notice in the County
Recorder's office in the county in which the property is located. If the notice
is recorded and compliance with the notice is subsequently satisfied, the city
shall record a release of the notice.
(Ord. 2009- , passed - -2009)
§ 9-4-6 REMOVAL BY CITY.
   When any such person to whom notice, as aforesaid, has been given, and on or
before the date of compliance on the notice fails, neglects, or refuses to move
from the property any or all litter, the Public Works Director and/or Community
Development Director is authorized and directed to cause same to be removed and
disposed of at the expense of the owner or person controlling the property.
Upon completion of the work, the Public Works Director shall prepare a verified
statement of account of the actual cost of the removal or abatement, the date
the work was completed, and the street address and the legal description of the
property on which the work was done, including 10% for additional inspection
and other incidental costs in connection therewith, and shall serve a duplicate
copy of the verified statement upon the person owning or controlling the
property in the manner prescribed in §
9-4-5.
§ 9-4-7 LIEN FOR REMOVAL.
   If no appeal is taken from the amount of the assessment, or if an appeal is
taken and the Council has affirmed or modified the amount of the assessment,
the original assessment or the assessment as so modified shall be recorded in
the office of the County Recorder and from the date of its recording, shall be
a lien on the lot or tract of land until paid. The liens shall be subject and
inferior to the lien for general taxes and to all prior recorded mortgages and
encumbrances of record. A sale of the property to satisfy a lien obtained under
the provisions of this section shall be made upon judgment of foreclosure or
order of sale. The city shall have the right to bring an action to enforce the
lien in the Superior Court at any time after the recording of the assessment,
but failure to enforce the lien by the action shall not affect its validity.
The recorded assessment shall be prima facie evidence of the truth of all
matters recited therein, and of the regularity of all proceedings prior to the
recording thereof. A prior assessment for the purposes provided in this section
shall not be a bar to a subsequent assessment or assessments for the purposes,
and any number of liens on the same lot or tract of land may be enforced in the
same action.
§ 9-4-8 PLACEMENT OF DEBRIS; LIABILITY.
   Any person, firm or corporation that places any rubbish, trash, filth, or
debris upon any private or public property not owned or under the control of
that person, firm, or corporation is guilty of a class one misdemeanor or a
civil violation and, in addition to any fine or penalty which may be imposed
for a violation of any provision of this section, is liable for all costs which
may be assessed pursuant to this article for removing, abating or enjoining the
rubbish, trash, filth, or debris.
(Ord. 2009- , passed - -2009) Penalty, see
Article 1-8
ARTICLE 9-5: AUTHORITY TO INSPECT; NOTICE TO REMOVE REFUSE, LITTER, AND DEBRIS
(NONEMERGENCY); RIGHT TO APPEAL; COMPULSORY REMOVAL AND SANCTIONS
Section
   
9-5-1   Inspection of private property for protection of public health and
safety
   
9-5-2   Notice to remove (nonemergency)
   
9-5-3   Appeal of notice (nonemergency)
   
9-5-4   Compulsory removal (nonemergency)
   
9-5-5   Waiver of requirement to give notice (emergency)
   
9-5-6   Compulsory removal (emergency)
   
9-5-7   Notice of assessment for violations
   
9-5-8   Determination of emergency and/or appeal of notice of assessment
(emergency)
   
9-5-9   Liability for compulsory removal of refuse, debris, litter, and
hazardous waste; preparation of verified statement of account; assessment of
owner, lessee, tenant, or occupant
   
9-5-10   Lien against private property to collect fees or costs assessed by the
city for regular or compulsory collection and removal of refuse and debris and
cost to repair or replace damaged or stolen city property; enforcement of lien
§ 9-5-1 INSPECTION OF PRIVATE PROPERTY FOR PROTECTION OF PUBLIC HEALTH AND
SAFETY.
   A.   The Public Works Director or his or her representative(s) may enter
onto private property within the city to inspect for actual or potential
hazards to the public health and safety, including hazards resulting from the
accumulation of refuse, debris, or hazardous waste. If the Public Works
Director and/or Community Development Director or his or her representative are
denied access to the property for the purpose of conducting such an inspection
by the owner, occupant, or lessee of the private property, he or she may file a
complaint, under oath to a magistrate, pursuant to A.R.S. § 36-603. The
complaint shall specify the necessity for entry onto the property for
inspection for and/or abatement of any hazard to the public health and safety.
Upon the issuance by a magistrate of a warrant to enter and inspect, the
Director or his or her representative(s) may enter and inspect the property
between the hours of sunrise and sunset when accompanied by a peace officer.
   B.   The lessor of property or his or her agent may enter the property of
the lessee to inspect for and/or abate any hazard to the public health and
safety pursuant to A.R.S. § 33-1343.
§ 9-5-2 NOTICE TO REMOVE (NONEMERGENCY).
   A.   Upon determination by the Public Works Director and/or Community
Development Director that the condition of private property violates city code,
the owner, lessee, tenant, or occupant of the private property shall be served
with written notice of the violation. The notice shall be served personally or
by certified or registered mail to the owner of the property at his or her last
known address or to the lessee, tenant, or occupant, and, if unoccupied, by
posting the notice in a conspicuous place on the property.
   B.   The notice shall also:
      1.   Demand that the property be brought into conformance with city code
(specific section to be cited) within 30 days of service of the notice;
      2.   Inform the owner, lessee, tenant, or occupant that, if the property
is not brought into conformance with city code (specific section to be sited)
within the time provided, that the city will exercise its authority under §
9-5-4;
      3.   Provide the owner, lessee, tenant, or occupant with an estimate of
the cost which the city will incur to exercise its authority under §
9-5-4;
      4.   Inform the owner, lessee, tenant, or occupant that they shall be
jointly or severally liable for the costs or expense, under §
9-5-9, in addition to any other civil penalties which may be imposed under this
chapter; and
      5.   Inform the owner, lessee, tenant, or occupant of his or her right to
appeal this notice under §
9-5-3.
§ 9-5-3 APPEAL OF NOTICE (NONEMERGENCY).
   A.   The owner, tenant, lessee, or occupant may appeal the Director's
notice, in writing, to the City Manager within 30 calendar days after the
notice has been served on any of the mentioned persons or was properly posted.
The appeal shall be delivered personally or by registered or certified mail.
The appellant's filing of an appeal, as provided hereunder, shall stay any
further action pursuant to the Director's notice until the City Manager renders
his or her decision on the matter. The appeal shall, at a minimum, identify the
appellant(s), describe his or her interest in the property, and explain the
appellant's basis for objection to the notice. The City Manager shall uphold,
reverse, or modify the Director's notice and notify the appellant, by certified
or registered mail, of his or her decision. The City Manager's decision shall
constitute an exhaustion of all the appellant's administrative remedies for
purposes of this section.
   B.   If the City Manager upholds or modifies the Director's decision, he or
she shall provide the owner, tenant, lessee, or occupant with an additional 30
days from the date of mailing his or her decision to the appellant, to the
address provided by the appellant, to bring the property into compliance with
city codes in accordance with his or her decision.
§ 9-5-4 COMPULSORY REMOVAL (NONEMERGENCY).
   If, within 30 days after the Director has given notice, as provided under §
9-5-2, the refuse or debris described in the notice is not removed, and the
owner, lessee, tenant, or occupant has not appealed the notice to the City
Manager, as provided under §
9-5-3, the Director may then remove, or cause to be removed, the refuse or
debris and shall subject the owner, lessee, tenant, or occupant to liability as
provided in §
9-5-9.
§ 9-5-5 WAIVER OF REQUIREMENT TO GIVE NOTICE (EMERGENCY).
   Notwithstanding any requirements for notice provided under §
9-5-2, the City Manager may declare certain violations of §§
9-2-5C.,
9-4-1, or
9-4-2 to be "an extreme and present danger to the public health and safety,"
which requires the city to take immediate action for the public welfare. The
City Manager shall make his or her determination in writing, describing with
particularity the reasons for the determination.
§ 9-5-6 COMPULSORY REMOVAL (EMERGENCY).
   Upon decision by the City Manager under §
9-5-5, he or she may then order the Director to remove, or cause to be removed,
the subject refuse or debris and shall subject the owner, lessee, tenant, or
occupant to liability as provided in §
9-5-9.
§ 9-5-7 NOTICE OF ASSESSMENT FOR VIOLATIONS.
   A.   The city will assess the owner, lessee, tenant, or occupant, either
jointly or severally, for all costs associated with the removal of the refuse,
debris, or hazardous waste under §
9-5-6 if the City Manager determines that the owner, lessee, tenant, or
occupant was, jointly or severally, responsible for the presence of the refuse,
debris, or hazardous waste constituting a violation of city codes.
   B.   Upon determination by the City Manager that the owner, lessee, tenant,
or occupant was in violation of city codes and that they, jointly or severally,
should be assessed the costs to collect and remove the nonconforming refuse,
debris, or hazardous waste, as provided under §
9-5-9, the City Manager shall serve notice of the assessment upon the owner,
lessee, tenant, or occupant of the property. The notice shall be served
personally or by certified or registered mail to the owner of the property at
his or her last known address or to the lessee, tenant, or occupant, and, if
unoccupied, by posting notice in a conspicuous place on the property. The
notice shall, at a minimum:
      1.   Explain the nature of the violation;
      2.   Provide a copy of the City Manager's written determination of
"extreme and present danger" to the public health and safety;
      3.   Provide an explanation of the costs incurred to bring the property
into conformance with the section of the city code being violated;
      4.   Provide that the City Manager has determined that the owner, lessee,
tenant, or occupant is jointly or severally responsible for the presence of the
refuse, debris, or hazardous waste constituting a violation of city codes (cite
specific section);
      5.   Demand payment of all costs incurred; and
      6.   Inform the owner, lessee, tenant, or occupant of his or her right to
appeal the City Manager's determination of extreme and present danger and/or
the assessment under §
9-5-8.
§ 9-5-8 DETERMINATION OF EMERGENCY AND/OR APPEAL OF NOTICE OF ASSESSMENT
(EMERGENCY).
   A.   The owner, lessee, tenant, or occupant may appeal the City Manager's
determination of violation of city code (citing specific section) and/or the
notice of assessment under §
9-5-7 to the Mayor and City Council. The appeal shall be made, in writing, to
the Mayor and City Council and submitted to the City Clerk within 30 days of
receipt of notice of the assessment under §
9-5-7. Filing of the appeal shall stay any requirement to pay the assessment by
the appellant until the City Council has rendered its final decision. The
written appeal shall, at a minimum:
      1.   Request a hearing before the City Council at its earliest
convenience;
      2.   Cite, with specificity, the decision(s) being appealed; and
      3.   Provide an address where appellant may receive notice of the hearing
date.
   B.   The hearing shall be held before the City Council in open session. The
appellant shall be given an opportunity to present oral and documentary
evidence in support of his or her appeal. The appellant may be represented by
legal counsel or other competent representative. The City Council shall uphold,
modify, or reverse the City Manager's decision and the Council's decision shall
constitute exhaustion of all administrative remedies.
§ 9-5-9 LIABILITY FOR COMPULSORY REMOVAL OF REFUSE, DEBRIS, LITTER, AND
HAZARDOUS WASTE; PREPARATION OF VERIFIED STATEMENT OF ACCOUNT; ASSESSMENT OF
OWNER, LESSEE, TENANT, OR OCCUPANT.
   A.   Assessment of costs for removal of refuse, debris, litter, and
hazardous waste. The owner, lessee, tenant, or occupant of private property,
jointly or severally, from which the city collects and removes or causes to be
collected and removed any refuse, debris, or hazardous waste under §§
9-5-4 or
9-5-6 shall be liable to the city for all costs incurred by the city to bring
the property into conformity with the law. The liability shall include all
costs incurred by the city to collect and remove any refuse, debris, and
hazardous waste plus 10% fee. The city shall retain the 10% fee to cover
administrative, inspection, and incidental costs incurred by the city to bring
the property into conformance with the law.
   B.   Preparation of verified statement of account. Once the city has had the
refuse, debris, litter, or hazardous waste collected and removed or caused it
to be collected or removed, under §§
9-5-4 or
9-5-6, the City Clerk shall prepare a verified statement accounting for all
costs and fees incurred by the city. The statement shall also provide the dates
that the work was commenced and completed, the street address of the property,
the legal description of the property, the name and address of the property
owner, the name and address of any private agency that collected and removed
the refuse, debris, litter, or hazardous waste, and any other information which
the City Clerk believes is of importance.
   C.   Assessment of owner, lessee, tenant, or occupant. The City Clerk shall
serve the owner, lessee, tenant, or occupant of the private property personally
or by certified or registered mail at the property address with a copy of the
assessment and demand that full payment be made within 30 calendar days of
making the service of the demand. If the owner is not the occupant of the
property, the owner shall be served personally or by certified or registered
mail at his or her last known address. A duplicate copy of the assessment shall
be filed and recorded against the property in the office of the County Recorder
in accordance with §
9-5-10.
§ 9-5-10 LIEN AGAINST PRIVATE PROPERTY TO COLLECT FEES OR COSTS ASSESSED BY THE
CITY FOR REGULAR OR COMPULSORY COLLECTION AND REMOVAL OF REFUSE AND DEBRIS AND
COST TO REPAIR OR REPLACE DAMAGED OR STOLEN CITY PROPERTY; ENFORCEMENT OF LIEN.
   A.   The filing and recording of an assessment under §
9-5-9C. in the office of the County Recorder shall constitute a lien against
the property. Any such lien shall be subject to and inferior to any lien for
general taxes assessed and unpaid, and to all previously recorded mortgages and
encumbrances. A prior assessment for costs under §§
9-5-4 and
9-5-6 shall not bar a subsequent assessment of costs and liens for subsequent
collection and removal of refuse, debris, litter, or hazardous waste by the
city under §§
9-5-4 and
9-5-6. The recorded assessment shall be prima facie evidence of the truth of
all matters recited therein, and of the regularity of all proceedings prior to
the recording thereof.
   B.   The city may bring an action to enforce the lien in a court of
competent jurisdiction. Judicial sale of the property to satisfy the lien shall
be made upon a judgment of foreclosure and order of sale. Failure on the part
of the city to so enforce the lien shall not affect the validity of the lien.
(Ord. 182, passed 10-5-1988)
ARTICLE 9-6: DUST COMPLAINT SIGN REGULATION
Section
   
9-6-1   Project information sign
   
9-6-2   Enforcement
   
9-6-3   Exemptions
   
9-6-4   Definitions
§ 9-6-1 PROJECT INFORMATION SIGN.
   For all sites with a building or grading permits that involve disturbing one
acre or larger, except for routine maintenance, the owner and/or operator shall
erect and maintain a project information sign in accordance with Exhibit A
(Work Zone Identification Sign Details) attached to Resolution 907, which is
hereby adopted by reference as if set out in full herein, that is readable by
the public at the main entrance to the property. Such signs shall have a white
background, have black block lettering, as specified in Exhibit A, and shall
contain at least all of the following information:
   A.   Project name and permit holder;
   B.   Building or grading permit number;
   C.   Name and phone number of person(s) responsible for conducting the
project; and
   D.   Text stating: "Dust Complaints – Call the City of Somerton, Public
Works Department (928) 627-9876 during regular office hours."
(Res. 907, passed 7-19-2005; Ord. 293, passed 8-2-2005)
§ 9-6-2 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Stop-work order; revocation of permit. In the event that any person
holding a building permit or grading permit pursuant to this article violates
the terms of the article, the city may suspend or revoke the building or
grading permit.
   (B)   Violation and penalties. Any person, firm or corporation violating any
of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a class one misdemeanor,
and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000 or
by imprisonment for not more than ten days or both fine and imprisonment. Each
separate day or part thereof, during which any violation of these sections
shall be punishable as herein provided.
(Res. 907, passed 7-19-2005; Ord. 293, passed 8-2-2005)
§ 9-6-3 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following are exempt from the requirements of this article: normal farm
agricultural practices under A.R.S. §§ 49-457 and 49-504.4, and open areas,
vacant lots, unpaved parking lots and unpaved roadways than are not located at
sources that require any permit under these rules.
(Res. 907, passed 7-19-2005; Ord. 293, passed 8-2-2005)
§ 9-6-4 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING PERMIT.  An official document or certificate issued by the City of
Somerton, which authorizes the performance of a specific construction work,
grading or alteration of ground features to create improvements and structures.
   GRADING. Excavation of or fill placement of material upon a land surface to
create a desired slope or elevation.
(Res. 907, passed 7-19-2005; Ord. 293, passed 8-2-2005)
ARTICLE 9-7: POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM; STORM WATER PHASE II
PERMIT PROGRAM
Section
   
9-7-1   Purpose and finding of facts
   
9-7-2   Definitions
   
9-7-3   Permits and fees
   
9-7-4   Review and approval
   
9-7-5   Erosion and sediment control plan
   
9-7-6   Design requirements
   
9-7-7   Inspections
   
9-7-8   Enforcement
§ 9-7-1 PURPOSE AND FINDING OF FACTS.
   A.   The purpose of this local regulation is to safeguard persons, protect
property, and prevent damage to the environment from the polluted stormwater
runoff from construction sites that disturb one acre or more of land in the
City of Somerton. This article will also promote the public welfare by guiding,
regulating and controlling the design, construction, and use of any development
or other activity that disturbs one acre or more within the city's
jurisdiction.
   B.   During construction activities, soil is highly vulnerable to erosion by
wind and water. This soil poses a serious threat to endangered species and
limited water resources, by reducing water quality and causing the siltation of
aquatic habitat for fish, aquatic life, and native riparian vegetation. Eroded
soil also results in the accelerated need to clean storm drains, clear and
clean ditches, and dredge lakes and river backwaters. In addition, clearing and
grading during construction cause the loss of native vegetation necessary for
terrestrial and aquatic habitat for retarding and reducing stormwater runoff.
(Res. 926, passed 10-4-2005; Ord. 300, passed 10-18-2005)
§ 9-7-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADEQ. Arizona Department of Environmental Quality.
   AZPDES CONSTRUCTION GENERAL PERMIT.  AZPDES General Permit No. AZG2002-002
for Stormwater Discharges from Large and Small Construction Activity in
Arizona, except for those in Indian Country.
   BUILDING PERMIT. An official document or certificate issued by the city,
which authorizes the performance of a specific construction work, grading or
alteration of ground features to create certain improvements and structures.
   CERTIFIED CONTRACTOR. A person(s) or firm who is licensed by the state to
perform grading and excavation work and has received certified training.
   CITY.  The City of Somerton, Yuma County, State of Arizona.
   CITY ENGINEER. The City Engineer or firm or person, and his, her or its
properly authorized assistants and inspectors, designated by the city to
prepare plans and administer the construction of work.
   CLEARING. Any activity that removes the vegetation from the earth's surface.
   CONSTRUCTION. Any repair, reconstruction, upgrading or enhancing of a
structure, grading or landscaping that disturbs one or more acres of land.
   DESIGN ENGINEER. A licensed professional engineer registered in the State of
Arizona, who prepares plans and administers construction of public or private
development.
   DRAINAGE WAY.  A waterway, canal, natural swales, canyons, arroyos, or
human-made surface channels, conveying surface water throughout or from the
site.
   EROSION. The process of the wearing away of the soil on the earth's surface.
This is caused by natural or human-made activities. Often the eroded debris
(silt or sediment) becomes a pollutant via stormwater runoff. EROSION occurs
naturally but can be intensified by human-made activities such as farming,
agriculture, and land development.
   EROSION CONTROL. A planned activity or measure that prevents erosion.
   EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN (ESCP). A set of plans prepared by or
under the direction of a design engineer indicating the specific measures and
sequencing to be used to control sediment and erosion on a development site
during and after construction. The ESCP may be included as a part of the SWPPP.
   GRADING. Excavation of or fill placement of material upon a land surface to
create a desired slope or elevation.
   IMPROVEMENT. See Construction above.
   MAJOR MODIFICATION.  Any addition to or cancellation of the originally
submitted ESCP and their impacts, as deemed by the City Engineer, that may
result in increased flood hazards or sediment track out to the public roads
and/or to the city's storm sewer system.
   MAJOR STORM. A storm that drops 0.50 inches or more of rain in a 12-hour
period or less.
   PERIMETER CONTROL. A physical barrier that prevents sediment from leaving a
site by filtering sediment-laden runoff or diverting it to a sediment trap or
ponding area.
   PERMIT. See Construction Permit above.
   PHASING. A plan for sequencing areas of parcel of land for development and
subsequent construction of a parcel of land in distinct sequences of areas,
with the stabilization of each area completed before construction of the next.
   SEDIMENT. Soil particles, both mineral and organic, that are in suspension,
are being transported, or have been removed from their site of origin by air,
water, and gravity and have come to rest on the earth's surface.
   SEDIMENT CONTROL. Measures that prevent eroded sediment from leaving the
site.
   SEDIMENT PONDS AND SEDIMENT TRAPS. Temporary (or permanent) ponding areas
formed by constructing an earthen embankment with a stone outlet used to detain
and collect sediment and to prevent damaging erosion on site, which may cause
silt-laden runoff from the site. Ponds are generally larger in size than traps
and serve ten acres or more of a disturbed area at one time.
   SITE. A parcel of land or a contiguous combination thereof, where grading
work is performed as a single, unified or phased operation.
   STABILIZATION. A technique, practice or procedure used to prevent or
minimize exposed soil from eroding. STABILIZATION practices include but are not
limited to: pre-watering, applying dust suppressant, vegetation (temporary and
permanent seeding), gravel application, soil stabilizers, plastic covers and
tarps.
   STARTING OF CONSTRUCTION. The first land-disturbing activity associated with
a development, including but not limited to land operation such as clearing,
grubbing, grading and filling; installation of streets and walkways; excavation
for footings, piers, and foundations; erection of temporary forms; and
installation of accessory buildings, such as garages.
   STORMWATER POLLUTION AND PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP). A written document that
describes the construction operator's activities to comply with the
requirements of the stormwater Construction General Permit No.__. The SWPPP
describes a series of processes that evaluate potential pollutant sources at a
construction site and select and implement appropriate measures designed to
prevent and control the discharge of pollutants in stormwater runoff.
   THE UNITED STATES WATERS. All waters that are currently used, were used in
the past, or may be susceptible to use in interstate or foreign commerce,
including all waters subject to the ebb and flow of the tide. WATERS OF THE
UNITED STATES include all interstate waters and intrastate lakes, rivers,
streams (including intermittent streams), mudflats, sand flats, wetlands,
sloughs, prairie potholes, wet meadows, playa lakes, or natural ponds.
   WATERCOURSE. Any body of water, including, but not limited to lakes, ponds,
rivers, streams, and bodies of water delineated by the State of Arizona and/or
the United States of America.
(Res. 926, passed 10-4-2005; Ord. 300, passed 10-18-2005)
§ 9-7-3 PERMITS AND FEES.
   A.   The applicant shall submit an ESCP for review and approval by the city.
The city shall not grant any permit for site development or improvement
activity that would disturb one acre or more of land without first having
reviewed and approved the applicant's ESCP.
   B.   No building permit is required for the following site development/
improvement activities:
      1.   Any emergency activity that is immediately necessary for the
protection of life, property or natural resources; or
      2.   Existing nursery and agricultural operations conducted as permitted
or accessory use.
   C.   Each application shall bear the name(s) and address(es) of the owner or
developer of the site, and of any consulting firm retained by the applicant's
principal contact at the firm and shall be accompanied by a filing fee as set
by the city.
   D.   Each applicant shall include a statement that any land clearing,
construction or development involving the movement of earth shall be in
accordance with the ESCP and shall require a certified contractor to visit (be
on) site on all days when construction or grading activities are taking place.
   E.   The applicant will be required to file with the city an assurance of
completion agreement as provided in § 21.1 of the Somerton City Zoning Code to
cover all costs of improvements, landscaping and maintenance of improvements,
as specified by the city. The applicant shall also pay for the city's
engineering and inspection costs during any and all construction phases.
   F.   Fees for SWPPP inspection and engineering review after a major
modification shall be as follows:
 
Application Fees:
                                     $157 for the first ten acres, plus an
Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) inspection fee additional $26 for
                                     each additional five acres
SWPPP engineering review fee         $35
 
   G.   Fees for ESCP (if the applicant qualities for an AZPDES construction
general permit waiver) inspection and engineering review after a major
modification shall be as follows:
 
Application Fees:
Erosion and sediment control plan (ESCP) inspection fee $63
ESCP engineering review fee                             $14
 
(Res. 926, passed 10-4-2005; Ord. 300, passed 10-18-2005)
§ 9-7-4 REVIEW AND APPROVAL.
   A.   The city will review each application for a construction permit to
determine its conformance with the provisions of this regulation. After
receiving an application, the city shall respond in one of the following ways:
      1.   Approve the permit application;
      2.   Approve the permit application subject to such reasonable conditions
as may be necessary to secure substantially the objectives of this regulation,
and issue the permit subject to these conditions; or
      3.   Disapprove the permit application, indicating the reason(s) and
procedure for submitting a revised application and/or submission.
   B.   If the city does not act on an original or revised application, within
30 calendar days, the applicant may assume approval of permit application, and
request issuance of the permit, unless additional agreements have been created
between the applicant and the city.
(Res. 926, passed 10-4-2005; Ord. 300, passed 10-18-2005)
§ 9-7-5 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN.
   A.   The city will require the submittal of the ESCP in all cases, if even
the project qualifies for an AZPDES/stormwater permit waiver for small
construction sites.
   B.   The ESCP shall include the following:
      1.   A natural resources map identifying soil type, vegetation cover, and
resources protected under other sections of this article. This map shall be a
normal engineering scale and should be at a scale no smaller than one inch=100
feet and no larger than one inch=ten feet;
      2.   A construction schedule prior to any site development construction,
including stripping and clearing; rough grading; construction of utilities,
infrastructure and buildings; and final grading and landscaping. The schedule
shall identify the expected date on which clearing will begin, the estimated
duration of exposure of cleared areas, areas of clearing, installation of
temporary erosion and sediment control measures, and establishment of
vegetative plantings;
      3.   All erosion and sediment control measures necessary to meet the
objectives of this local regulation and any additional state or federal
requirements throughout all phases of construction and after completion of
development of the site. Depending on the complexity of the project, the
drafting of intermediate plans may be required before starting any phases of
construction;
      4.   For development other than subdivisions, and wherever applicable,
seeding mixtures and rates, types of sod, method of seedbed preparation,
expected seeding dates, irrigation requirements, type and rate of lime and
fertilizer application, and kind and quantity of mulching for both temporary
and permanent vegetative control measures;
      5.   Provisions for maintenance of control facilities, including
easements and estimates of the cost of maintenance for post-construction stage;
and
      6.   The ESCP may be a part of the SWPPP required by ADEQ.
   C.   Modifications to the ESCP shall be processed and approved or
disapproved in the same manner as §
9-7-5 of this regulation, may be authorized by the city by written
authorization to the permittee, and shall include:
      1.   Major amendments of the ESCP submitted to the city;
      2.   Field modifications of a minor nature; and
      3.   A fee for each modified submittal that involves a major
modification, as per the fee table attached to Resolution 926, which is hereby
adopted by reference as if set out in full herein.
(Res. 926, passed 10-4-2005; Ord. 300, passed 10-18-2005)
§ 9-7-6 DESIGN REQUIREMENTS.
   A.   Grading, erosion control practices, sediment control practices, and
waterway crossings shall be constructed in accordance with the design criteria
set forth by the City Standard Construction Specifications, and shall be
adequate to prevent transportation of sediment from the site to the
satisfaction of the City Engineer. Cut and fill slopes shall be no greater than
4:1, except as approved by the City Engineer to meet other community or
environmental objectives.
   B.   Clearing, and grading of natural resources, such as natural desert and
wetlands, shall not be permitted, except when in compliance with all other
chapters of this article. Clearing techniques that retain natural vegetation
and drainage pattern, as described in the City Standard Construction
Specifications shall be used to the satisfaction of the City Engineer.
   C.   Clearing, except that necessary to establish sediment control devices,
shall not begin until all sediment control devices have been installed and have
been stabilized.
   D.   Phasing shall be required on all sites disturbing greater than 40
acres, with the size of each phase to be established as a part of the plan
review process and as approved by the City Engineer.
   E.   Erosion control requirements shall include the following.
      1.   Soil stabilization shall be completed within 14 days of clearing or
inactivity in construction.
      2.   If seeding or another vegetative erosion control method is used,
such erosion control method shall become established within two weeks or the
city shall require the site to be reseeded or a non-vegetative option employed.
      3.   Special techniques that meet the design criteria outlined in the
City Standard Construction Specifications on steep slopes or in drainage ways
shall be used to ensure stabilization.
      4.   Soil stockpiles must be stabilized or covered at the end of each
workday, or whenever a major storm is expected.
      5.   The entire site must be stabilized, using a heavy mulch layer or
another method that does not require germination to control erosion.
      6.   Techniques shall be employed to prevent the blowing of dust or
sediment from the site.
      7.   Techniques that retard and divert upland runoff past disturbed
slopes shall be employed.
   F.   Sediment control requirements may (shall) include:
      1.   Settling basins, sediment traps, or tanks and perimeter controls;
      2.   Settling basins that are designed in a manner that allows adaptation
to provide long-term stormwater management, if required by the City Engineer;
and
      3.   Protection for the adjacent properties by the use of a vegetated
buffer strip (in combination with) or perimeter controls.
   G.   Waterway and watercourse protection requirements shall include:
      1.   A temporary stream crossing installed and approved by ADEQ or the
cty, if a wet watercourse will be crossed regularly during construction;
      2.   Stabilization of the watercourse channel before, during and after
any in-channel work;
      3.   All on-site stormwater conveyance channels designed according to the
criteria outlined in this
Article 9-7; and
      4.   Stabilization adequate to prevent erosion located at the outlets of
all pipes and paved channels.
   H.   Construction site access requirements shall include:
      1.   A temporary access road provided at all sites; and
      2.   Other measures as required by the city or design engineer in order
to ensure that sediment is not tracked onto public streets by construction
vehicles or washed into storm drains.
(Res. 926, passed 10-4-2005; Ord. 300, passed 10-18-2005)
§ 9-7-7 INSPECTIONS.
   A.   The city shall make inspections as hereinafter stipulated and either
shall approve the portion of the work completed or shall notify the permittee
that the work fails to comply with the ESCP as approved. Plans for grading,
stripping, excavating, and filling work bearing the stamp of approval of the
City Engineer shall be maintained at the site during the progress of the work.
To obtain inspections, the permittee shall notify the city at least two working
days before the day of inspection for:
      1.   Start of construction;
      2.   Completion of site cleaning and rough grading;
      3.   Completion of final grading; and
      4.   Completion of final landscaping.
   B.   The permittee or an agent shall make regular inspections of all control
measures in accordance with the inspection schedule outlined on the approved
ESCP. The purpose of these inspections will be to determine the overall
effectiveness of the control plan and the need for additional control measures.
All inspections shall be documented in written form and submitted to the city
at the time interval specified in the approved permit.
   C.   The city/design engineer or a designated agent shall enter the property
of the applicant as deemed necessary to make regular inspections to ensure the
validity of the reports filed under §
9-7-5.
   D.   The permittee shall maintain at the site, during the progress of work
and until the final stabilization is achieved, an approved copy of the ESCP.
(Res. 926, passed 10-4-2005; Ord. 300, passed 10-18-2005)
§ 9-7-8 ENFORCEMENT.
   A.   Stop-work order; revocation of permit. In the event that any person
holding a construction permit pursuant to this article violates the terms of
the permit or implements site development in such a manner as to adversely
affect the health, welfare, or safety of persons residing or working in the
neighborhood or development site, so as to be materially detrimental to the
public welfare or injurious to property or improvements in the neighborhood,
the city may suspend or revoke the building permit.
   B.   Violation and penalties. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, or maintain any grading,
excavation or fill, or cause such actions, contrary to or in violation of any
terms of this article. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a class one misdemeanor, and upon
conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000 or by
imprisonment for not more than ten days or both fine and imprisonment. Each
separate day or part thereof, during which any violation of the sections shall
be punishable as herein provided.
(Res. 926, passed 10-4-2005; Ord. 300, passed 10-18-2005)
CHAPTER 10: OFFENSES
      Article
         
10-1.   OFFENSES
ARTICLE 10-1: OFFENSES
Section
   
10-1-1   Burning
   
10-1-2   Dangerous constructions
   
10-1-3   Damage to property
   
10-1-4   Damage to street surfaces
   
10-1-5   Deposits of injurious material on thoroughfares
   
10-1-6   Excavations to be covered
   
10-1-7   Explosives
   
10-1-8   False or misleading reports to police
   
10-1-9   Fences; barbed wire and electric
   
10-1-10   Furnishing weapons and other articles to prisoners
   
10-1-11   Littering
   
10-1-12   Loitering
   
10-1-13   Minors
   
10-1-14   Noise
   
10-1-15   Obstruction of streets
   
10-1-16   Obstruction of view
   
10-1-17   Offensive business
   
10-1-18   Offensive premises
   
10-1-19   Marijuana
   
10-1-20   Prostitution
   
10-1-21   Searchlights
   
10-1-22   Signs and banners
   
10-1-23   Smoking
   
10-1-24   Spitting
   
10-1-25   Storing motor vehicles
   
10-1-26   Water; flow upon streets prohibited
   
10-1-27   Weapons
   
10-1-28   Graffiti
   
10-1-29   Fireworks
§ 10-1-1 BURNING.
   It is unlawful for any person to start or maintain any open fire for the
purpose of burning trash or rubbish in any of the streets, alleys, or vacant
lots in the city, or to start or maintain any such fire in the yards or
enclosures surrounding any dwelling house or business property situated therein
without issuance of a burn permit by the Fire Department.
Penalty, see
Article 1-8
§ 10-1-2 DANGEROUS CONSTRUCTIONS.
   It is unlawful for any person to maintain or allow any signs, billboards,
awnings, and other similar structures over or near streets, sidewalks, public
grounds or places frequented by the public, so situated or constructed as to
endanger the public safety.
Penalty, see
Article 1-8
§ 10-1-3 DAMAGE TO PROPERTY.
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to damage in any manner or attempt to
damage or tamper with any pipe lines, water hydrants, street lamps or lights,
or the fixtures and appliances thereunto belonging upon any of the poles or
other objects for use in connection with the lighting of the streets of the
city or any water pipes, hydrants, or any appliances pertaining to the water or
sewer works, or any other property or any and every character belonging to the
city.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to deface, walk, ride, or drive upon or
over any sidewalk or street crossing composed of or containing cement, during
the construction thereof, or before the same is thrown open to public use.
   C.   It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to damage in any
manner any road, street, or bridge in the city limits by using the same, by
heavy vehicles, malicious destruction, or by any act that will result in damage
to any such road, street, or bridge.
   D.   It is unlawful to break or destroy any window, door, or part of any
dwelling owned or occupied by another or to break or sever from any premises
owned or occupied by another any gate, fence, railing, tree, brush, or vine or
any property whatsoever, or to deface, mutilate, or injure the same.
   E.   It is unlawful for any person within the city to throw stones or other
missiles at railroad trains; or to let off the brakes of railroad cars standing
on side tracks or tamper with the couplings of railroad cars, or to uncouple
cars standing on railroad tracks, or to uncouple the air hose of the air brake
system on railroad cars; or to remove, tamper with, or break switch lamps or
other signals set to control the movements of trains, or to jump on or off
moving trains, or to throw refuse upon or in any way litter the depot or
station grounds of any railroad.
Penalty, see
Article 1-8
§ 10-1-4 DAMAGE TO STREET SURFACES.
   It is unlawful to place, drive, pull, propel, or otherwise move or operate
across or upon any oil surfaced or paved street in the city, any tractor
trailer, truck, or other vehicle having on its periphery any block, stud,
flange, cleat or spike, lugs, or any other protuberances of material other than
rubber which project beyond the tread of the traction surface of the tire,
without first obtaining from the city a written permit to cross or operate upon
any street.
Penalty, see
Article 1-8
§ 10-1-5 DEPOSITS OF INJURIOUS MATERIAL ON THOROUGHFARES.
   It is unlawful for any person, either willfully and maliciously or
carelessly and negligently, to drop, throw, place, or scatter upon any street,
alley, sidewalk, or public place in the city any nails, tacks, broken glass,
glass bottles, or any instrument or thing whatsoever of such nature as to be
capable of injuring persons or property.
Penalty, see
Article 1-8
§ 10-1-6 EXCAVATIONS TO BE COVERED.
   A.   Any person who makes any excavation or digs any hole, drain, or ditch
in any highway or thoroughfare in the city without providing a sufficient light
at night and a temporary fence or suitable obstruction around or in front of
the excavation during the day is guilty of a misdemeanor.
   B.   Any person who maintains a well, cellar, pit, or other excavation of
more than two feet in depth on any unenclosed lot, without substantial curbing,
covering, or protection, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
Penalty, see
Article 1-8
§ 10-1-7 EXPLOSIVES.
   It is unlawful for any person within the limits of the city to blast, or use
powder, fireworks, or other explosives, without a permit from the Fire
Department, in writing.
Penalty, see
Article 1-8
§ 10-1-8 FALSE OR MISLEADING REPORTS TO POLICE.
   It is unlawful for any person willfully to make to the Police Department of
the city any false, fraudulent, misleading, or unfounded report or statement,
or willfully to misrepresent any fact for the purpose of interfering with the
operation of the Police Department or with the intention of misleading any
police officer.
Penalty, see
Article 1-8
§ 10-1-9 FENCES; BARBED WIRE AND ELECTRIC.
   A.   Barbed wire. It is unlawful for any person to erect or maintain within
the city any fence constructed in whole or in part of barbed wire, razor wire,
or other similar wire (hereafter referred to as barbed wire), except as
indicated below.
      1.   Barbed wire is not allowed in the following zones, except for
security fence around construction building materials, and then only by special
permit issued by Community Development Director:
         a.   Manufactured Home Subdivision District (MHS);
         b.   Parking District (P);
         c.   Low Density Residential District (R-1);
         d.   Low Density Residential District, Including Dwellings and Mobile
Homes (R-2);
         e.   High Density Residential District (R-3);
         f.   Recreational Vehicle Park District (RVP); and
         g.   Recreational Vehicle Subdivision District (RVS).
      2.   Barbed wire is not allowed in the following zones, except for
security purposes, and then only by special permit issued by Community
Development Department. Special permits will not be issued for barbed wire in
areas generally accessible to the public during normal business hours:
Commercial Zone (C-1).
      3.   Barbed wire is allowed in the following zones, but only in
conjunction with animal, crop, equipment, or facilities protection, restraint,
or security:
         a.   Agriculture (A); and
         b.   Suburban Ranch (RA).
      4.   Barbed wire is allowed in the following zones for perimeter fencing,
materials, and facility security or protection. (Perimeter fencing is allowed
with barbed wire only if the barbed wire is a minimum of six feet above the
ground. If barb arms are used at the fence top, the fence must be completely on
private property, including the area below barb arms if they extend outside the
fence line.): Light Industrial District (LI) or Heavy Industrial District (HI).
      5.   Barbed wire is allowed for use by the following for perimeter
fencing, materials, and facility security or protection regardless of zone they
are located in. (Perimeter fencing is allowed with barbed wire only if the
barbed wire is a minimum of six feet above the ground. If barb arms are used at
the fence top, the fence must be completely on private property, including the
area below barb arms if they extend outside the fence line.):
         a.   Federal, state, or local government facilities; and
         b.   School facilities.
   B.   Electric fences. Electrically-charged fences are allowed within the
city only by special permit from the Community Development Director, and then
with the following restrictions generally applying.
      1.   A special permit will be allowed only in an industrial zone or
during construction in other zones, and then only for major security reasons.
      2.   Electrically-charged fences will be allowed only in a location made
inaccessible to persons, who would know the fence is electrified, by virtue of
another fence or structure.
      3.   Electrically-charged fences will only be allowed if they are UL-
approved units that work on an intermittent pulse basis.
      4.   All electrically-charged fences shall be so identified with adequate
signage in both English and Spanish at a distance not more than 200 feet
between signs and no less than one sign per perimeter leg of the fence.
Penalty, see
Article 1-8
§ 10-1-10 FURNISHING WEAPONS AND OTHER ARTICLES TO PRISONERS.
   It is unlawful for any person to furnish, or attempt to furnish, or take
into jail or to deliver, or attempt to deliver, to any prisoner therein
confined, or in the custody of any officer, any weapon, tool, intoxicating
liquor, drug, or other article without the consent of the officer in charge.
Penalty, see
Article 1-8
§ 10-1-11 LITTERING.
   It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit any litter in or upon any
street, alley, public grounds, school grounds, or church grounds.
Penalty, see
Article 1-8
§ 10-1-12 LOITERING.
   It is unlawful for any person, other than the owner, manager, or his or her
authorized representative, to interfere individually or collectively with free
enjoyment of the property by the owners thereof; or interfere with the conduct
of any lawful business by obstructing entrance to the business or by
obstructing free passage of persons or merchandise or commodities within the
place of business; or by obstructing service rendered by the business to its
customers.
Penalty, see
Article 1-8
§ 10-1-13 MINORS.
   A.   It is unlawful for any person under the age of 16 years to idle or
loiter upon the streets or public places of the city between the hours of 9:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m. from October 1 to May 1 and between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 6:00 a.m. from May 1 to October 1, unless the person is accompanied by a
parent, guardian, or some person of lawful age having legal custody of the
person. It is unlawful for any parent, guardian, or other adult person having
the care and custody of the person to encourage or allow the person to idle or
loiter upon the streets or public places between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:
00 a.m. from October 1 to May 1 and between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m. from May 1 to October 1, unless accompanied by the parent or guardian. The
provisions of this section shall not apply when the person is upon an emergency
errand or legitimate business directed by his or her parent, guardian, or other
adult person having the care and custody of the person.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person the age of 16 or 17 to loiter or
idle upon the streets or public places of the city between the hours of 11:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m. from January 1 to December 31. It shall be unlawful for any
parent, guardian, or other adult person having the care and custody of the
person to encourage or allow the person to idle or loiter upon the public
streets or public places between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. from
January 1 to December 31, unless the person is accompanied by a parent,
guardian, or some person of lawful age having legal custody of the person.
   C.   Any minor who shall violate the provisions of this section for the
first offense shall be warned by the Police Chief or a police officer and sent
home. On the second offense, proceedings may be taken according to state
statute.
(Ord. 130, passed 11-18-1980) Penalty, see
Article 1-8
§ 10-1-14 NOISE.
   A.   Generally. It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and it is
unlawful to create any unreasonably loud, disturbing, or unnecessary noise
within the limits of the city, or reaching the limits of the city, regardless
of the source. It shall be unlawful to make any noise of the character,
intensity, or duration as to be detrimental to the life or health of any
individual or in disturbance of the public peace and welfare. The following
acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing, and unnecessary noises
and noises in violation of this code, but this enumeration shall not be deemed
to be exclusive, namely:
      1.   Blowing horns or signaling devices; except as a danger signal. The
sounding or blowing of any horn or signal device on any automobile, truck, bus,
motorcycle, or other vehicle, except as a danger signal; the creation by means
of any such signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the
sounding of the device for any unnecessary and unreasonable period of time;
      2.   Radios, phonographs, and the like. The playing of any radio,
phonograph, sound amplification device or any other musical instrument in such
a manner or with the volume, particularly between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m., or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet,
comfort, or repose of persons in any health or medical clinic, dwelling, hotel,
or other type of residence, or of persons in the vicinity. This section shall
apply only when two or more independent witnesses who are not related are the
complaining party.
      3.   Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing, and the like, on
streets. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing on the public
streets, particularly between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or at any
time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of
persons in any health or medical clinic, dwelling, hotel, or other type of
residence, or of persons in the vicinity;
      4.   Pets causing frequent or long continued noise. The keeping of any
animal, bird, or fowl which, by causing frequent or long continued noise, shall
disturb the comfort or repose of any person in the vicinity;
      5.   Use of vehicles. The use of any automobile, truck, bus, motorcycle,
or other vehicle so out of repair, so loaded, or in the manner as to create
loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling, or other noise;
      6.   Exhaust discharge. To discharge into the open air the exhaust of any
steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor vehicle, or
motorboat engine, except through a muffler or other device which will
effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. It is unlawful for any
person operating any motor vehicle to use a cut-out, bypass, or similar muffler
elimination appliance;
      7.   Noises near schools, health or medical clinics, churches, and the
like. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school,
institution of learning, church, or court while the same is in session, or
adjacent to any health or medical clinic, which unreasonably interferes with
the workings or session thereof. Provided, that signs must be displayed in the
streets indicating that the same is a school, institution of learning, church,
court, or health or medical clinic;
      8.   Loading and unloading operations or the opening and destruction of
bales, boxes, crates, and containers. The creation of loud and excessive noise
in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening and
destruction of bales, boxes, crates, and containers;
      9.   Loud speakers and sound amplifiers on vehicle. It is unlawful to
play, operate, or use any device known as a sound truck, loud speaker or sound
amplifier, radio or phonograph with loud speaker or sound amplifier, or any
instrument of any kind or character which emits loud and raucous noises from
any vehicle. This section shall include those vehicles that use mechanical
loudspeakers or amplifiers on automobiles, motorcycles, trucks, buses, or other
moving or standing vehicles or trailers for advertising or other purposes;
      10.   Building operations, excavation, and the like. The erection
(including excavating),demolition, alteration, or repair of any building in any
area of the city, other than between the hours of sunrise and 7:00 p.m. on
weekdays, except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health
and safety and then only with a permit which may be granted for a period not to
exceed 30 days, while the emergency continues. If it should be determined that
the public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition,
alteration, or repair of any building or the excavation of streets and highways
within the hours specified herein, and if it is further determined that loss or
inconvenience would not result to any party in interest, permission maybe
granted for the work to be done at times other than specified herein, upon
application being made at the time the permit for the work is awarded or during
the progress of the work;
      11.   Noises to attract attention. The use of any drum, loudspeaker, or
other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by creation
of noise to any gathering, performance, show, sale, or display of merchandise
is unlawful; and
      12.   Squealing tires. No person shall operate any vehicle:
         a.   At such a speed on a curve or turn as to create loud and
unnecessary noise through the squealing of tires upon the public right-of-way;
         b.   So to accelerate or decelerate in such a manner as to create loud
and unnecessary noise through the squealing of tires upon the public right-of-
way; or
         c.   So as to cause damage to the public right-of-way.
   B.   Exemptions. None of the terms or prohibitions in this code relating to
noise shall apply to or be enforced against:
      1.   Heating and cooling equipment when it is functioning in accordance
with manufacturer's specifications and is in proper operating condition
provided that no unit may create an excessive, unnecessary or offensive noise
causing annoyance or discomfort to a reasonable person of normal sensitivity
within any sleeping or living area inside any dwelling unit;
      2.   Landscape maintenance equipment when it is functioning in accordance
with the manufacturer's specifications and with all mufflers and noise-reducing
equipment in use and in proper operating condition;
      3.   The reasonable use of amplifiers or loudspeakers in the course of
public addresses which are noncommercial in character, and which amplifiers or
loudspeakers are not used in connection with any moving vehicle;
      4.   Noises of safety signals, warning devices and emergency pressure
relief valves;
      5.   Noises resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle when
responding to an emergency call or acting in time of emergency;
      6.   Noises from church chimes or bells;
      7.   Noise created by any federal, state or city vehicle, equipment or
facility while being operated for official use;
      8.   Any aircraft operated in conformity with, or pursuant to, federal
law, federal air regulations or air traffic control instructions issued
pursuant to or within duly adopted federal air regulations, together with any
noise created by aircraft operated under, or pursuant to, declaration of an
emergency under federal air regulations.
      9.   An event being held pursuant to a city-issued special event or event
permit and activities hosted by the city provided that the event is operating
in accordance with the conditions of that permit.
   C.   Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this section is
guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor.
(Ord. 199, passed 11-6-1990; Ord. 2019-001, passed 3-19-2019) Penalty, see
Article 1-8
§ 10-1-15 OBSTRUCTION OF STREETS.
   It is unlawful for any person to obstruct any public street or alley,
sidewalk, or park or other public grounds within the city by committing any act
of, or doing anything which is injurious to the health, or indecent or
offensive to the senses, or to do in or upon any such streets, alleys,
sidewalks, parks, or other public grounds, any act or thing which is an
obstruction or interference to the free use of property or with any business
lawfully conducted by anyone, in or upon, of facing or fronting on any of the
streets, alleys, sidewalks, parks, or other public grounds in the city.
Penalty, see
Article 1-8
§ 10-1-16 OBSTRUCTION OF VIEW.
   It is unlawful for any person to maintain or allow any tree, hedge,
billboard, or other obstructions which prevent persons driving vehicles on
public streets, alleys, or highways from obtaining a clear view of traffic when
approaching an intersection or pedestrian crosswalk.
Penalty, see
Article 1-8
§ 10-1-17 OFFENSIVE BUSINESS.
   It is unlawful for any person to establish or maintain any slaughterhouse or
make a practice of slaughtering cattle, hogs, sheep, or any other kind of
animal, or establish or maintain any soap factory, render tallow, or pursue,
maintain, or carry on any other business or occupation offensive to the senses
or prejudicial to the public health within the limits of the city.
Penalty, see
Article 1-8
§ 10-1-18 OFFENSIVE PREMISES.
   It is unlawful for any person to suffer or permit any premises belonging to
or occupied by him or her, or any cellar, privy, vault, pool, sewer, or private
drain therein, to become nauseous, foul, or offensive to the senses or
prejudicial to the public health or comfort.
Penalty, see
Article 1-8
§ 10-1-19 MARIJUANA.
   A.   Marijuana prohibited on public property. To the fullest extent
allowable by law, it is unlawful to possess, smoke, consume, sell, or
distribute, store, cultivate, manufacture, or produce marijuana or marijuana
products on or in property that is occupied, owned, controlled, or operated by
the city, or an open space in the city.
   B.   Marijuana prohibited.
      1.   Marijuana products are prohibited on school grounds, inside school
buildings, in school parking lots or playing fields and in school buses. For
purpose of this division, SCHOOL means any public, charter, or private school
where children attend classes in programs or grades equivalent to kindergarten
through 12.
      2.   Smoking is prohibited in all private residences when used as a
licensed childcare, adult day care, group home or health care facility, or any
other facility receiving a license or certification from Arizona Department of
Economic Security or the Arizona Department of Health Services, except when
authorized by the Department.
   C.   Marijuana permitted in residential districts.
      1.   Except as provided by A.R.S. §§ 36-2801 et seq. and this section, it
shall be unlawful for an individual to otherwise cultivate marijuana in a
residential zoning district within the city limits.
      2.   Cultivation shall be limited to a closet room, room, greenhouse, or
other enclosed area on the grounds of the residence equipped with a lock or
other security device that prevents access by minors.
   D.   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CITY. The City of Somerton, Arizona.
      CONSUME, CONSUMING and CONSUMPTION. The act of ingesting, inhaling, or
otherwise introducing marijuana into the human body.
      CONSUMER. An individual who is at least 21 years of age and who purchases
marijuana or marijuana products.
      CULTIVATE or CULTIVATIONS. To propagate, breed, grow, prepare, and
package marijuana.
      DEPARTMENT. The State of Arizona Department of Health Services or its
successor agency.
      EXTRACTION. The process of extracting or separating resin from marijuana
to produce or process any form of marijuana concentrates using water, lipids,
gases, solvents, or other chemicals or chemical processes.
      MANUFACTURE or MANUFACTURING. To compound, blend, extract, infuse, or
otherwise make or prepare a marijuana product.
      MARIJUANA. All parts of the plant of the genus cannabis, whether growing
or not, as well as the seeds from the plant, the resin extracted from any part
of the plant, and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or
preparation of the plant or its seeds or resin. Includes cannabis as defined in
A.R.S. § 13-3401. Does not include industrial hemp, the fiber produced from the
stalks of the plant of the genus cannabis, oil, or cake made from the seeds of
the plant, sterilized seeds of the plant that are incapable of germination, or
the weight of any other ingredient combined with marijuana to prepare topical
or oral administrations, food, drink, or other products.
      MARIJUANA CONCENTRATE. Resin extracted from any part of a plant of the
genus cannabis and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or
preparation of the resin or tetrahydrocannabinol. Does not include industrial
hemp or the weight of any other ingredient combined with cannabis to prepare
topical or oral administrations, food, drink, or other products.
      MARIJUANA PRODUCTS. Marijuana concentrate and products that are composed
of marijuana and other ingredients and that are intended for use or
consumption, including edible products, ointments, and tinctures.
      OPEN SPACE. A public park, public sidewalk, public walkway, public trail,
preserve, public pedestrian thoroughfare, or public rights-of-way.
      PUBLIC PLACE. The same meaning prescribed in the Smoke-Free-Arizona Act,
A.R.S. § 36-601-01.
      SMOKE. To inhale, exhale, burn, carry, or possess any lighted marijuana
or lighted marijuana products, whether natural or synthetic.
(Ord. 2021-003, passed 6-15-2021)
§ 10-1-20 PROSTITUTION.
   Any person who shall practice prostitution, or who shall, by word, sign, or
action, make known or call attention that he or she is a prostitute, courtesan,
or lewd man or woman, or who shall make any public display of himself or
herself, or who shall solicit any person to visit or patronize a prostitute or
place of prostitution, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
Penalty, see
Article 1-8
§ 10-1-21 SEARCHLIGHTS.
   It is unlawful for any person to operate within the city any incandescent or
arc-type searchlight, beacon light, or similar lighting device designed to and
capable of projecting a beam of light into the sky for a distance in excess of
one-half mile, unless permission is obtained from the Council. The provisions
of this section shall not apply to emergency searchlights or beacons operated
pursuant to public authority.
Penalty, see
Article 1-8
§ 10-1-22 SIGNS AND BANNERS.
   It is unlawful for any person to place any banner or sign upon any street
light pole, traffic signal pole, or utility pole within the city without first
obtaining authorization from the Community Development Director.
Penalty, see
Article 1-8
§ 10-1-23 SMOKING.
   It is unlawful for any person to strike matches or other inflammable
substances or to smoke in any school, church, or other public place where
public gatherings are held during the time any such gathering is in progress.
Penalty, see
Article 1-8
§ 10-1-24 SPITTING.
   It is unlawful for any person to spit upon any of the public sidewalks or
crosswalks in the city or upon any public path, byway or highway, or in or on
any public ground or park in the city, or upon the floor or interior of any
public building in the city.
Penalty, see
Article 1-8
§ 10-1-25 STORING MOTOR VEHICLES.
   A.   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      LOST, STOLEN, ABANDONED, OR OTHERWISE UNCLAIMED VEHICLES. Any vehicle,
trailer, or semi-trailer of a type subject to registration with the Arizona
Motor Vehicle Division under the provisions of A.R.S. Title 28, which has been
abandoned on a public highway, public property, private property, or elsewhere
within the city. Evidence that a vehicle was left unattended for a period of 36
hours within the right-of-way of a highway, road, street, or other public
thoroughfare shall be prima facie evidence of abandonment.
      MOTOR VEHICLE. Any self-propelled vehicle.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to keep, store, or allow to remain in
such a manner as to be exposed to view from without the property any motor
vehicle, or any part or parts thereof, not licensed and operative, or not
operative as a motor vehicle upon any property in the city, other than upon
property zoned for industrial purposes, unless there is a business on the
property, properly licensed with the city as a wrecking or storage yard.
   C.   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to investigate, determine,
and ascertain if there exists any person in violation of this section. If any
person is found in violation of this section, the Chief of Police shall notify
the person by written notice to correct the violation within 15 days. In the
event the condition shall not be corrected within 15 days, the person shall be
cited for violation of this section of the code. Each day the violation is
committed or permitted to continue after the 15-day notice has been given shall
constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
   D.   Police officers or other law enforcement officers of the city are
hereby authorized to seize lost, stolen, abandoned, or otherwise unclaimed
motor vehicles at any location within the city, including private property.
Motor vehicles seized pursuant to this section shall be disposed of and reports
made to the Superintendent of the Arizona Motor Vehicle Division, in accordance
with A.R.S. §§ 28-1402 and 28-2091 et seq.
Penalty, see
Article 1-8
§ 10-1-26 WATER; FLOW UPON STREETS PROHIBITED.
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to willfully or negligently permit or
cause the escape or flow of water in such quantity as to cause flooding, or to
impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic, to create a hazardous condition to the
traffic, or to cause damage to the public streets of the city.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to willfully or negligently permit or
cause the escape or flow of irrigation water in the quantity as to cause
flooding, to impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic, to create a hazardous
condition to the traffic, or to cause damage to the public streets of the city
through the failure or neglect to properly operate or maintain any irrigation
structure, delivery ditch, or waste ditch in which the person has a vested
right or interest or through the willful or negligent failure of the person to
accept irrigation water after it has been ordered by him or her.
Penalty, see
Article 1-8
§ 10-1-27 WEAPONS.
   A.   It is unlawful for any person within the limits of the city to fire or
discharge any firearm, BB gun, air gun, pellet gun, dart gun, slingshot, gas-
operated gun, or other similar gun or instrument.
   B.   The prohibitions of division A. above shall not apply to the use of any
such gun or instrument by:
      1.   A law enforcement officer or other duly authorized public official
or employee in the performance of any official duty;
      2.   Any person to whom a license, permit, or authority is issued by the
Chief of Police of the city for the use of the gun or instrument for a valid
and proper purpose and for use in a manner not likely to harm any person,
animal, or property; and/or
      3.   Any person when used only for the necessary protection of property,
habitation, or person in a manner authorized by the laws of the state under or
within rights guaranteed by the Constitution of the state or the United States
of America.
   C.   A person, except a peace officer in actual service and discharge of his
or her duty, who has concealed on or about his or her person a weapon is guilty
of a misdemeanor.
      1.   WEAPON, as used in this section, means anything readily capable of
lethal use and possessed under circumstances not manifestly appropriate for
lawful uses which it may have. The term WEAPON includes a firearm which is not
loaded or lacks a clip or other component to render it immediately operable,
and components which can readily be assembled into a weapon.
      2.   A weapon is not a concealed weapon as used in this section if:
         a.   It is carried in a belt holster which holster is wholly or
partially visible, or is carried in a scabbard or case designed for carrying
weapons which scabbard or case is wholly or partially visible and/or
         b.   It is located in a closed trunk, luggage, or glove compartment of
a motor vehicle.
   D.   It is a misdemeanor for any person to recklessly or carelessly handle a
weapon.
   E.   Any person other than a peace officer on duty carrying a weapon, upon
entering any public place or attending a public event, may be required by the
operator of the establishment or the sponsor of the event to remove his or her
weapon and place it in the custody of the operator of the establishment or the
sponsor of the event.
   F.   A person who sells or gives to a minor under the age of 18 years,
without written consent of the minor's parent or legal guardian, a weapon,
ammunition, or toy pistol by which dangerous and explosive substances may be
discharged, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
Penalty, see
Article 1-8
§ 10-1-28 GRAFFITI.
   A.   Definitions. For the purpose of this section the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      GRAFFITI. Includes any inscription, word, figure or design that is
marked, etched, scratched, drawn, painted, pasted, or otherwise affixed to or
on any public or private building, structure or surface without the express
permission of the owner of the building, structure, or surface.
      GRAFFITI INSTRUMENTS. Includes any tool, instrument, aerosol spray paint
container, broad tip marker, article, substance, solution, or other compound
designed or commonly used to make graffiti.
   B.   Prohibition.
      1.   No person shall make graffiti of any type on any building, public or
private, or any other property real or personal, owned by any person,
corporation, association, partnership, or any public agency or instrumentality
without the expressed permission of the owner, manager, tenant, or other person
responsible for the property.
      2.   No person shall possess graffiti instruments in such a manner as to
give rise to an inference of intent to make graffiti; and, no person shall
possess an aerosol paint container in any public place, including any building,
park, facility or alley or on any private property where that person has no
right to be, unless possession is authorized or required as part of a
legitimate business or activity.
   C.   Limiting access to graffiti implements.
      1.   No person who owns, conducts, operates, or manages a business where
aerosol spray paint containers are sold, nor any person who sells or offers for
sale aerosol spray paint containers shall store or display, or cause to be
stored or displayed, the aerosol spray paint containers in an area that is
accessible to the public without employee assistance in the regular course of
business pending legal sale or other disposition.
      2.   Nothing herein shall preclude the storage or display of aerosol
spray paint containers in an area viewable by the public so long as the items
are not accessible to the public without employee assistance.
      3.   No person who owns, conducts, operates or manages a business where
aerosol spray paint containers are sold, nor any person who sells or offers for
sell aerosol spray paint containers shall sell or offer to sell aerosol spray
paint containers to any person under the age of 18 years of age. A sign shall
be erected in a conspicuous place and shall read, "The sale of aerosol spray
paint containers to any person under the age of 18 is prohibited by the
Somerton City Code."
   D.   Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this article upon
first conviction shall be considered guilty of a petty offense and upon
subsequent convictions shall be guilty of a class one misdemeanor punishable as
set forth in this code and state law.
   E.   Removal of graffiti by the city. The city having determined that
graffiti constitutes both vandalism and filth and debris does hereby compel the
owner, lessee or occupant of buildings, grounds or lots to remove graffiti on
basis that its presence constitutes a hazard to public health and safety. The
removal of the graffiti shall be accomplished according to the following
provisions.
      1.   Upon determining that graffiti has been applied to any building or
structure, whether public or private, within the city limits, the city shall
cause a written notice to be sent to the owner, occupant or lessee. The written
notice shall give five days for compliance by removal of the graffiti from the
building or structure.
      2.   Notice shall be by either personal service or certified or
registered mail, and if the owner does not occupy the building or premises,
then the notice shall be provided to the owner as indicated on the Yuma County
tax rolls.
      3.   If after five days from actual notice the owner or occupant or
lessee has failed to remove the graffiti, the city may cause the graffiti to be
removed and assess the costs of removal against the owner of the real property
upon which the building or structure is located.
      4.   Notice of intent to go upon private property and to remove or abate
the graffiti shall be given in the same manner as notice set forth in division
A. of this section. The notice of intent to go upon private property and remove
graffiti shall also include the city's estimate as to the cost for the removal
or abatement of the graffiti and that the actual amount of the cost shall be
certified by the city and recorded in the office of the County Recorder as a
lien against the real property. Any owner, occupant or lessee who receives
written notice to remove or abate the graffiti or written notice that the city
intends to enter upon private property to remove or abate the graffiti may
appeal to the City Council for a hearing on either the notice or the amount of
the assessment. The appeal must be in writing and act as a stay of all
proceedings until such time as the Council schedules a time, place and date
certain for the hearing.
      5.   A prior assessment or lien for the purpose provided in this section
shall not be a bar to a subsequent assessment or assessments for that purpose
and any number of liens on the same lot or tract of land may be enforced in the
same option.
      6.   The lien upon real property authorized herein shall be subject and
inferior to the lien for general taxes and to all prior recorded mortgages,
liens, and encumbrances of record. A sale of the property to satisfy a lien
obtained under the provisions of the articles shall be made upon judgment of
foreclosure and order of sale. The city reserves the right to bring an action
to enforce the lien in Superior Court in the county in which the property is
located at any time after the recording of the assessment, but failure to
enforce the lien by legal action shall not affect its validity.
      7.   The recorded assessment and lien shall be prima facie evidence of
the truth of all of the matters recited therein and of the regularity of all
proceedings prior to the recording thereof.
      8.   However, if a property owner, occupant, or lessee signs a consent
form that allows city employees to enter his or her private property to remove
or abate the graffiti the city will not assess a cost to the property owner,
occupant, or lessee for the removal or abatement of the graffiti.
(Res. 916, passed 8-16-2005; Ord. 297, passed 9-6-2005)
§ 10-1-29 FIREWORKS.
   A.   Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, have the meanings ascribed to them in this division, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
      CONSUMER FIREWORK. Those fireworks defined by A.R.S. § 36-1601.
      DISPLAY FIREWORK. Those fireworks defined by A.R.S. § 36-1601.
      FIREWORKS. Any combustible or explosive composition, substance or
combination of substances, or any article prepared for the purpose of producing
a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or
detonation, that is a consumer firework, and display firework as defined by
A.R.S. § 36-1601.
      NFPA 1124. The National Fire Protection Association Code for the
Manufacture, Transportation, Storage and Retail Sales of Fireworks and
Pyrotechnic Articles as defined by A.R.S. § 36-1601.
      NOVELTY ITEMS. Federally deregulated novelty items that are known as
snappers, snap caps, party poppers, glow worms, snakes, toy smoke devices,
sparklers, and certain toys as defined in A.R.S. § 36-1601.
      PERMISSIBLE CONSUMER FIREWORKS. Consumer fireworks defined by A.R.S. §
36-1601 that may be sold within the city.
      SUPERVISED PUBLIC DISPLAY. A monitored performance of display fireworks
open to the public and authorized by permit by the Fire Chief or his designee.
   B.   Fireworks prohibited; exceptions.
      1.   The use, discharge or ignition of fireworks within the city is
prohibited on all private and public property including but not limited to,
public buildings, parking lots, public parks, public schools, streets, and
public rights of way, except as authorized in §
10-1-29(C).
      2.   Nothing in this division or section shall be construed to prohibit
the use, discharge or ignition of novelty items or the occurrence of a
supervised public display of fireworks.
      3.   Permits may be granted by the Fire Chief or designee for conducting
a properly supervised public display of fireworks. Every such public display of
fireworks shall be of such character and so located, discharged or fired, only
after proper inspection and in a manner that does not endanger persons,
animals, or property. A permit shall not be issued, and may be revoked, during
time periods of high fire danger warnings. The Fire Chief has authority to
impose conditions on any permits granted.
      4.   Failure to comply with any permit requirements issued by the Fire
Chief is a civil offense punishable by civil fines for each violation or
schedule of progressive fines for multiple permit violations.
   C.   Limited use of permissible consumer fireworks. The use, discharge, or
ignition of permissible consumer fireworks within the city may be used from
June 24 through July 6 and December 24 through January 3 of each year, except
when a federal or state agency implements a stage one or higher restriction on
these dates.
   D.   Sale of fireworks.
      1.   No person shall sell or permit or authorize the sale of permissible
consumer fireworks to a person who is under 16 years of age.
      2.   No person shall sell or permit or authorize the sale of permissible
consumer fireworks in conflict with state law, this code, or NFPA 1124.
      3.   No person shall sell or permit or authorize the sale of permissible
consumer fireworks, except from May 20 through July 6 and December 10 through
January 3 of each year. The sale of permissible consumer fireworks shall be
prohibited from May 20 through July 6 and December 10 through January 3 when a
federal or state agency implements a stage one or higher restriction during
these dates.
   E.   Posting of signs by persons engaged in the sale of fireworks; civil
penalty.
      1.   Prior to the sale of permissible consumer fireworks, every person
engaged in such sales shall prominently display signs indicating the following:
State of Arizona
Consumer Fireworks Regulations
A.R.S. § 36-1601. et al.
The use of permissible consumer fireworks as defined under state law is
allowed:
June 24 - July 6 and December 24 - January 3
The sale of permissible consumer fireworks as defined under state law is
allowed:
May 20 - July 6 and December 10 - January 3
All other fireworks are prohibited, except as authorized by local Fire
Department permit.
The sale and use of novelties known as snappers (pop-its), party poppers, glow
worms, snakes, toy smoke devices and sparklers are permitted at all times.
Permissible consumer fireworks may not be sold to persons under 16 years of
age.
Check with your local Fire Department for additional regulations and dates
before using.
      2.   Signs required under §
10-1-29(E) may be placed at any retail sales display of permissible consumer
fireworks.
      3.   The sign shall be eight and one-half inches by eleven inches in
size, on cardstock paper, in landscape orientation, and displayed on a
contrasting background. A model sign shall be posted on the city's website and
filed with the Clerk's office.
      4.   Failure to comply with divisions 1, 2, and 3 of §
10-1-29(E) is a civil offense punishable by civil fine of $500.
   F.   Authority to enforce violations of this section; means of enforcement.
      1.   The Fire Chief or designee, a city police officer, or the City
Attorney may issue civil complaints to enforce violations of this section
designated as civil offenses.
      2.   Any person authorized pursuant to this section to issue a civil
complaint may also issue a notice of violation specifying actions to be taken
and the time in which they are to be taken to avoid issuance of a civil
complaint.
      3.   A city police officer or the City Attorney may issue criminal
complaints to enforce this section.
   G.   Liability for emergency responses related to use of fireworks;
definitions.
      1.   A person who uses, discharges or ignites permissible consumer
fireworks, fireworks or anything that is designed or intended to rise into the
air and explode or to detonate in the air or to fly above the ground, is liable
for the expenses of any emergency response that is required by such use,
discharge or ignition. The fact that a person is convicted or found responsible
for a violation(s) of this section is prima facie evidence of liability under
this division.
      2.   The expenses of an emergency response are a charge against the
person liable for those expenses pursuant to §
10-1-29(G)(1). The charge constitutes a debt of that person and may be
collected proportionately by the public agencies, for-profit entities or not-
for-profit entities that incurred the expenses. The person's liability for the
expense of an emergency response shall not exceed $5,000 for a single incident.
The liability imposed under this section is in addition to and not in
limitation of any other liability that may be imposed.
      3.   For the purposes of this division:
         a.   EXPENSES OF AN EMERGENCY RESPONSE means reasonable costs directly
incurred by public agencies, for-profit entities or not-for-profit entities
that make an appropriate emergency response to an incident.
         b.   REASONABLE COSTS includes the costs of providing police, fire
fighting, rescue and emergency medical services at the scene of an incident and
the salaries of the persons who respond to the incident.
   H.   Penalty. The penalty for violating any prohibition or requirement
imposed by this section is a class three misdemeanor unless another penalty is
specifically provided for.
   I.   Seizure.
      1.   A city police officer or any other peace officer shall seize, remove
or cause to be removed, at the expense of the owner, all fireworks or
combustibles offered or exposed for sale, stored or possessed in violation of
this section.
      2.   In addition to the persons specified in §
10-1-29(I)(1), a fire marshal working for or contracted with a city or fire
district may seize, remove or cause to be removed all fireworks for sale or
offered for sale in the fire marshal's jurisdiction. The city or fire district
may impose a fine on the owner of the fireworks that at a minimum covers the
cost of the enforcement of this section.
      3.   A person that has fireworks confiscated more than two times in a
five-year period is prohibited from selling permissible consumer fireworks in
this city for the three succeeding years following the most recent violation.
(Ord. 2020-002, passed 6-2-2020)
CHAPTER 11: TRAFFIC
      Article
         
11-1.   ADMINISTRATION
         
11-2.   TRAFFIC CONTROL
         
11-3.   PARKING
         
11-4.   BICYCLES
         
11-5.   PROHIBITING THE POSSESSION OF ALCOHOL OR OTHER SPIRITUOUS LIQUOR
         
11-6.   PUBLIC PARKS
         
11-7.   CIVIL TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS
ARTICLE 11-1: ADMINISTRATION
Section
   
11-1-1   Duty of Chief of Police
   
11-1-2   Records of traffic violations
   
11-1-3   Chief of Police to investigate accidents
   
11-1-4   Traffic accident studies
   
11-1-5   Traffic accident reports
§ 11-1-1 DUTY OF CHIEF OF POLICE.
   A.   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to provide for the
enforcement of the street traffic regulations of the city and all of the state
vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the city, to make arrests for
traffic violations, to investigate accidents, to assist in developing ways and
means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out all duties specially
imposed upon the Chief of Police by this chapter.
   B.   Any peace officer of the city may be authorized by the Chief of Police
to perform any of the duties of the Chief of Police included in this chapter.
§ 11-1-2 RECORDS OF TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS.
   A.   The Chief of Police shall keep a record of all violations of the
traffic laws of the city or of the state vehicle laws of which any person has
been charged, together with a record of the final disposition of all the
alleged offenses. The record shall accumulate during at least a five-year
period and, from that time on, the record shall be maintained complete for at
least the most recent five-year period.
   B.   All forms for records of violations and notices shall be serially
numbered. For each month and year, a written record shall be kept available to
the public showing the disposal of all the forms.
   C.   All records and reports shall be public records.
§ 11-1-3 CHIEF OF POLICE TO INVESTIGATE ACCIDENTS.
   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to investigate traffic accidents
and to arrest and assist in the prosecution of those persons charged with
violations of law causing or contributing to those accidents.
§ 11-1-4 TRAFFIC ACCIDENT STUDIES.
   Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the Chief
of Police shall conduct studies of those accidents and determine remedial
measures.
§ 11-1-5 TRAFFIC ACCIDENT REPORTS.
   A.   The Chief of Police shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic
accident reports. Accident reports or cards referring to them shall be filed
alphabetically by location.
   B.   The Chief of Police shall receive and properly file all accident
reports made to him or her under state law or under any law of the city, but
all the accident reports made by drivers shall be for the confidential use of
the city, and no report shall be admissible in any civil or criminal
proceedings other than upon request of any person making the report, or upon
request of the court having jurisdiction, to prove a compliance with the laws
requiring the making of any such report.
ARTICLE 11-2: TRAFFIC CONTROL
Section
   
11-2-1   Directing traffic
   
11-2-2   Obedience to traffic regulations
   
11-2-3   Motorized skateboards and motorized play vehicles
   
11-2-4   Traffic-control devices
   
11-2-5   Authority to designate crosswalks, establish safety zones, and mark
traffic lanes
   
11-2-6   Authority to place and obedience to turning markers
   
11-2-7   Authority to place and obedience to restricted turn signs
   
11-2-8   Limitations on turning around
   
11-2-9   One-way streets and alleys
   
11-2-10   Regulation of traffic at intersections
   
11-2-11   Drivers to obey signs
   
11-2-12   Processions
§ 11-2-1 DIRECTING TRAFFIC.
   A.   The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to direct all traffic by
voice, hand, or signal.
   B.   Officers of the Fire Department, when at the scene of an emergency, may
direct or assist the Chief of Police in directing traffic thereat or in the
immediate vicinity.
§ 11-2-2 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
   It is unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any
act required by this chapter. It is unlawful for any person to willfully fail
or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of the Chief of Police
or of any Fire Department official.
Penalty, see §
11-7-1
§ 11-2-3 MOTORIZED SKATEBOARDS AND MOTORIZED PLAY VEHICLES.
   A.   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      CHILD or JUVENILE. An individual who is under the age of 18 years.
      CUSTODIAN. A person who has lawful custody of a child.
      MOTORIZED PLAY VEHICLE. A coaster, scooter, any other alternatively-
fueled device, or other motorized vehicle that is self-propelled by a motor or
engine, gas or electric, and which is not otherwise defined in A.R.S. Title 28
as a "motor vehicle," "motorcycle," "motor-driven cycle," "motorized
wheelchair," or "electric personal assistive mobility device."
      MOTORIZED SKATEBOARD. A self-propelled device which has a motor, a deck
on which a person may ride, and at least two wheels in contact with the ground,
and which is not otherwise defined in A.R.S. Title 28, as amended, as a "motor
vehicle," "motorcycle," "motor-driven cycle," or "motorized wheelchair."
   B.   Obedience to traffic laws.
      1.   Except as to those provisions of law which by their nature can have
no application, any person operating a motorized skateboard or motorized play
vehicle on a roadway, or on any shoulder adjoining a roadway, shall be granted
all the rights and shall be subject to all the duties applicable to the driver
of a vehicle by both:
         a.   The laws of this state declaring rules of the road applicable to
vehicles; and
         b.   The traffic laws of the city applicable to the driver of a
vehicle.
      2.   This section shall not be construed to require the licensing or
registration of motorized skateboards or motorized play vehicles, the licensing
of motorized skateboard or motorized play vehicle operators, or the carrying of
insurance covering accidents involving motorized skateboards.
   C.   Responsibilities of parents, guardians, and custodians.
      1.   The parent, guardian, or legal custodian of any minor or ward shall
not authorize or knowingly permit such a minor or ward to violate any of the
provisions of this section.
      2.   No minor shall operate a motorized skateboard or motorized play
vehicle on any city right-of-way, including streets, roadways, and alleyways,
unless the minor possesses, at all times while operating the motorized
skateboard or motorized play vehicle, a written consent of the minor's parent
or legal guardian. The written consent shall be signed by the parent or legal
guardian, whose signature shall be notarized, and shall contain the following:
         a.   The name and date of birth of the minor;
         b.   The residence address of the minor and parent/guardian;
         c.   The residence and work telephone number of the parent/guardian;
and
         d.   The following statement: "I am the parent/guardian of the minor
named herein and hereby authorize said minor to operate a motorized skateboard
or motorized play vehicle in the City of Somerton. I have read and discussed
with the minor the applicable laws of the State of Arizona and of this c0ity
regarding the operations of motorized skateboards or motorized play vehicles
and have assured myself that said minor understands these regulations."
   D.   Operation prohibited in certain areas and at certain times.
      1.   No person shall operate a motorized skateboard or motorized play
vehicle on any sidewalk, except for use in crossing the sidewalk to gain access
to any public or private road or driveway.
      2.   No person shall operate a motorized skateboard or motorized play
vehicle in any city parking structure or city park, except for use on public
roadways within the park on which a motorized skateboard or motorized play
vehicle is otherwise allowed.
      3.   No person shall operate a motorized skateboard or motorized play
vehicle on any public property that has been posted or designated by the owner
of the property as an area in which the operation of motorized skateboards or
motorized play vehicles is prohibited.
      4.   No person shall operate a motorized skateboard or motorized play
vehicle on any private property of another, or any public property, which is
not held open to the public for vehicle use, without the written permission of
the owner, or the owner's authorized agent.
      5.   No person shall operate a motorized skateboard or motorized play
vehicle on any public roadway having a speed limit established greater than 25
mph. At no time shall a motorized skateboard or motorized play vehicle operate
on any portion of an arterial or main collector, except for use of crossing the
street.
      6.   No person shall operate a skateboard or motorized play vehicle on a
city right-of-way, including streets, roadways, and alleyways, except during
daylight hours.
   E.   General operating restrictions.
      1.   No child under the age of 12 shall operate a motorized skateboard or
motorized play vehicle.
      2.   No person shall operate a motorized skateboard or motorized play
vehicle in excess of the posted speed limit or at a speed greater than is
reasonable and prudent under the circumstances then existing.
      3.   A person operating a motorized skateboard or motorized play vehicle,
approaching a sidewalk, bicycle path, bicycle lane, or multi-use path in order
to cross it, shall yield the right-of-way to all other users.
      4.   No person operating a motorized skateboard or motorized play vehicle
shall allow passengers when the motorized skateboard or motorized play vehicle
is in operation or motion.
      5.   No person operating or riding upon a motorized skateboard or
motorized play vehicle shall attach themselves or the motorized skateboard or
motorized play vehicle in any manner to any other vehicle.
      6.   No person shall operate a motorized skateboard or motorized play
vehicle while carrying any package, bundle, or article which prevents the
operator from keeping both hands upon the steering mechanism at all times.
      7.   No person operating a motorized skateboard or motorized play vehicle
shall transport extra fuel in a separate container or alter the fuel reservoir
from the original manufacturer's design. This includes the prohibition of
physically attaching fuel packs or containers to the operator's person.
      8.   No person shall operate a motorized skateboard or motorized play
vehicle in a manner causing excessive, unnecessary, or offensive noise, which
disturbs the peace and quiet of any neighborhood or which causes discomfort or
annoyance to a reasonable person of normal sensitivity.
      9.   No person shall operate a motorized skateboard or motorized play
vehicle that has been structurally altered from the original manufacturer's
design, including, but not limited to, the alteration or removal of any
muffler.
   F.   Required safety equipment.
      1.   No person shall operate a motorized skateboard or motorized play
vehicle at any time when there is not sufficient light to render clearly
discernible persons and vehicles at a distance of 500 feet ahead.
      2.   No person shall operate a motorized skateboard or motorized play
vehicle unless it is equipped with a brake, which enables the operator to make
a braked wheel(s) skid on pavement.
      3.   A person under the age of 18 years operating a motorized skateboard
or motorized play vehicle on a roadway shall at all times wear a protective
helmet on his or her head in an appropriate and safely secured manner. The
helmet shall meet minimum standards of testing inspection as approved by the
bicycle industry and wear a reflective vest.
      4.   No person shall operate a motorized skateboard or motorized play
vehicle without wearing footwear. The footwear must have a sole and completely
cover the feet and toes.
   G.   Violations. Violations of this section are civil traffic infractions to
which the provisions of §
11-7-1 shall apply.
(Ord. 282, passed 8-3-2004)
§ 11-2-4 TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   A.   The Chief of Police, with the approval of the Council, shall place and
maintain traffic-control devices, signs, and signals when and as required under
the traffic regulations of the city to make effective the provisions of the
regulations, and may place and maintain any additional traffic-control devices
as he or she may deem necessary to regulate traffic under the traffic laws of
the city or under state laws or to guide or warn traffic.
   B.   The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official
traffic-control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the traffic
regulations of the city unless otherwise directed by the Chief of Police,
subject to the exceptions granted in this chapter or by state law.
§ 11-2-5 AUTHORITY TO DESIGNATE CROSSWALKS, ESTABLISH SAFETY ZONES, AND MARK
TRAFFIC LANES.
   The Chief of Police is hereby authorized, on approval by the Council:
   A.   To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks, or lines upon
the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where in his or her
opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at
any other places as he or she may deem necessary;
   B.   To establish safety zones of the kind and character and at those places
as he or she may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians; and
   C.   To mark lanes for traffic on street pavements at those places as he or
she may deem advisable, consistent with the traffic laws of the city.
§ 11-2-6 AUTHORITY TO PLACE AND OBEDIENCE TO TURNING MARKERS.
   A.   The Chief of Police is authorized to place markers, buttons, or signs
within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by
vehicles turning at those intersections, and the course to be traveled as so
indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law.
   B.   When authorized markers, buttons, or other indications are placed
within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning
thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of those
indications.
Penalty, see §
11-7-1
§ 11-2-7 AUTHORITY TO PLACE AND OBEDIENCE TO RESTRICTED TURN SIGNS.
   A.   The Chief of Police, on approval by the Council, is hereby authorized
to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a
right, left, or U-turn, and shall place proper signs at those intersections.
The making of the turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and
permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on
the signs or the signs may be removed when the turns are permitted.
   B .   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right, left,
or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of
any such sign.
Penalty, see §
11-7-1
§ 11-2-8 LIMITATIONS ON TURNING AROUND.
   The driver of any vehicle shall not turn the vehicle so as to proceed in the
opposite direction upon any street in a business district and shall not, upon
any other street, so turn a vehicle unless the movement can be made in safety
and without interfering with other traffic.
§ 11-2-9 ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS.
   A.   The Council shall, by resolution, designate any streets or alleys which
are to be limited to one-way traffic.
   B.   When any resolution of the Council designates any one-way street or
alley, the Chief of Police shall place and maintain signs giving notice
thereof, and no regulation shall be effective unless the signs are in place.
Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at
every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is
prohibited.
§ 11-2-10 REGULATION OF TRAFFIC AT INTERSECTIONS.
   A.   The Council shall, by resolution, designate through streets,
intersections where stops are required, and intersections where vehicles shall
yield the right-of-way.
   B.   When any resolution of the Council shall designate any through street
or intersection where vehicles are to stop or yield the right-of-way, the Chief
of Police shall erect and maintain the appropriate signs at every location
where a vehicle must stop or yield the right-of-way.
§ 11-2-11 DRIVERS TO OBEY SIGNS.
   Whenever traffic signs are erected as provided in this chapter, every driver
of a vehicle shall obey the signs unless directed to proceed by the Chief of
Police or a traffic-control signal. No driver shall drive upon or through any
private property such as an oil station, vacant lot, or similar property to
avoid disobedience to any regulation included in this chapter.
Penalty, see §
11-7-1
§ 11-2-12 PROCESSIONS.
   A.   No procession or parade, except funeral processions, shall be held
without first securing a permit from the Chief of Police, and all the requests
for permits shall state the time, place of formation, proposed line of march,
destination, and any other regulations as the Chief of Police may set forth
therein.
   B.   A funeral procession composed of a procession of vehicles shall be
identified by any methods as may be determined and designated by the Chief of
Police.
   C.   No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a
funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when the
vehicles are conspicuously designated. This provision shall not apply at
intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals or the
Chief of Police.
   D.   Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the
right-hand edge of the roadway as practical and shall follow the vehicle ahead
as close as is practical and safe.
Penalty, see §
11-7-1
ARTICLE 11-3: PARKING
Section
   
11-3-1   Method of parking
   
11-3-2   Blocking traffic; parking trucks and trailers on residential streets
   
11-3-3   Parking adjacent to schools
   
11-3-4   Authority to erect signs restricting parking
   
11-3-5   Parking vehicles on sidewalks
   
11-3-6   Abandoned vehicles
   
11-3-7   Penalties
   
11-3-8   Business parking sections on Main Street
§ 11-3-1 METHOD OF PARKING.
   Except as otherwise provided by resolution of the Council, every vehicle
stopped or parked upon a roadway where there are adjacent curbs shall be so
stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle parallel to and
within 18 inches of the right-hand curb.
§ 11-3-2 BLOCKING TRAFFIC; PARKING TRUCKS AND TRAILERS ON RESIDENTIAL STREETS.
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to stop, stand, or park any motor
vehicle, or other vehicle, upon a street in the city in the manner or under
such conditions as to leave available less than 20 feet of the width of the
roadway from the free movement of the vehicular traffic, except that a person
may stop temporarily, in the actual loading or unloading of passengers, or,
when necessary, in the observance of traffic signs or signals of the Chief of
Police.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle, or other
vehicle, within an alley or entrance to a private driveway except for the
loading or unloading of materials, and not then unless the loading or unloading
can be accomplished without blocking the alley to the free movement of
vehicular traffic.
   C.   No person shall stand or park a vehicle with a rated chassis capacity
in excess of three-fourths of a ton on tractor, semi-trailer, or trailer on a
local or collector street in a residential zone except during the process of
loading or unloading the vehicle.
   D.   No person shall park any vehicle at any time in that area between the
curb and the sidewalk. On those roadways without curbs, no person shall park a
vehicle so as to force a pedestrian to walk in traveled portion of the roadway.
(Ord. 142, passed 12-7-1982) Penalty, see §
11-7-1
§ 11-3-3 PARKING ADJACENT TO SCHOOLS.
   When signs are erected indicating no parking on that side of the street
adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such
designated place for one hour before school opens until one hour after school
closes on any school day.
Penalty, see §
11-7-1
§ 11-3-4 AUTHORITY TO ERECT SIGNS RESTRICTING PARKING.
   The Chief of Police, upon approval by the Council, may erect signs requiring
parking at an angle to the curb, allowing parking on the left-hand curb on one-
way streets, notifying drivers that parking is prohibited, establishing time
limits for certain parking areas, and restricting parking in any way that may
be necessary. No parking restrictions shall become effective until the
restricted parking area is specifically designated by resolution of the Council
and signs have been erected as authorized by this section. It is unlawful for
any person to stop or stand a vehicle in disobedience to the parking
restrictions.
Penalty, see §
11-7-1
§ 11-3-5 PARKING VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS.
   It is unlawful for any person to park any vehicle, whether in usable
condition or not, or for an owner to permit his or her vehicle to be parked
upon any sidewalk in the city.
Penalty, see §
11-7-1
§ 11-3-6 ABANDONED VEHICLES.
   Any vehicle remaining parked upon any sidewalk or city right-of-way of the
city for more than three days, or any disabled vehicle remaining parked upon
any street of the city for more than seven days, is declared to be an abandoned
vehicle and the police shall forthwith remove the same from the sidewalks or
streets of the city at the expense of the owner of the vehicle.
§ 11-3-7 PENALTIES.
   The City Magistrate is empowered to levy penalties for traffic and parking
violations under this code.
Cross-reference:
   Civil traffic violations, see §
11-7-1
§ 11-3-8 BUSINESS PARKING SECTIONS ON MAIN STREET.
   A.   The city desires to alleviate parking problems in front of commercial
buildings on Main Street.
   B.   The Public Works Director is authorized to designate those sections of
Main Street that will be designated for business parking.
   C.   Those areas of Main Street designated for business parking shall be
clearly marked and posted by the city.
   D.   In those sections of Main Street marked and designated for business
parking, parking shall be limited to two hours between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday.
   E.   Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and, upon conviction, fined for each offense not less than $5 and not more than
$10.
(Ord. 127, passed 7-15-1980)
ARTICLE 11-4: BICYCLES
Section
   
11-4-1   Definitions
   
11-4-2   Speed
   
11-4-3   Emerging from alley or driveway
   
11-4-4   Parking
   
11-4-5   Riding on sidewalks
   
11-4-6   Responsibility of parent or guardian
   
11-4-7   Penalty
§ 11-4-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BICYCLE. Every device propelled by human power, upon which any person may
ride, having two tandem wheels.
§ 11-4-2 SPEED.
   No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and
prudent under the conditions then existing.
Penalty, see §
11-4-7
§ 11-4-3 EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR DRIVEWAY.
   The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway, or building
shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any
alley, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on the sidewalk or
sidewalk area, and upon entering the street or public highway shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the street or public highway.
Penalty, see §
11-4-7
§ 11-4-4 PARKING.
   No person shall park a bicycle upon a street, alley, or public highway other
than in a rack to support the bicycle or close to the building or at the curb,
in such a manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic.
Penalty, see §
11-4-7
§ 11-4-5 RIDING ON SIDEWALKS.
   No person shall ride a bicycle upon Main Street, or upon the sidewalks
adjacent to Main Street, between the center line of Somerton Avenue and the
center line of Federal Street as those center lines intersect Main Street
within the city. The Chief of Police is authorized to erect signs on any
sidewalk, street, alley, or public highway prohibiting the riding of bicycles
thereon by any person. The presence or absence of the signs shall in no way
affect the validity of this article or its enforceability. Whenever any person
is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk permitted under this article, the person
shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall otherwise ride and
operate the bicycle in compliance with the provisions of this article and the
laws of the state applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except those
provisions which, by their nature, can have no application.
Penalty, see §
11-4-7
§ 11-4-6 RESPONSIBILITY OF PARENT OR GUARDIAN.
   The parent or guardian of a person under the age of 18 shall not authorize
or knowingly permit that person to violate any of the provisions of this
article.
Penalty, see §
11-4-7
§ 11-4-7 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, fined for each offense not to
exceed $50 or imprisonment not to exceed ten days, or both the fine and
imprisonment. In addition to the penalty herein above set forth, the City
Police Department, or any of the members thereof, may impound and retain
possession of any bicycle operated in violation of any of the provisions of
this article.
(Ord. 106, passed 10-15-1975)
ARTICLE 11-5: PROHIBITING THE POSSESSION OF ALCOHOL OR OTHER SPIRITUOUS LIQUOR
Section
   
11-5-1   Drinking in motor vehicle
   
11-5-2   Alcoholic beverage in possession while driving
   
11-5-3   Alcoholic beverage in possession as passenger
   
11-5-4   Alcoholic beverage in vehicle
   
11-5-5   Motor vehicle with underage personnel and alcoholic beverage
   
11-5-6   Consuming spirituous liquor in public place, thoroughfare, or
gathering; permit procedures and requirements
§ 11-5-1 DRINKING IN MOTOR VEHICLE.
   No person shall drink any alcoholic beverage while in a motor vehicle upon a
highway within the city limits.
Penalty, see §
11-7-1
§ 11-5-2 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE IN POSSESSION WHILE DRIVING.
   No person shall have in his or her possession on his or her person while
driving a motor vehicle upon a highway, within the city limits, any bottle,
can, or other receptacle containing any alcoholic beverage which has been
opened, or seal broken, or the contents of which have been partially removed.
Penalty, see §
11-7-1
§ 11-5-3 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE IN POSSESSION AS PASSENGER.
   No person shall have in his or her possession, while in a motor vehicle upon
a highway, within the city limits, any bottle, can, or other receptacle
containing any alcoholic beverage which has been opened, or a seal broken, or
the contents of which have been partially removed.
Penalty, see §
11-7-1
§ 11-5-4 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE IN VEHICLE.
   It is unlawful for the registered owner of any motor vehicle, or the driver
if the registered owner is not then present in the vehicle, to keep in a motor
vehicle, when the vehicle is upon a highway, within the city limits, any
bottle, can, or other receptacle containing any alcoholic beverage which has
been opened, or a seal broken, or the contents of which have been partially
removed, unless the container is kept in the trunk of the vehicle, or kept in
some other area of the vehicle not normally occupied by the driver or
passengers, if the vehicle is not equipped with a trunk. A utility compartment
or glove compartment shall be deemed to be within the area occupied by the
driver and passengers.
Penalty, see §
11-7-1
§ 11-5-5 MOTOR VEHICLE WITH UNDERAGE PERSONNEL AND ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE.
   No person under the age of 21 years shall knowingly drive or be a passenger
in any motor vehicle upon the highway, within the city limits, carrying any
alcoholic beverage, unless that person is accompanied by a parent or legal
guardian or is employed by a licensee under A.R.S. Title 4, and is driving the
motor vehicle during the regular hours and in the course of his or her
employment.
Penalty, see §
11-7-1
§ 11-5-6 CONSUMING SPIRITUOUS LIQUOR IN PUBLIC PLACE, THOROUGHFARE, OR
GATHERING; PERMIT PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS.
   A.   No person shall consume spirituous liquor from any bottle, can, or
other receptacle containing any spirituous liquor which has been opened, or a
seal broken, or the contents of which have been partially removed in a public
place, thoroughfare, or gathering, within the city limits. This division A.
shall not apply in a public recreation area (city parks), provided a permit is
obtained from the City Parks and Recreation Department.
   B.   The permits shall include the following:
      1.   Adequate security, acceptable to the Director of the Parks and
Recreation Department, shall be provided for any event where alcohol is served
and shall comply with any rules and regulations as are applicable to park
usage;
      2.   The Director of the Parks and Recreation Department shall maintain a
list of organizations which are entitled to use municipal facilities without
charge, and in the event that any organization is not placed on the list and is
required to pay fees and charges as authorized by resolution to the Parks and
Recreation Department, the organization shall have the right to appeal any
decision of the Director of the Parks and Recreation Department to the City
Council; and
      3.   The rules and regulations of the Parks and Recreation Department
relating to parks and recreation facilities and special events, as set forth in
§
11-6-4, may be modified from time to time by subsequent resolution.
(Ord. 233, passed 2-18-1997) Penalty, see §
11-7-1
ARTICLE 11-6: PUBLIC PARKS
Section
   
11-6-1   Parks to be closed
   
11-6-2   No person to remain
   
11-6-3   Penalty
   
11-6-4   Council to adopt park rules and regulations
§ 11-6-1 PARKS TO BE CLOSED.
   All public parks of the city are to be closed to the public between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of each day of the week.
§ 11-6-2 NO PERSON TO REMAIN.
   No person shall be in or remain on the grounds of any public park of the
city between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of each day of the week with
the exception of city-sponsored events.
Penalty, see §
11-6-3
§ 11-6-3 PENALTY.
   Any violation of this article shall be a class three misdemeanor.
(Ord. 139, passed 8-4-1981)
§ 11-6-4 COUNCIL TO ADOPT PARK RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   A.   Generally. The Council may adopt by resolution rules and regulations
regarding the use of city parks, as set forth in division B. of this section,
which may be modified or changed from time to time, but the rules and
regulations shall follow the generally accepted principles of good municipal
park management.
   B.   Rules, regulations and charges.
   Rules, Regulations and Rental Charges for Use of Parks and Recreation
Facilities and Special Event Permits
I.   Application priorities.
   a.   The primary use of municipal public recreation building and facilities
is for activities of constructive recreational nature, organized and conducted
by the Parks and Recreation Division.
   b.   City activities, city sponsored groups, and city agencies will have
priority use of the facilities over other applications for the facility space.
When conflict occurs, facility use permits held by non-sponsored groups may be
canceled at the discretion of the Director of Parks and Recreation.
   c.   The application for use of Parks and Recreation facilities or special
event vendor permits will be made at least one week prior to the anticipated
use. This also means that rental charges must be paid at least one week before
the anticipated use. If a deposit is required, the facility will not be
considered reserved until the deposit is made.
   d.   Application shall be issued to responsible adults (over 21 years of
age) only, who shall be in attendance when application is made.
II.   Approval/revocation, rules of conduct for activities.
   At the discretion of the Director of Parks and Recreation all activities may
be required to be under competent, adult supervision, with the organization
using the facility assuming full responsibility for any damage to the facility
or equipment. If a Parks and Recreation Division employee is on duty, he or she
shall exercise authority over the organization or its activities. If the adult
supervision is inadequate, it shall be the responsibility of the recreation
leader on duty to report same to the Parks and Recreation Division. Cleanup of
the contracted area will be the responsibility of the user. The permit holder
shall be charged on an hourly basis to pay for cleanup if it is necessary for
the city to provide additional cleanup services.
   a.   All permits shall be immediately revocable by the Director of Parks and
Recreation upon his or her determination that a violation of any rule of this
code, or city ordinance or state statue has occurred. If notice of cancellation
of a request is not received at the office of Parks and Recreation at least 48
hours prior to the date of the event, the permit holder may be held responsible
for all charges at the discretion of the Director. Also, any person or persons
guilty of violating any of the following provisions may be prohibited, at the
discretion of the Director of Parks and Recreation, from future use of
facilities.
   b.   No apparatus (scenery and the like), furniture, or equipment shall be
moved into a Parks and Recreation facility unless special permission is granted
in advance and so stated in the permit. The apparatus, furniture, or equipment
(provided by the holder of the permit) shall be removed from the Parks and
Recreation facility promptly after use and before 8:30 a.m. the following
morning so there shall not be any interference with normal Parks and Recreation
programs. Failure to comply may prohibit such groups from using facilities at a
later date.
   c.   The organization using facilities shall indemnify the city for any and
all damage to the facility by any person or persons attending the activity, and
all liability and damages to any person for injuries, including death. When
insurance is required by the Director of Parks and Recreation, the organization
shall furnish to the City of Somerton a certificate of insurance naming the
occurrence, and $100,000 property damage/each occurrence. Responsibility for
loss, breakage, or need for repair of any piece of furniture, equipment, or
portion of the facility of area rests solely with the person in charge (the
individual signing the agreement) who shall report same to the Director of
Parks and Recreation.
   d.   Building facilities and public park areas must be vacated by 11:00 p.m.
unless permission is granted specifically in the permit. It is the
responsibility of the permit holder to assure that this policy is administered.
Programs shall be concluded on time to provide for cleanup and clearance of the
facility as stated in the permit.
   e.   The following specific rules shall be observed while using any facility
and the permit holder shall be held responsible for any loss or damage growing
out of the violation.
      i.   The use of tobacco in any facility in any form is prohibited.
      ii.   Functions shall be confined to the specific part of the facility
assigned to the permit holder.
   f.   Glass beverage containers are not permitted in any of the public parks
or facilities.
   g.   Alcohol consumption is by permit only and may not be sold unless issued
a state special liquor permit.
   h.   Amplified music without authorization is prohibited. The Somerton Noise
Ordinance is strictly enforced.
   i.   Overnight camping without authorization is prohibited.
   j.   Ramada reservation is by permit only and is required for all city
ramadas. The fee for ramada reservation will be set forth in the facility fee
schedule set forth in division IV. below. All same-day reservations need to be
completed before 12:00 p.m. noon on the day of the event; all weekend
reservations need to be completed before Friday noon before the event. Key for
the bathrooms can be picked up at the Police Station Deposit required (see fee
schedule).
   k.   As determined by the City of Somerton Fire Department the total number
of people admitted for any usage shall not exceed the seating capacity of the
facility involved.
      i.   Senior Center: 150; and
      ii.   Community Center: 500.
   l.   All statutes and ordinances of the federal, state, county, and city
shall be obeyed.
   m.   At the discretion of the Director of Parks and Recreation, a Parks and
Recreation Staff Division employee may be required to be on duty when Parks and
Recreation Division facilities are utilized. Employees shall be responsible to
the Director of Parks and Recreation, paid by the Parks and Recreation
Division, and no organization using Parks and Recreation facility shall make
any payment to the employee. The Director of Parks and Recreation may require
any person, group, or organization to reimburse the city for any expense
incurred as direct result from an activity sponsored by the person, group, or
organization within a recreational facility.
   n.   The use of city-owned special equipment shall be permitted only when
operated by City of Somerton employees, or other persons specifically
authorized in the permit. The special equipment must be returned in the
condition it was found (with exception of normal wear), otherwise the user
shall be responsible for repair or replacement charges.
   o.   No material of any kind shall be attached to any part of the facility
or area without express written approval from the Director of Parks and
Recreation.
   p.   If control personnel, parking attendant, and the like are necessary,
such personnel shall be supplied by permit holder. The Director of Parks and
Recreation shall specify when control personnel are necessary. Permit holders
using city facilities for the purpose of social events or gatherings will be
required to provide bonded security for their event. Proof that service has
been contracted should be turned in at least 24 hours before the event at the
Parks and Recreation Office on office days and hours. Security personnel must
be uniformed, certified, and bonded.
   q.   Concession rights shall be reserved to the City of Somerton unless
specifically stated otherwise in the permit.
   r.   No Parks and Recreation Division kitchen facility shall be used except
as specifically outlined by the Parks and Recreation Division. The usual rental
charge shall be consistent with actual cost incurred by the city. Facilities
must be cleaned after use and approval inspection given.
   s.   Continuous use of facilities by clubs or enterprise shall be permitted
through signed agreements, which may be re-issued annually by the City Council.
No permit shall exceed a period of time of one year.
   t.   Permits having duration of less than 30 days may be issued by the
Director of Parks and Recreation.
   u.   When an application for use of facilities has been approved by the
Director of Parks and Recreation, the notification section shall contain the
date, hours of usage, age of group, type of activity, anticipated number of
participants, and contact person phone number.
   v.   No person shall make a false statement on any application as provided
for in this article.
   w.   Control of lights, keys, locks, and locking of doors, gates and the
like will be the responsibility of the permit holder when no Parks and
Recreation employee or employees are in attendance.
   x.   Use of facility shall not include business or commercial activities
except by special agreement with the Department.
   y.   All admissions fees and prices charged are subject to the approval of
the Parks and Recreation Department.
III.   Groups classified.
   a.   Class A - City co-sponsored groups or city agencies.
      i.   The following organizations are exempt from rental fees during their
season:
         1.   Somerton Yaqui Babe Ruth Baseball;
         2.   Somerton Youth Baseball League;
         3.   Somerton School District; and
         4.   El Diablito Club.
      ii.   The above may be supplemented or deleted by resolution of the City
Council.
      iii.   Organizations that fall in the Class A group can be exempt from
one-time rental fee by the Parks and Rec. Director with the authorization of
City Manager.
   b.   Class B - Social. Private individuals or groups using facilities for
the purpose of social gatherings or functions (weddings, receptions, religious
groups, and the like).
   c.   Class C - Nonprofit. Groups or organizations using facilities whose
purpose is clearly of a non-profit nature. This includes organizations that can
demonstrate a Section 501C(3) exempt status from the IRS.
   d.   Class D - Commercial. Individuals, groups or organizations using
facilities for raising money or whose purpose is clearly of a profit making
status.
IV.   Facility fee schedule.
Facility        Class A Class B Class C
Athletic Fields
Facility                        Class A        Class B        Class C
Athletic Fields
   Practice session          No Charge      No Charge      $15.00
   Lights per hour           No Charge      $10.00         $20.00
   Single game (per game)    No Charge      $15.00         $20.00
   Each additional game      No Charge      $5.00          $7.50
   Key deposit (bathrooms)   No Charge      $10.00         $10.00
Somerton Community Center
   Per game                  No Charge      $10.00         $20.00
   Special event             No Charge      $300.00        $500.00
   Security deposit (6 hours)At Request     $200.00        $200.00
   Setup of table and chairs $30.00         $30.00         $30.00
                                (optional)     (optional)     (optional)
   Staff attendant           $8.00 (per     $8.00 (per     $8.00 (per hour)
                                hour)          hour)
Senior Center                   No Charge      Not Available  Not Available
   Security deposit          At Request     Not Available  Not Available
Ramada Reservation             No Charge      $15.00         $20.00
   Key deposit (bathrooms)   $10.00         $10.00         $10.00
Special Event Charges
   Setup                     $100.00        $100.00        $100.00
   Barricades (15)           $20.00         $20.00         $20.00
   Cleanup                   $200.00        $200.00        $200.00
Barricade Service
   City street closure*      $50.00         $50.00         $50.00
   Setup                     $40.00         $40.00         $40.00
   Cleanup                   $40.00         $40.00         $40.00
Booth Space
   Food space (without       No Charge      $15.00         $15.00
electricity)
   Food space (with          $10.00         $25.00         $25.00
electricity)
   Hobbies/crafts/sales      No Charge      $15.00         $15.00
   Info/presentation space   No Charge      $10.00         $10.00
Somerton Heritage Pool**
   Session (3 hours) ***     No Charge      $75.00         $105.00
   Security/cleaning deposit At Request     $100.00        $100.00
   Lights per hour           No Charge      $10.00         $20.00
   Pool supervisor           $8.00 (per hr) $8.00 (per hr) $8.00 (per hr)
   Lifeguard (1 per every 25 $7.00 (per hr) $7.00 (per hr) $7.00 (per hr)
patrons)
* Closure of Highway 95 is reserved for the following annual events: Greater
Days Parade, Fiestas Patrias Parade, Red Ribbon Parade. Other events will be
considered on an individual basis at the discretion of the Director of Parks
and Recreation.
** Somerton Heritage Pool reservations are subject to availability. The pool
is available for rental from May to September only.
*** Session fees listed are for residents only. The non-resident Class B rate
is $100.00/session and the non-resident Class C rate is $150.00/session.
 
V.   Alcohol permit fees.
 
Permit                  Class A Class B Class C
Individual/group permit $10.00  $10.00  $10.00
 
(Res. 2007-040, passed 8-21-2007; Ord. 233, passed 2-18-1997; Ord. 2013-007,
passed 12-17-2013)
ARTICLE 11-7: CIVIL TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS
Section
   
11-7-1   Civil traffic violations
   
11-7-2   Authority to detain persons to serve traffic complaint
   
11-7-3   Hearing officers
§ 11-7-1 CIVIL TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS.
   Any violation of or failure or refusal to do or perform any act required by
this article or traffic control regulations, and amendments thereto, of this
code constitutes a civil traffic violation. Civil traffic violations are
subject to the provisions of A.R.S. Title 28, Chapter 5, Art. 4, and amendments
thereto.
§ 11-7-2 AUTHORITY TO DETAIN PERSONS TO SERVE TRAFFIC COMPLAINT.
   Any peace officer or duly authorized agent of the city may stop and detain a
person as is reasonably necessary to investigate an actual or suspected
violation of this article, or amendments thereto, and to serve a copy of the
traffic complaint for any alleged civil or criminal violation.
§ 11-7-3 HEARING OFFICERS.
   The City Council or Manager may appoint one or more hearing officers to
preside over civil traffic violation cases when, in his or her or its opinion,
the appointment of the hearing officers are necessary to assure prompt
disposition of civil traffic violation cases. Hearing officers may hear and
dispose of civil traffic violation cases under supervision of the presiding
officer of the City Magistrate Court, which is appealable to the Superior Court
pursuant to A.R.S. Title 22, Chapter 2, Art. 4.
(Ord. 148, passed 1-17-1984)
CHAPTER 12: WATER AND SEWER
      Article
         
12-1.   WATER AND SEWER SYSTEM ADMINISTRATION
         
12-2.   APPLICATION FOR SERVICE
         
12-3.   DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE
         
12-4.   RATES AND BILLS
         
12-5.   SEWER SERVICE
         
12-6.   WATER SERVICE
         
12-7.   LIABILITY
         
12-8.   REGULATIONS PART OF CONTRACT
         
12-9.   FLOW OF FUNDS
ARTICLE 12-1: WATER AND SEWER SYSTEM ADMINISTRATION
Section
   
12-1-1   Management of water and sewer systems
   
12-1-2   Receipts and deposits
§ 12-1-1 MANAGEMENT OF WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS.
   The Council shall have the power to prescribe any other and further rates,
rules, and regulations as it may deem necessary.
§ 12-1-2 RECEIPTS AND DEPOSITS.
   The Clerk shall keep a correct account of all receipts, make out all bills
for water and sewer rents and materials furnished to consumers, collect the
same, and deposit the proceeds so collected to the credit of the city, and in
accordance with the direction of the Council.
ARTICLE 12-2: APPLICATION FOR SERVICE
Section
   
12-2-1   Application for water and sewer service
   
12-2-2   Grounds for rejection of application
   
12-2-3   Violation of application provisions
   
12-2-4   Deposit required
   
12-2-5   Payment responsibility
§ 12-2-1 APPLICATION FOR WATER AND SEWER SERVICE.
   Application for the use of water and sewer service shall be made in person
at the City Hall, by the owner or agent of the property to be benefitted,
designating the location of the property and stating the purpose for which the
water and sewer may be required.
§ 12-2-2 GROUNDS FOR REJECTION OF APPLICATION.
   The city may reject any application for water and sewer service for any good
and sufficient reasons, including the following: service not available under a
standard rate; service which involves excessive service expense; service which
may affect the service to other consumers; and service when the applicant is
delinquent in payment of bills incurred for service previously supplied at any
location.
§ 12-2-3 VIOLATION OF APPLICATION PROVISIONS.
   For violations of any of the provisions relating to application for service,
the city shall, at the expiration of seven days after mailing written notice to
the last known address of the consumer, at its option, discontinue service.
Where the service is thereafter reinstated, the consumer shall first pay to the
city a reinstatement charge.
§ 12-2-4 DEPOSIT REQUIRED.
   A.   There shall be charged to all persons applying for water and sewer
service from the city a deposit. The deposit shall be paid before service is
given to the applicant for sewer and water services.
   B.   Deposits shall be non-interest bearing and shall be refunded to the
consumer upon discontinuance of service and payment of charges, provided that
charges may be deducted from the security deposit before the refund is made.
(Ord. 126, passed 6-17-1980)
Cross-reference:
   Similar provisions, see §
13-1-1
§ 12-2-5 PAYMENT RESPONSIBILITY.
   A.   The individual who makes application for water and sewer service shall
be responsible for the payment of all bills incurred in connection with the
services furnished, except, in the case of residential rental property, the
owner of the rental property shall be responsible for payment of the water and
sewer service.
   B.   In all cases where the residential rental property has individual
service connections to each of the rental units and the valve shut-off is
located at the property line, the provisions of this section shall not apply.
In this case, each of the tenants of the residential units shall be responsible
for payment of their individual water and sewer service bills.
(Ord. 126, passed 6-17-1980)
ARTICLE 12-3: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE
Section
   
12-3-1   Notice required
   
12-3-2   Service may be discontinued under certain conditions
   
12-3-3   Establishing procedures for the disconnection and discontinuance of
water services to users
§ 12-3-1 NOTICE REQUIRED.
   Any person who desires to discontinue the use of water and sewer service
shall file written notice with the Clerk at least three days in advance of the
intended termination of service. Responsibility for water and sewer service
consumed extends to the time specified for discontinuance or to the time of
departure, whichever occurs last.
§ 12-3-2 SERVICE MAY BE DISCONTINUED UNDER CERTAIN CONDITIONS.
   The city may discontinue water and sewer service upon any of the following
conditions:
   A.   To prevent fraud or abuse;
   B.   Disregard of city rules pertaining to water and sewer service;
   C.   Emergency repairs;
   D.   Insufficient supply caused by factors outside control of city;
   E.   Legal process;
   F.   Direction of public authorities;
   G.   Local emergency requiring emergency measures;
   H.   Tampering with materials or other equipment by the consumer; and/or
   I.   Delinquent water and sewer bills, as provided for in §§
12-4-3 and
13-1-1.
(Ord. 112, passed 9-20-1978)
§ 12-3-3 ESTABLISHING PROCEDURES FOR THE DISCONNECTION AND DISCONTINUANCE OF
WATER SERVICES TO USERS.
   In the event that the city may decide to discontinue water and sewer service
for any of the conditions set forth in §
12-3-2, or any other just reason, the city shall first give notice of its
intention to discontinue water and sewer service to the customer or user in a
form as prescribed by resolution of the Council. The notice to the customer or
user shall notify the customer or user of the reason why the city desires to
discontinue water and sewer service, and shall give the customer or user an
opportunity to be heard and present any argument or reason why water and sewer
services should not be discontinued. The customer or user, after receiving
notice from the city of its desire and intention to discontinue service, shall
respond within the time period as prescribed in the notice, and shall be
granted a hearing before a hearing body who shall determine whether there is
good and just cause to discontinue water and sewer services. The hearing body
shall be composed of members in a number to be set by resolution of the City
Council and shall be comprised of those persons designated by the City Council.
(Ord. 112, passed 9-20-1978)
ARTICLE 12-4: RATES AND BILLS
Section
   
12-4-1   Water and sewer service rates
   
12-4-2   Minimum rate
   
12-4-3   Water and sewer bills
   
12-4-4   Incorrect bill
   
12-4-5   Turn-offs and turn-ons
   
12-4-6   Commencement of charges
§ 12-4-1 WATER AND SEWER SERVICE RATES.
   All water and sewer service sold by the city shall be sold at rates
established from time to time by resolution of the Council.
§ 12-4-2 MINIMUM RATE.
   Service for a time period less than a month shall be charged at the minimum
monthly rate.
§ 12-4-3 WATER AND SEWER BILLS.
   A bill shall be rendered for each water and sewer connection and shall be
mailed as set forth in §
13-1-1, which shall be the billing date hereinafter mentioned. All bills shall
include sewer charges, when applicable, and any other charges for other city
services as may be authorized by the Council. The city reserves the right to
vary the dates or length of the billing period, temporarily or permanently, if
necessary or desirable.
Cross-reference:
   Billing, late charges and service cutoffs, see §
13-1-1
§ 12-4-4 INCORRECT BILL.
   A.   Any consumer may present a claim to the city if he or she believes that
he or she may have received an incorrect bill. The claim shall be presented in
person at the City Hall before the bill becomes delinquent, provided that the
consumer may make a claim following payment of his or her bill and his or her
payment shall not prejudice his or her claim.
   B.   The claim shall not exempt the consumer from delinquency penalties if
he or she fails to pay his or her bill on time.
§ 12-4-5 TURN-OFFS AND TURN-ONS.
   A charge as set forth in §
13-1-1 shall be made each time service is turned off and thereafter reinstated
for nonpayment of bills or any other violation of the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 12-4-6 COMMENCEMENT OF CHARGES.
   The city shall commence service charges for a consumer when the water or
sewer connection is made, regardless of whether the water or the sewer service
is used or not.
ARTICLE 12-5: SEWER SERVICE
Section
   
12-5-1   Definitions
   
12-5-2   Sewer district established
   
12-5-3   Responsibility of officers
   
12-5-4   Classes of sewage disposal service available
   
12-5-5   Request for service
   
12-5-6   Agreements or contracts for service
   
12-5-7   Continuity of service
   
12-5-8   Extensions
   
12-5-9   Construction of sewers; connections
   
12-5-10   Regulation of discharges
   
12-5-11   Billing procedures
   
12-5-12   Rates and charges
   
12-5-13   Permits
   
12-5-14   Additional regulations
§ 12-5-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPLICATION. The written instrument by which a developer or a customer
applies for sewer service of any sort.
   APPROVING AUTHORITY (AUTHORITY). The City Council or its designated
representative.
   BOARD OF REVIEW. The members of the City Council or its designated
committee.
   BOD (BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). The quantity of oxygen utilized in
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in
five days at 20°C, expressed in milligrams per liter.
   BRANCH SEWER. An arbitrary term for a sewer which receives sewage from
lateral sewers from a relatively small area.
   C. Centigrade degrees.
   CITY. The City of Somerton, Arizona.
   COD (CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). A measure of the oxygen-consuming capacity of
inorganic and organic matter present in water or wastewater under standard
laboratory procedures, expressed in milligrams per liter.
   CONSTRUCTION COST. The cost to a developer, less the city's oversizing
costs, if any, described herein, for the design and construction of all
facilities as required to serve the developer's property and to connect to the
city's sanitary sewer system.
   CONSULTING ENGINEERS. The engineer or engineering firm or corporation
responsible for professional engineering services provided for an assignment.
   CONTROL MANHOLE. A structure that is accessible for the purpose of
maintaining a building sewer. A CONTROL MANHOLE may be used as an inspection
chamber.
   COOLING WATER. The water discharge from any system of condensation, air
conditioning, cooling, refrigeration, or other sources. It shall contain no
polluting substances which would produce BOD or SS each in excess of ten parts
per million by weight, toxic substances as limited in this code, or other
polluting substances which may be limited in this chapter.
   COUNTY. County of Yuma, Arizona.
   CUSTOMER or CONSUMER. Any individual, corporation, partnership, firm, or
association furnished sewage disposal service by the Authority.
   DEVELOPER. Any individual, corporation, partnership, firm, or association
developing a property or properties for resale, rental, or lease at or to which
sewage disposal service is to be rendered by the city, and who shall have the
legal right to negotiate for that service. Where applicable, any individual,
corporation, partnership, firm, or association applying for the extension of
sewers or force mains in order to serve a certain property.
   DIRECTOR. The executive officer of the Public Works Department.
   DOMESTIC SEWAGE or SANITARY SEWAGE. Sewage derived principally from
dwellings, business buildings, industries, institutions, and the like,
originating as wastes from kitchens, water closets, lavatories, bathrooms, and
showers.
   DOMESTIC USER. All users of sewage treatment facilities not classified as
industrial users.
   EFFLUENT. Sewage, water, or other liquid, after some degree of treatment,
flowing out of any treatment device or facilities.
   FORCE MAIN. A pressure sewer-pipe line for the transmission of sewage. The
pipe cannot receive sewage, except under pressure by pumping.
   FRONTAGE. The actual width, normally expressed in feet, of a property in
respect to a street or avenue, but without relation to the front, side, or rear
of any structure located on the property, along which the proposed sewer or
force main is installed. In the case of a corner lot, FRONTAGE is calculated as
the longer of the sides involved. For irregularly-shaped lots or acreage,
FRONTAGE will be calculated by taking the square root of the number of square
feet of property involved.
   GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking,
and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce.
   GREASE or FATS. Any material which is extractable from an acidified sample
of a waste by hexane or other designated solvent.
   GROUND GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing
of food that has been shredded or comminuted to such a degree that all
particles will be carried freely in suspension in public sewers, with no
particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.
   GUARANTEE DEPOSIT. The amount placed with the city by each customer as
security for payment of the sewer bill.
   HAULER. Any person engaged in transportation or conveyance of liquid wastes
to a district sewage treatment plant for disposal.
   INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY. Recovery by the grantee of the grant amount
allocable to the treatment and/or transmission of wastes from industrial users
of a treatment works.
   INDUSTRIAL USER.
      1.   Any nongovernmental, nonresidential user of a publicly-owned
treatment works which discharges more than the equivalent of 25,000 gallons per
day (gpd) of sanitary wastes, and which is identified in the Standard
Industrial Classification Manual 1972 of the Federal Office of Management and
Budget, as amended and supplemented, under one of the following divisions:
         a.   Division A: Agriculture, Forestry, and Fishing;
         b.   Division B: Mining;
         c.   Division E: Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas, and
Sanitary Services; and
         d.   Division I: Services.
      2.   Any nongovernmental user of a publicly-owned treatment works which
discharges wastewater to the treatment works, which contains toxic pollutants
or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or
by interaction with other wastes, to contaminate the sludge of any municipal
systems, or to injure or to interfere with any sewage treatment process, or
which constitutes a hazard to humans or animals, creates a public nuisance, or
creates any hazard in or has any adverse effect on the waters receiving any
discharge from the treatment works.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Any liquid, solid, or gaseous substance or form of energy,
or combination thereof, resulting from any process of industrial, commercial,
governmental, and institutional concerns, manufacturing, business, trade, or
research, including the development, recovery, or processing of natural
resources, or from sources identified in the Standard Industrial Classification
Manual of the Federal Office of Management and Budget, as amended.
   INFLUENT. Sewage, raw or partly treated, flowing into any sewage treatment
device, pumping station, or related facilities.
   INSPECTION CHAMBER. An accessible structure through which sewage from a
building sewer flows and from which samples of the sewage may be collected for
the purpose of being tested.
   INTERCEPTOR. A large-size gravity flow sewer or force main for the
transmission of sewage, which has been designed to receive sewage from one or
more collecting sewers or pumping stations.
   LABORATORY DETERMINATION. The measurements, tests, and analyses of the
characteristics of waters and wastes in accordance with the provisions of 40
C.F.R. pt. 136. These methods are contained in the latest edition of the three
publications below, or in accordance with any other equivalent methods
prescribed by the Director:
      1.   Standard Methods for Examination of Water and Wastewater, a joint
publication of the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works
Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation;
      2.   Annual Book of Standards, Part 23 Water Atmospheric Analysis, 1972,
or ASTM, a publication of the American Society for Testing and Materials; and
      3.   Methods for Chemical Analysis of Water and Wastes, or EPA Methods, a
publication of the Environmental Protection Agency.
   LATERAL SEWER LINE. A branch sewer line connected to the main sewer line. A
lateral sewer is normally eight inches in size or larger.
   MAIN SEWER LINE. A major gravity sewer line in any specific development, to
which one or more lateral sewers may be tributary.
   METER MEASUREMENT. The act of or result of determining the quantity of water
supplied or being discharged by a user and determined by an instrument or
device used for the measurements and approved by the Director.
   MUNICIPALITIES. Any city, town, or village, wholly or partly within the
county.
   OFF-SITE SEWERS. Sewer lines totally outside a development.
   ON-SITE SEWERS. Sewer lines in streets or rights-of-way, or easements
totally within a development, and those sewer collection lines in peripheral
streets constructed for use by that development.
   OPTION. The process and act of keeping all facilities for collecting,
pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage in normal operation and in a good
state of repair, including the replacement of the facilities when necessary.
   OVERSIZED SEWER. A sewer extension in, through, or past a development which,
because of future extensions or other reasons, is larger than required for the
immediate development to be served.
   pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration in
grams per liter of solution.
   PLANNED EXTENSION. Future sewer extensions scheduled by the Authority with
special provisions for payments therefor.
   PLUMBING. All pipes, fittings, and appurtenances on the property owner's
side of the property line or outside easement areas. This includes the property
owner's extension from the sewer lateral up to and including the house
plumbing.
   ppm. Part per million by weight and/or milligrams per liter.
   PRETREATMENT FACILITIES. Structures, devices, or equipment for the purpose
of removing deleterious wastes from sewage generated from a premises prior to
its discharge into a public sewer.
   PRIVATE SEWER. Any sewer or system of sewers, exclusive of building sewers,
which is not owned by the municipality in which it is located or any other
public authority or private utility.
   PROPERTY OWNER. The record title holder of premises served or to be served
with a sewer connection by the Authority.
   PUB. L. NO. 92-500. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act of 1972, being
33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq., as amended.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer which is owned and/or controlled by public authority
or private utility.
   PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR. The City Public Works Director or his or her
authorized representative.
   SAMPLING. The periodic collection of sewage for testing.
   SCAVENGER WASTE. Any liquid waste from sources such as septic tanks, package
plants, or industrial processes which are removed from a premises by means
other than a sewer.
   SERVICE LATERAL. Sewer connection extending from the collecting sewer in the
street to a customer's property line, or from the collecting sewer in an
easement to the easement line, often referred to as a HOUSE CONNECTION.
   SEWAGE. A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business
buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with any
infiltration as may be present. Often referred to as WASTEWATER.
   SEWAGE DISPOSAL PLANT. The physical facilities for the treatment of sewage
before discharge into a canal, ocean, lake, or injection well.
   SEWAGE DISPOSAL SERVICE. The service provided by the city for the disposal
of sewage, including transmission, treatment, and effluent disposal.
   SEWAGE DISPOSAL SERVICE CHARGE (SERVICE CHARGE). The charge established for
the disposal of sewage based upon volume discharged to the sewer.
   SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM. All facilities required to transport sewage to a
treatment plant for treatment and effluent disposal, including gravity sanitary
sewers, interceptors, force mains, pumping stations, treatment plants,
outfalls, and disposal wells.
   SEWAGE FLOW METER. A device that measures and records the flow of sewage. It
may also measure the rate of flow.
   SEWERAGE SYSTEM. All facilities for collection, pumping, transmission,
treatment, and disposal of sewage.
   SEWER (COLLECTION SEWER). The gravity-flow sloping pipe facility installed
in public streets, rights-of-way, and easements for the collection of sewage.
   SEWER IMPACT FEE. A charge for the proposed usage of the city's facilities
based on the average daily sewage flow in gallons per day, paid by a developer
or a customer for utilizing portions of the city's sanitary sewer system funded
by the city and held in a special fund or funds to be utilized solely to defray
the cost of new facilities to the extent new usage requires new facilities.
   SEWER SYSTEM OF THE CITY. The sanitary sewer collection system within the
corporate limits of the city that is operated by the city.
   SEWER SYSTEM OUTSIDE THE CITY. The sanitary sewer collection system outside
the corporate limits of the city that is operated by the city.
   SLUG. Any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which, in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds, for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average 24-
hour concentration or flows during normal operation.
   SURCHARGE. The part of the sewer service charge which shall be applied to
extra strength wastes to cover added operation and maintenance costs.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids that are in suspension in water, sewage, or other
liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering.
   SYSTEM. The entire sewerage system of the city, all treatment and disposal
facilities and interceptor sewers owned and operated by the city, and all
sewerage collection systems connected thereto.
   TESTING. The analysis of samples of sewage.
   TOXIC SUBSTANCE. Any substance, whether gaseous, liquid, or solid, which
when discharged to the sewer system in sufficient quantities may tend to
interfere with any sewage treatment process, or to constitute a hazard to human
beings or animals, or inhibit aquatic life or create a hazard to recreation in
the receiving waters of the effluent from the sewage treatment plant.
   UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water discharged in its original state or water discharged
which, after use for any purpose, is at least equal chemically, physically, and
biologically to the water from its original source, i.e., potable water, ground
water, and river and stream water.
   USER. Any person or premises receiving waste disposal services.
   USER CHARGE. Charges assigned to each user which defray a proportionate
share of the cost of operation and maintenance of the sewerage system, often
referred to as SEWAGE DISPOSAL SERVICE CHARGE.
   WASTEWATER. A term interchangeable with SEWAGE, as defined herein.
(Ord. 121, passed 12-4-1979)
§ 12-5-2 SEWER DISTRICT ESTABLISHED.
   For the better protection of the health and convenience of the inhabitants,
all that portion of the city now or hereafter embraced within the district
reached by the sewer system is hereby declared to be a sewer district. All
persons owning real property adjoining the streets or alleys in which there are
sewer lines or lateral, branch, main, or trunk sewers of the sewer system, and
all persons owning, leasing, or using real property or buildings or fixtures
thereon which can be served by sewers, shall cause to be connected all privies,
cesspools, and open or unconnected drains with the sewer system, at the time
and in the manner as hereinafter provided, and as the Council by resolution may
require. All expenses of the connection shall be borne by the owner of the real
property or building and the person leasing or using same. It is unlawful to
fail to abate all the privies, cesspools, and open or unconnected drains at the
time and in the manner herein required and in the manner required by the
Council by resolution.
(Ord. 121, passed 12-4-1979) Penalty, see
Article 1-8
§ 12-5-3 RESPONSIBILITY OF OFFICERS.
   For the convenience, best administration, and operation of the sewer system
of the city, it is hereby made the duty of the city officers and employees in
charge of and operating the city water system to perform the same duties with
respect to the operation, management, and control of the sewer system as is
required of them in the operation and management and control of the water
system, except as may be otherwise provided in this code or by resolution or
ordinance of the Council.
(Ord. 121, passed 12-4-1979)
§ 12-5-4 CLASSES OF SEWAGE DISPOSAL SERVICE AVAILABLE.
   The city renders sewage disposal service of four general classes.
   A.   Customers within the city. A retail consumer of water supplied by the
city who is either receiving sewage disposal service or has it available for
connection from his or her property to the sewer system of the city.
   B.   Customers outside the city. A retail consumer of water supplied by the
city who has sewage disposal service available to his or her property through
existing sewers either owned by the city or by others, but not part of the
sewer system of the city.
   C.   Customers with other sources of water supply. A customer who disposes
of sewage through the city's sewage disposal system and is supplied with water
from sources, public or private, other than the city.
   D.   Industrial wastes. Sewage or liquid wastes from any manufacturing or
industrial plant, building, or premises, not including storm water, which shall
be such as to impose a burden upon the sewage disposal system, in addition to
the burden imposed by the average sewage entering the sewer system. Charges for
disposal of the sewage are fixed by contract, and by special charge in unusual
cases. In lieu of the special charge, the city has the right to require
pretreatment of industrial wastes.
(Ord. 121, passed 12-4-1979)
§ 12-5-5 REQUEST FOR SERVICE.
   A.   Within the city. Connections to the sewer system of the city, except to
interceptors, must be authorized by the Superintendent of Sewers, with written
notice to the Public Works Director in advance of the connections.
   B.   In the unincorporated area of the county. Connections to the sewage
disposal system, either directly or indirectly, in the unincorporated area must
be authorized by the Public Works Director in advance of the connections.
   C.   Connections to interceptors. Connections of service laterals directly
to the interceptor system shall not be permitted.
   D.   Connections to sewers. Where existing service laterals have been
provided, the customer shall pay the entire expense of connection to the
facilities within his or her property. Where service laterals have not been
provided, the customer shall be responsible for payment of all costs of the
connection from the sewer to the facilities within his or her property. All the
connections shall be subject to inspection by authorized personnel of the
governmental agency having jurisdiction. In addition, the customer shall pay
all connection and construction charges, if any.
   E.   Service availability from existing systems. Sewer service to any
structure upon any given property shall only be rendered from city-owned sewers
in public rights-of-way abutting the property. The determination as to the
availability of service from existing facilities shall be at the sole
discretion of the Public Works Director. The city shall have the right to
require extensions of its facilities for proper service or to require the
permanent legal agreements which the city deems necessary in order to carry out
the intent of this section.
(Ord. 121, passed 12-4-1979) Penalty, see
Article 1-8
§ 12-5-6 AGREEMENTS OR CONTRACTS FOR SERVICE.
   A.   With water service application. Applications for sewage disposal
service are automatic when sewage disposal service is available to the
property.
   B.   New sanitary sewer service installations. Agreements or contracts for
sewage disposal service are effective 30 days after the installation of a new
sewer abutting the property within the city.
   C.   Large-volume sewage disposal agreements. Sewage disposal service on a
volume basis may be obtained by means of cost-sharing arrangements outlined in
contractual agreements with the city.
   D.   Developer agreements. Agreements for the provision of sewage disposal
service for new properties requiring the construction of sewer facilities
shall, upon request by a developer, be prepared by the Public Works Director.
(See §
12-5-8B.) Final zoning approval of a property must be obtained prior to the
city's preparation of the agreement.
   E.   Limitation or use. In no case shall a customer extend his or her
plumbing across a street, alley, lane, court, avenue or other highway, or
property line without unity of title, in order to furnish service for adjacent
property through one service lateral, even though the adjacent property is
owned by him or her. In case of the unauthorized connection, the customer's
service shall be subject to discontinuance until the unauthorized connection
has been discontinued and full payment has been made of all bills for service,
calculated under proper classifications and rate schedules, and until
reimbursement in full has been made to the city for all extra expenses incurred
for clerical work, testing, and inspections.
(Ord. 121, passed 12-4-1979) Penalty, see
Article 1-8
§ 12-5-7 CONTINUITY OF SERVICE.
   The city will at all times use reasonable diligence to provide continuous
service and, having used reasonable diligence, will not be liable to the
customer for failure or interruption of service. The city will not be liable
for any act or omission caused directly or indirectly by strikes, labor
troubles, accidents, litigation, shutdowns for repairs or adjustments,
interference by governmental agencies, failures of electric power, acts of God,
or other causes beyond its control.
(Ord. 121, passed 12-4-1979)
§ 12-5-8 EXTENSIONS.
   A.   Planned extensions. The city may from time to time, through the
creation by the county of special taxing districts or by other means, plan
sewer extensions in specific areas of the county. The costs of these extensions
and terms of payment may be set forth individually by county ordinance or
resolution.
   B.   Sewer extensions other than planned extensions. Where properties are to
be served by extensions which are not planned extensions, sewer facilities
shall be extended on the following basis.
      1.   Application (by developers or others). An application shall be
required for extension of sewer service under the provisions hereof, and shall
be in writing and signed by the developer or developers desiring city sewer
service. The application shall be filed with the Public Works Director and
shall include a legal description of the property and shall indicate the name,
street address, lot and block number, and the street frontage of each site,
along with the proposed usage. Each applicant shall agree to connect to and use
the city sewer service for his or her property. No sewers, or connections to
sewers, will be extended until the charges for sewer service, as further
outlined, have been provided for.
      2.   Processing of application. Upon receipt by the Public Works Director
of a proper application requesting a sewer main extension, it will be evaluated
and, if not feasible, returned with the proper explanation. If feasible, the
cost to the developer will be estimated and submitted to the developer for
consideration. If the developer decides to proceed further with the project and
final zoning of the project has been approved, at the developer's request, the
Public Works Director shall prepare and submit an agreement specifying all
terms and conditions for service and related costs to the developer.
      3.   Basis of payment for extensions. The cost to the developer shall be
the payment of the connection charges and construction costs as further
outlined. The allocation of costs for oversizing sewers and rebates in regard
to off-site sewers are outlined in §
12-5-9E. and H.
      4.   Sewer extended past property line. Each developer may be required to
extend one sewer line to an upstream limit of his or her property which will
terminate at an upstream manhole determined by the Public Works Director with
respect to the complete system, rather than at the end of the particular
extension requested. At the discretion of the Public Works Director, temporary
cleanouts at the property line may be allowed in lieu of extension to a
proposed manhole location. The charges or costs to the developer will include
the cost of sewer to the upstream property line of the development.
   C.   Right to refuse service. The city shall have the right at all times to
refuse to extend service on the basis of a use detrimental to the sewer system,
lack of payment of required fees, or for any reason which, in the opinion of
the Public Works Director, will cause the extension not to be in the public
interest. No payment of any costs, submitting of any petition, or any other act
to receive sewer service shall guarantee sewer service.
(Ord. 121, passed 12-4-1979)
§ 12-5-9 CONSTRUCTION OF SEWERS; CONNECTIONS.
   A.   Sewer construction by developer. Sewers to be constructed by the
developer or his or her contractor shall be constructed in accordance with the
following provisions.
      1.   Plat approval. In the case of subdivisions, the application shall be
accompanied by two copies of a recorded plat, or, in the case of a new
subdivision, an approved tentative plat, or preferably a master tentative plat
or a large scale development plan plus a plan showing location of proposed
sewer extensions.
      2.   Other governmental approval. Prior to final acceptance, all the
sewer extensions shall be approved by the appropriate state agencies and the
County Department of Public Health.
      3.   Materials and construction standards. All materials and labor shall
meet the specifications currently required by the city. All construction shall
be performed under the inspection of the city and in strict compliance with the
standards of the city and either city or county public works manuals, whichever
is applicable.
      4.   Costs. The developer will pay all connection charges and
construction costs prior to connecting to the city's system, unless otherwise
specified in an agreement between the developer and the city. Construction cost
will be the cost of sewer lines of sufficient capacity to collect the sewage in
the proposed development and transport it to the nearest adequately-sized city
sewer. Connection charges are defined in §
12-5-12 hereinafter.
      5.   Oversizing. The city reserves the right to oversize any extension
and will pay for the oversizing on the basis of additional costs beyond that
necessary to serve only the subject development. The city will pay an
established unit amount based upon the pipe size of a facility multiplied by
the length of that facility. The established unit amount will be determined by
the Public Works Director based on the flow requirements of the developer and
the city's study of current construction costs. The city will credit the
developer for the cost of the city's share of oversized sewers and this credit
will be in the form of a reduction of the connection charge or a cash payment
if the connection charge is more than offset. The city also reserves the right
to limit the amount of its participation in the cost of oversizing, depending
on current economic conditions or other factors. The rates of credit related to
the difference in diameter between the pipe required for the developer's
project and the pipe required by the city to be installed are specified as
follows:
 
Pipe Size Difference in Inches Credit per Inch Diameter per Lineal Foot
Force Mains
8 and greater                  $1.35
Gravity Sewer Mains
8 and greater                  $1.50
 
      6.   Maintenance bond. Sewers installed under this section shall become
part of the city's system; however, before acceptance, a contract bond,
approved by the City Council, equal in the amount of 100% of the construction
cost shall be required to guarantee all work and materials for a period of one
year after acceptance by the city. Terms and conditions of the bond must meet
the city's standards.
      7.   Construction permit. A permit for construction must be obtained by
the developer from the appropriate governmental agency.
      8.   Repayment policy. In those cases where a developer does not utilize
all of the capacity of a sewer extension he or she has paid for and which has
not been oversized, others may connect into it. The city will make every effort
to collect applicable construction connection charges from those others and
make repayments to the developer, but shall only be liable for moneys
collected. The connection charge is specified in division A.9. of this section.
A developer shall not be repaid sums in excess of his or her original
investment, less his or her use, in the sewer extension. The repayment shall
only be made during an eight-year period commencing with the date of an
executed agreement between the developer and the city for sewer service.
      9.   Construction connection charge. The construction connection charge
shall be as per §
12-5-2. The period of the repayment is limited to eight years from the date of
the initial execution of the developer agreement with the Authority.
   B.   Public easement required. No sewer facility will be installed under the
provisions outlined herein and accepted by the city for operation and
maintenance, unless it is in a public right-of-way or easement with a minimum
width of 12 feet. Conveyance of all easements shall be by a separate document
in recordable form to be approved by the city and shall be accompanied by a
written certification by an attorney licensed to practice law in the state that
the developer is the owner in fee simple of the property to be conveyed by the
easements and that, upon its execution by the developer, a valid and
enforceable easement in the developer's property will be vested in the city. No
sewer facilities to be owned and operated by the city shall be installed under
any building or appurtenance thereto.
   C.   Conveyance and ownership. All sewer facilities and appurtenances to be
owned by the city shall be conveyed to the city by proper bill of sale
immediately after the city's acceptance, in writing, of the construction of the
system. The developer shall also provide copies of paid bills and/or lien
waivers, releases, or satisfactions, together with a breakdown of the actual
cost of the facilities. Concurrently with the documents required above, the
developer shall furnish the city with one set of Mylar and electronic as-built
drawings showing specific locations, depths, elevations to be on city elevation
datum, and the like of all sewer facilities and appurtenances. When accepted
and properly conveyed to the city for ownership, maintenance, and operation,
the facilities shall become and remain the property of the Authority, and no
person shall by the payment of any charges provided for herein, or by causing
any construction of facilities accepted by the city, acquire any interest or
right in any of these facilities, or any portion thereof, other than the
privilege to have his or her property connected thereto for sewer service in
accordance with these procedures and regulations.
   D.   Minimum size, velocity, and length of gravity sewers.
      1.   The minimum size of plumbing shall be as regulated by the Building
Code.
      2.   The minimum size of a service lateral shall be four inches in
diameter for a single-family residence and six inches in diameter for all
others.
      3.   The minimum size of all other sewer lines shall be eight inches in
diameter.
      4.   The maximum infiltration or exfiltration rate shall not exceed 200
gallons per day per inch diameter per mile of pipe.
      5.   The minimum design velocity in gravity sewers shall be two feet per
second.
      6.   The minimum depth of cut to invert shall be three feet for service
laterals and four feet for main line sewers.
      7.   The minimum inside diameters of sewer manholes shall be 23 inches
for the cover frame opening and 48 inches at the base.
      8.   New gravity sewers shall discharge into existing gravity sewers
where possible. In the event that a pumping station is required, the design of
the tributary gravity system shall be such as to permit the present or future
extension of the system's gravity service area to the maximum practical extent.
To this end, the depth to invert at the pumping stations shall be in the range
of 12 to 14 feet and shall permit extension of gravity lines not less than one-
half mile. New force mains shall discharge into existing force mains.
      9.   The design and layout of the system shall be subject to approval by
the Public Works Director as to conformance with city standards and its master
sewer plan. The developer shall include provisions required by the city to
carry out the intent of the master planning and will be reimbursed for the
additional cost of oversized facilities.
   E.   Approvals. No sewer extension will be accepted by the city without the
approvals of the Public Works Director and the appropriate state agency and the
City Engineer.
   F.   Unauthorized work on sewer system. No person shall tamper with, work
on, uncover, make connection with, or in any way alter or damage any city sewer
or sewer appurtenance without written permission of the Public Works Director
or his or her appointed representative. Further, no unauthorized person shall
cause storm water, ground water, or any other unauthorized water or material to
enter the sanitary sewer system, including sanitary sewage from septic tank
trucks. This shall include the tying of downspouts or air-conditioning
condensate lines into the sewer system, raising of manhole lids to allow for
drainage, the dumping of garbage, refuse, or other wastes in manholes, the
draining of swimming pools into sewers, or any other means of causing or
allowing any substance not considered sanitary sewage, or not legally paid for
as sanitary sewage, to enter the sewer system. The offending person shall pay
the total cost of all charges attributable to the tampering and be subject to
all penalties as may be provided by law.
   G.   Common house connections. A single connection serving two or more
properties will not be permitted. In no case will common plumbing to two or
more lots or parcels be allowed.
   H.   Extent of city maintenance. The city shall not be responsible for the
repair and maintenance of house connections to the service laterals, nor for
privately-owned pumping stations, force mains, and sewers. The city shall be
responsible only for the repair and maintenance of all public sewers, pumping
stations, and force mains in the city's system and shall make a diligent effort
to inspect and keep these facilities in good repair.
   I.   Customer's maintenance.
      1.   The customer shall be responsible for the maintenance of the
plumbing from the connection at the service lateral into and including the
house plumbing, if a common lateral is utilized for two adjacent properties. If
a single lateral is utilized exclusively for one property, the customer shall
be responsible for keeping the service lateral, in addition to the plumbing,
free from obstructions. In either case, the city shall have the right to
inspect the house connection and plumbing and to discontinue water service to
any customer or property owner who fails to maintain the plumbing to the extent
that it may or does cause harm to the sewer facilities.
      2.   In the case of municipally- or privately-owned utilities, the city's
responsibility for the cost of maintenance ends at the point of connection to
the city system. The city retains all rights to insist on proper maintenance of
these facilities and to exclude infiltration and/or harmful wastes by the
owners.
   J.   Connection to sewer required. For the better protection of the health
and convenience of the inhabitants, all persons owning real property adjoining
streets and alleys in which there are sewer pipes and mains of the sewer
system, and persons owning, leasing, or using real property or buildings or
fixtures thereon which can be served by sewers, shall cause to be connected all
privies, cesspools, and open and unconnected drains with the sewer system
within 90 days after receipt of verbal or written notice by the city.
(Ord. 121, passed 12-4-1979) Penalty, see
Article 1-8
§ 12-5-10 REGULATION OF DISCHARGES.
   A.   Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to establish rules and
regulations concerning discharges to the system, including the determination of
the acceptability or unacceptability of discharges, the pretreatment of
discharges, and establishing specific limitations on certain discharges.
   B.   Access to premises for inspection of discharge; inspection chamber may
be required. The Director shall at all times have free access to the premises
of any user of its facilities, and free access to the premises of any person
reasonably believed by the Director to be a user or possible user of its
facilities, for the purpose of inspecting, sampling, or testing the discharge
emanating therefrom, or any discharge which may emanate therefrom in order to
determine whether the discharge, or potential discharge, is acceptable or
unacceptable to the city. Where necessary, the Director may require the owner
of any premises which discharges to the system to install a suitable inspection
chamber, together with any necessary meters and other appurtenances in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the
discharge, or potential discharge. The chambers, when required, shall be
constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Director. The chamber
shall be installed at the owner's expense and shall be maintained by him or her
so as to be safe and assessable at all times.
   C.   Acceptability or unacceptability of discharge; determination by Public
Works Director. The Director shall determine the acceptability or
unacceptability of any discharge to the system. The determination shall be made
on the basis of sound engineering and operational evaluations taking into
consideration the nature and concentration of the discharge, its point of entry
into the system, its compatibility with other discharges in the system, its
compatibility with the treatment facility receiving it, and all other factors
pertinent to the effect of the discharge on any part of the system or treatment
process.
   D.   Unacceptable discharges. Unacceptable discharges shall include, but not
necessarily be limited to, those which have been determined by the Director to:
      1.   Contain materials or substances which would constitute a hazard to
life and limb of personnel engaged in inspection, maintenance, and operation of
the system;
      2.   Contain materials or substances which are toxic, as defined in §
12-5-1;
      3.   Contain materials or substances which are in any way deleterious to
any part of the system;
      4.   Contain concentrations of any toxic or deleterious materials or
substances in excess of any limits set thereon in accordance with these
regulations;
      5.   Cause the city to incur excessive expense in the handling or
treatment thereof;
      6.   Be incompatible with the treatment process or inhibit the
performance of the treatment process at a city treatment facility;
      7.   Be of such volume or contain such BOD, suspended solids, or other
material load which could cause the treatment facility to exceed its design
capabilities;
      8.   Cause a treatment facility of the city to fail to meet effluent
requirements set by state and federal regulatory agencies or cause the effluent
to have a degrading effect on the receiving body of water;
      9.   Contain viable pathogenic organisms in quantities as to be a hazard
to public health; and/or
      10.   Cause a treatment facility of the city to fail to meet effluent
requirements as established under the city's operation permit for its sewage
treatment plants.
   E.   Unacceptable discharges; refusal of service. The Director may refuse
the service of the city's facilities to any person whose discharge is
determined by the Director to be unacceptable in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter.
   F.   Unacceptable discharges; pretreatment permitted. Any person whose
discharge has been determined by the Director to be unacceptable in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter may apply to the Director for permission to
pretreat the discharge by the use of a method of pretreatment designed to
render the discharge acceptable.
   G.   Acceptable methods of pretreatment; review by Public Works Director;
refusal of pretreatment method. The acceptability of a pretreatment method for
any given discharge, an application for which has been made in accordance with
these regulations, and the terms for the installation and use thereof shall be
reviewed by the Director. The review shall be made on the basis of sound
engineering and operational evaluations taking into consideration all factors
pertinent to the effect of the discharge both before and after pretreatment on
any part of the system. The federal pretreatment regulations, 40 C.F.R. pt.
403, shall be enforced as applicable.
   H.   Inspection of pretreatment facilities by Public Works Director.
Pretreatment facilities shall at all times be subject to inspection by the
Director in order to determine if the facilities are efficiently performing the
function for which they are installed.
   I.   Cost of pretreatment to be borne by user. All costs incident to
pretreatment and all expenses incident to the acquisition, installation,
operation, maintenance, and repair of pretreatment facilities shall be borne by
the user. In addition, any extraordinary administrative or investigative
expenses incurred by the city as a result of the installation and use of
pretreatment facilities shall be charged to the user.
   J.   Discharge of certain materials and substances prohibited. No person
shall release or cause to be released, or allow to run, leak, or escape into
the Authority's sewerage system, any discharge containing any materials or
substances considered by the Public Works Director to be toxic, as defined in §
12-5-1, or to be in any way deleterious to any part of the Authority's sewerage
system or treatment process. Certain materials shall by their nature be
considered by the Public Works Director to be toxic or deleterious, except in
small quantities or concentrations. The materials or substances shall include,
but not necessarily be limited to:
      1.   Construction materials, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings,
metals, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastic, wood, paunch manure, fur, wax, or
any solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in
sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewerage system;
      2.   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquids, solids, or gases;
      3.   Steam or hot water above 150°F (65°C);
      4.   Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l, or containing substances which may
solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 33°F and 150°F (1°C and
65°C);
      5.   Any water or wastes having a pH lower than five and one-half or
higher than ten, or having any other corrosive property apt to cause damage or
hazard to structures, equipment of the sewerage system, or personnel employed
in its operations;
      6.   Any water or waste containing readily-releasable cyanide (cyanide
released at a temperature of 150°F (65°C) and pH = two and one-half) in excess
of two mg/l; any water or waste containing total cyanide in excess of five mg/
l;
      7.   Coal tar and its derivatives and waste; and/or
      8.   Any liquids or wastes containing toxic or poisonous substances in
sufficient quantities or rate of flow as to injure or interfere with any of the
sewage treatment process, to constitute a hazard to human beings or animals, or
to create any hazard in the receiving waters.
   K.   Discharge of certain materials permitted conditionally.
      1.   Certain toxic substances and pathogenic bacteria, admission of which
into the system would otherwise be prohibited, shall be acceptable in a
discharge if they are:
         a.   Reduced by treatment at the source to a point that will meet the
general purposes of these rules and regulations or come within any applicable
standards set thereon now or hereafter in accordance with these regulations; or
         b.   Discharged in such small concentrations so as to not be injurious
to personnel, sewers, any biochemical, biological, or other sewage treatment
process, or receiving waters.
      2.   The substances shall include, but not necessarily be limited to:
         a.   Any alcohols, antibiotics, arsenic, arsenicals, bromine, iodine,
chlorine, copper, copper salts, cresols, creosotes, fluorine, formaldehydes,
mercury, mercuricals, phenols, phenol derivatives, silver, silver compounds,
silvermides, toxic dyes (organic and mineral), or zinc;
         b.   Any strong oxidizing agents such as chromates, dichromates,
permanganates, or peroxides;
         c.   Any chemical compounds producing toxic, flammable, or explosive
gases, either upon acidification, alkalization, oxidation, or reduction;
         d.   Any strong reducing agents such as nitrates, sulphides, sulfites,
and thiosulphates; and/or
         e.   Any waste from industrial processes, hospital procedures, or
commercial processes containing viable pathogenic organisms.
   L.   Specific limitations on certain materials and substances in discharges;
compatibility with regulatory agency requirements.
      1.   Table A lists the maximum allowable values for certain materials in,
or characteristics of, wastewater entering the city's sewerage systems. The
city reserves the right to establish standards for substances not contained in
this list. In setting additional standards, the city will generally follow the
standards of the Water Pollution Control Federation. In defining and
interpreting the values in Table A, reference shall be made to Standard Methods
for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, American Water Works Association,
latest edition.
Table A
Material or Characteristic Maximum Allowable Value
Table A
Material or Characteristic Maximum Allowable Value
Boron                      1.0 ppm
Chromium, total            10.0 ppm
Copper                     10.0 ppm
Cyanides                   2.0 ppm
Cadmium                    2.0 ppm
Lead                       0.1 ppm
Mercury                    2.0 ppm
Nickel                     10.0 ppm
Zinc                       10.0 ppm
Iron                       25.0 ppm
Phenols                    0.5 ppm
BOD                        210.0 ppm
Suspended Solids           210.0 ppm
pH                         5.5—10
Temperature                150°F
 
      2.   The above limitations are intended to apply generally to all
industrial users within the city's sewerage system. If and when state or
federal regulatory agency regulations require a specific pretreatment
concentration for a specific industry, whichever is the more stringent
concentration level between these regulations and those regulations will apply.
   M.   Discharges containing ground garbage; approval of certain size grinders
required. Any discharge to the city's sewerage system containing garbage may be
made acceptable by means of grinding and dilution, provided, however, that the
installation of and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of
three-fourths horsepower (0.76 h.p. metric) or greater shall be subject to
review and approval by the Public Works Director prior to the installation and
operation and to periodic inspection by the city thereafter.
   N.   Discharges containing acids and bases; neutralization required. Any
water or wastes which are unacceptable pursuant to these regulations shall be
neutralized, diluted, or subjected to some other acceptable method of
pretreatment in order to render it acceptable to the city, in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter, prior to its discharge to the system. If
necessary, the use of automatically operating, diluting, or neutralization and
monitoring equipment shall be required. If, upon neutralization, the discharge
is sufficiently high in ionic strength as to continue to be unacceptable,
further pretreatment shall be required.
   O.   Discharge of odors; control by owner required. It shall at all times be
the responsibility of the owner to eliminate or control the emission of
offensive odors from building sewers to the system or the development of
offensive odors in the system as the result of a discharge. Whenever the
Director determines that offensive odors emanating from building sewers or
resulting from a discharge are present in the system, he or she shall require
the owner to take whatever steps are necessary to eliminate the odors from the
system. The cost of any devices which may be necessary to eliminate or control
the odors and all attendant expenses shall be borne by the owner.
   P.   Prevention of accidental release of unacceptable substances. There
shall be no connection to the system from any vessel, tank, container, or
receptacle of any kind used to receive, hold, store, or in any other way handle
any toxic or deleterious materials or substances, the discharge of which is
prohibited by these regulations through which quantities of the materials or
substances could accidentally or otherwise be discharged directly or indirectly
into the system. Persons who in the course of their business or otherwise
transport, store, receive, ship, or in any other way handle or process any such
materials or substances shall take precautions to prevent accidental spillage
of the substances to any connection to the system by way of floor drains,
basins, catch basins, downspouts, gutters, manholes, or any other such
connection. Whenever the Director determines that accidental spillage has
occurred through any connection to the system as described above, he or she
shall require the owner to eliminate the connection.
   Q.   Accidental release of unacceptable discharge; notification; charges. In
the event of any accidental release to the system of any unacceptable discharge
or of any substances or materials considered by the Public Works Director to be
toxic or deleterious, as provided in this chapter, it shall be the
responsibility of the user to notify the Public Works Director immediately, and
in no case later than one hour following such a discharge, so that remedial
action can be taken. Costs incurred to correct any damage resulting from such a
discharge shall be charged to the user and failure to report the discharge
shall result in an additional charge of $1,500 in addition to costs of
correction. Each discharge shall be considered separately and costs and charges
levied accordingly. Each day on which there is such a discharge shall be and is
hereby deemed to be a separate discharge and charges shall be levied
accordingly. The charges shall be collected by the city in the same manner as
all other charges set by the city.
   R.   Special agreements; application to district. Whenever necessary or
expedient in order to carry out the provisions of these regulations, the Public
Works Director may enter into special agreements with users of the city's
facilities setting forth terms under which the discharge of the users will be
acceptable to the city. The agreements shall be made only in accordance with an
application therefor made to the Board of Review pursuant to these regulations.
   S.   Discharge of unpolluted water where storm sewer is available. Whenever
separate storm and sanitary sewers are provided, required, or in use in any
area of the city, all unpolluted water, including all storm water, surface
water, ground water, roof runoff, uncontaminated cooling water, subsurface
drainage, or unpolluted industrial process water, shall be discharged to the
storm sewer. Whenever in such areas any such unpolluted water is found to be
discharged to sanitary sewer, the Director shall require the discharge to be
connected to the storm sewer at the expense of the user.
   T.   Appeal from determination regarding discharge. Any industrial user
whose discharge has been determined by the Director to be unacceptable in
accordance with these regulations or who disagrees with any other determination
of the Director hereunder may apply to the City Common Council for a review
thereof in accordance with these regulations.
   U.   Failure to comply with discharge regulations; charges. Any failure to
comply with any provision of this chapter shall result in an additional charge
against the person or premises so failing to comply in the amount of $500. In
addition, the person or premises shall be liable for any damages which occur to
the system as a result of the failure to comply with any provision of these
regulations, and each such failure to comply shall be and is hereby deemed to
be a distinct and separate failure and charges shall be applied accordingly.
The charges shall be collected by the city in the same manner as all other
charges set by the city.
(Ord. 121, passed 12-4-1979) Penalty, see
Article 1-8
§ 12-5-11 BILLING PROCEDURES.
   A.   Applicability. This section applies only to customers served directly
by sewage disposal plants operated by the city, except where special rates are
provided in acquisition of other utilities. Charges and deposits for other
customers are governed by the special rate schedules in effect in their area.
   B.   Billing periods; due date. Bills for sewage disposal service will be
rendered monthly in connection with water bills.
   C.   Sewer charges. Each bill for sewage disposal service rendered to the
customers on the sewer system of the city shall be based upon a user charge as
per current fees adopted by the city. The volume of sewage flow and the charges
shall be as determined by §
12-5-12.
   D.   Guarantee deposits.
      1.   Upon opening an account, a minimum guarantee deposit as set forth in
§
13-1-1 shall be paid by each residential user at the time of making application
for service.
      2.   Any new user having sewage disposal service available to three or
more dwelling units or for operation of a place of business shall pay a
deposit, which shall be equal to approximately one and one-third times the
actual billing, with a minimum of $10.
      3.   Governmental agencies, churches, synagogues, and recognized
charitable agencies and public utilities having reciprocal agreements with the
city are not required to pay guarantee deposits.
      4.   The guarantee deposit is required as security for payment of the
customer's sewer bill. It is refundable to the customer upon termination of
service.
   E.   Delinquent bills.
      1.   Bills are due and late penalties assessed as set forth in §
13-1-1. Upon termination of service, the guarantee deposit shall be applied to
the outstanding bill for that customer and a final statement shall be rendered
showing the balance due.
      2.   Service shall not be reinstituted until the final statement is paid
in full and the user makes application for service and pays the guarantee
deposit at the then established rate, as provided hereinabove.
      3.   A user's water service shall be discontinued and no new application
shall be accepted at any new location when there remains an outstanding final
statement for unpaid sewer service at any previous location.
      4.   Sewer service, as such, will not be discontinued under any normal
circumstances. However, in cases where discontinuance is required for any
reason, including, but not limited to, nonpayment, the city shall instead
discontinue the water service.
(Ord. 121, passed 12-4-1979)
§ 12-5-12 RATES AND CHARGES.
   A.   Monthly rates. The monthly rates to be charged and collected by the
Sewer Department for services provided are hereby fixed as follows:
 
Monthly Sewer Service Rates
Class              Rate Amount; Type
A.    Residentia$34.79 - Flat rate
B.    Multi-Fami$21.00 - Meter charge
                   $13.09 - Per unit fee
C.    Commercial$15.90 - Base fee
                   $2.69 (per 1,000 gallons)
 
   B.   Sewer connection fees. All connections to the city's sewer system
requiring the use of a four-inch pipe or less shall pay a connection fee of
$200. For connections requiring the use of six-inch and eight-inch pipes, a
connection fee(s) of $400 and $600 respectively, will be charged.
   C.   Inspection fees for new construction. Under the supervision of the
Public Works Director, a physical inspection will be conducted to ensure that
connections are properly installed. An inspection fee of $50 shall be charged.
   D.   Other charges.
      1.   Turn-off and turn-on fees. Where property is serviced with city
water, there will be no turn-off and turn-on fee, as such, for sewer service.
However, to enforce these procedures and regulations, water service may be
discontinued and the existing charges for water service turn-on and turn-off
shall prevail. In this regard, water service may be turned off due to an
infraction of these rules and regulations and will not be turned on until the
time as the infraction is corrected and all costs due the city are paid.
      2.   Miscellaneous charges. Miscellaneous charges shall be made for any
work done by the city beyond normal maintenance or extension charges as
outlined previously. This work, which will include such items as moving
connections, relocating manholes, or any other work done at the property
owner's request for the benefit of the property owner, shall be charged for at
direct cost plus appropriate overhead. Payment in full for the estimated cost
will be required prior to doing this type of work with appropriate refunds, if
any, when the work is completed. Work will not commence until a written
understanding between the parties has been executed.
      3.   Temporary emergency treatment rates. In cases where a customer
desires to use any portion of the sewers or sewage treatment facilities for
disposal of sewage on a temporary basis, and is not properly connected to the
sewer system, he or she may apply for the service through the Authority which
will compute the costs and require payment in full prior to the use of the
system. Should this service be desired on a permanent basis, a proper charge
will be estimated and an agreement establishing terms and costs shall be
entered into between the city and the customer using the service. It is the
intent of the city to discourage this type of service, except in the case of
municipalities and private utilities, and to this end the city reserves the
right to refuse to accept and also to discontinue this type of service.
      4.   Tax clause. All of the city's rates, including minimum and other
charges and service guarantees, are dependent upon federal, state, county,
municipal, district, and other governmental taxes, license fees, and other
impositions, and may be increased or a surcharge added if and when any or all
of the taxes, license fees, and other impositions are imposed or increased.
   E.   Credit for sewage disposal charge for water not entering sewer system.
Where water used for lawn sprinkling, gardening, or commercial-industrial
purposes does not enter the sanitary sewer system, relief from payment of the
sewage disposal service charge on the presently-metered total water consumption
has been provided for as follows.
      1.   Water submeter. A customer may install on his or her metered water
line, at his or her own expense and subject to the inspection by the Authority,
a submeter to measure the water which does not enter the sewer system. The
sewage disposal service charge will be billed on the difference in consumption
between the two meters, provided, however, that the credit to be given shall
not reduce the sewage disposal service charge to an amount less than the
required minimum charge.
      2.   Sewage meter. A customer may install, at his or her own expense and
subject to the approval of the Public Works Director, a specially designed and
constructed sewage meter for accurately measuring all sewage discharged from
the premises.
      3.   Separate water meter. A customer may have installed by the city, at
his or her own expense, a separate metered connection with the water main to
measure the water which does not get into the sewer system. The bill for water
used through the connection will not include the sewage disposal service
charge.
      4.   Affidavit for non-use. A customer may file (between July 1 and
October 1 of each year) a notarized affidavit on the form prescribed by the
city stating that water was used regularly for sprinkling or for other purposes
that did not enter the sewer system during the preceding fiscal year (July 1
through June 30). Upon verification by a representative of the city, the
customer shall receive a credit equal to 3% of the total amount of the sewage
disposal service paid by the customer during the preceding year, provided,
however, that the credit to be given shall not reduce the sewage disposal
service charge to an amount less than the required minimum charge.
(Ord. 121, passed 12-4-1979; Ord. 186, passed 2-21-1989; Res. 2008-042, passed
12-16-2008)
Cross-reference:
   Billing time frame and late penalties; trailer parks, see
Art. 13-1
   Responsibility for connection expenses beyond city's control, see §
12-6-10
§ 12-5-13 PERMITS.
   A.   Any person desiring to deposit or discharge, or who is now depositing
or discharging, any industrial waste into the sanitary sewers shall make
application for the disposal of industrial waste to the Public Works Director.
The Public Works Director shall approve the applications only when evidence is
submitted by the applicant that the discharge into the sanitary sewer will
comply with all of the requirements of this code.
   B.   Should any person fail to secure a permit or fail to have his or her or
its application approved, or is subsequently found to be exceeding the limits
set forth in his or her or its permit, the city officer in charge of the sewer
system's operation, upon 24-hour notice, if the person is using city water,
shall disconnect the person's connection with the city water system, and the
same will only be reconnected at the owner's expense. If the person, after 24
hours notice, shall have his or her connection with the city sewer system
severed, the services will only be restored at the person's expense.
(Ord. 121, passed 12-4-1979)
§ 12-5-14 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS.
   The Council may from time to time, by resolution, prescribe any additional
regulations and requirements governing connections to and the use of the sewer
system as may be proper or expedient.
(Ord. 121, passed 12-4-1979)
ARTICLE 12-6: WATER SERVICE
Section
   
12-6-1   Definitions
   
12-6-2   Classes of water service available
   
12-6-3   Request for service
   
12-6-4   Agreements or contracts for service
   
12-6-5   Continuity of service
   
12-6-6   Extensions to the distribution system
   
12-6-7   Construction of water mains; connections
   
12-6-8   Connections for service and meters; service connection fees
   
12-6-9   Billing procedures
   
12-6-10   Rates and charges
   
12-6-11   Penalties
   
12-6-12   Additional regulations
§ 12-6-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPLICATION. The written instrument by which a developer or a customer
applies for water service of any sort.
   APPROVING AUTHORITY (AUTHORITY). The City Manager or his or her designated
representative.
   CONNECTION CHARGES. Shall consist of a service charge that includes corp
stop, service line, curb stop, meter, meter box and lid.
   CONSTRUCTION COST. The cost to a developer, less the city oversizing costs,
if any, described herein, for the design and construction of all facilities as
required to serve the developer's property and to connect to the city's water.
   CONSULTING ENGINEERS. The engineer or engineering firm or corporation
responsible for design of facilities.
   COUNTY. The County of Yuma, Arizona.
   CUSTOMER or CONSUMER. Any individual, corporation, partnership, firm, or
association receiving water service from the city for consumption or usage
within its premises.
   CUSTOMER'S INSTALLATION. All pipes, shut-offs, valves, fixtures, and
appliances or apparatus of every kind and nature used in connection with or
forming a part of an installation for utilizing portable water for any purpose,
ordinarily located on the customer's side of the "point of delivery," whether
the installation is owned outright by the customer or is used by the customer
under lease or otherwise.
   DEVELOPER. Any individual, corporation, partnership, firm, or association
developing a property or properties for resale, rental, or lease, at or to
which water service is to be rendered by the city. Where applicable, any
individual, corporation, partnership, firm, or association applying for the
extension of water main or mains in order to serve a certain property.
   DIRECTOR. The executive officer of the Public Works Department.
   EXTENSION. An eight-inch or larger pipe line added to an existing water main
of the city for the purpose of serving one or more customers. All EXTENSIONS
shall be within a public right-of-way or an easement.
   FIRE HYDRANT ASSEMBLY. The assembly shall include the pipe, isolating
valves, fittings, and hydrant proper beyond the bell outlet (or mechanical
joint) of the tee on the city distribution main.
   FIRE LINES. The pipe, isolating valves, detection check valve, and fittings
of the city which extend from the main to the fire line pipes of the customer
and which are used for supplying water exclusively for fire protection
purposes.
   FRONTAGE. The actual width, normally expressed in feet, of a property in
respect to a street or avenue but without relation to the front, side, or rear
of any structure located on the property along which the proposed water main is
installed. In the case of the corner lot, FRONTAGE is calculated as the longer
of the sides involved. For irregularly-shaped lots or acreage, FRONTAGE will be
calculated by taking the square root of the number of square feet of property
involved.
   GUARANTEE DEPOSIT. The amount placed with the city by each customer as
security for payment of the water bill.
   METER. The measuring device purchased, owned, and installed by the city for
use on a service line or fire line for the purpose of accurately measuring
water used by a customer.
   MONTH. The time interval between successive meter reading dates when service
is rendered upon a monthly basis, which interval may be 30 days, more or less.
   OFF-SITE MAINS. Water mains totally outside a development.
   ON-SITE MAINS. Water mains in streets or rights-of-way, or easements totally
within a development, and those mains in peripheral streets constructed for use
by that development.
   OVERSIZED MAIN. A water main extension in, through, or past a development
which, because of future extensions or other reasons, is larger than required
for the immediate development to be served.
   PLANNED EXTENSION. Future water main extensions scheduled by the Authority
with special provisions for payments therefor.
   PLUMBING. All pipes, fittings, and appurtenances on the property owner's
side of the water meter.
   POINT OF DELIVERY OR CONNECTION. The point where the pipe or meter is
connected with the pipe of the customer, and where water service to the
customer begins.
   PROPERTY OWNER. The record title holder of premises served or to be served
with a water connection by the city.
   REIMBURSEMENT CHARGE. A charge payable to the city for use of oversized
mains for which installation was paid for by other parties such as the city or
through funds advanced from other customers.
   SERVICE. Service shall include, in addition to all water delivered to the
customer, the readiness and ability on the part of the city to furnish water to
the customer on demand. Thus, the maintenance of water pressure at the point of
delivery by the city shall constitute the rendering of SERVICE, irrespective of
whether the customer makes any use thereof.
   SERVICE CHARGE. The charge established for the water supplied by the city to
the customer.
   SERVICE CONNECTION. The physical connection made between each city-owned
water meter and the customer's plumbing.
   SERVICE LINES. The pipes of the city which extend from the water main to the
meter, including the corporation stop on the water main, the curb stop at the
meter, and the meter box.
   WATER IMPACT FEE. A charge for the proposed usage of the city water supply
treatment plant based on the service meter size, paid by a developer or a
customer for utilizing portions of the city water supply treatment plant
capacity funded by the city and held in a special fund or funds to be utilized
solely to defray the cost of new facilities to the extent that new usage
requires new facilities.
   WATER MAIN. The water pipe or pipes in any specific city development owned
or to be owned by the city to which service lines may be connected. The minimum
standard size of WATER MAINS is eight inches in diameter.
(Ord. 175, passed 1-18-1988)
§ 12-6-2 CLASSES OF WATER SERVICE AVAILABLE.
   The city renders water service of four general classes.
   A.   Domestic water service. This service covers the normal use of water in
faucets, sinks, baths, urinals, toilets, water heaters, boilers, refrigerators,
and other similar fixtures or apparatus in residences, apartments, hotels,
stores, offices, and industrial buildings.
   B.   Water service for fire protection purposes. This service is intended to
provide an emergency supply of water exclusively for fire protection purposes,
and the portion of the customer's installation to which this service is
rendered must be in a unit or units entirely separate and apart from the
customer's installation for domestic water service.
   C.   Short-term (temporary) water service. This service is available for
short periods of time upon application only, for street, sewer, and similar
construction, circuses, fairs, exhibitions, displays, lunch carts, camps,
ships, boats, and the like.
   D.   Other service. This service is available where submetering or separate
metering is required because the permanently-designated usage will not be
incorporated in the sanitary sewage flow for billing purposes.
(Ord. 175, passed 1-18-1988)
§ 12-6-3 REQUEST FOR SERVICE.
   A.   Domestic water service within the service limits of the city.
      1.   To obtain domestic water service from an existing distribution main,
application should be made at the office of the Building Inspector. The
applicant should make sure that the name of the customer, the street address,
and the legal description of the property to which service is to be rendered
are correctly entered upon the contract or agreement for service. When
feasible, the applicant should, before making application for service,
determine whether the property to be served is adjacent to the city
distribution system.
      2.   A customer first requesting water service for a property is required
to pay a service connection fee to defray installation costs. Additional
services to the same property may also be obtained at similar fees per meter
connection. The service connection fees will be collected only once for any one
metered service. Section 12-6-8 describes fees for various size services.
   B.   Fire protection water service within the service areas of the city. To
obtain the service, application should be made at the office of the Building
Inspector. In case of a new fire line and/or combination fire line and domestic
water service installation, it is necessary that the city be provided both plot
plans and plumbing plans for a cost estimate. After the cost has been
determined, it will be necessary for the applicant to sign the agreement or
contract for service or to send a letter authorizing the installation. However,
every applicant shall prepay the estimated cost of the installation from the
water main to the property line, including an isolating valve, a detection
check valve for determining leakage or illegal usage (plus the extension of the
proper size main if necessary), street repair, sidewalk repair, labor, concrete
vault for detection check valve, other related materials, and any other costs
as may be incurred in rendering service.
   C.   Fire hydrant service. A developer or customer requesting the
installation of fire hydrants in the service area of the city shall be required
to pay the installation cost, including the isolating valve, fire hydrant
assembly, pipe, fittings, street repair, sidewalk repair, labor, materials, and
any other costs as may be incurred in the installation. No fire hydrants may be
installed on any water main of less than six-inch size. A fire hydrant service
charge shall be required as described in §
12-6-10.
(Ord. 175, passed 1-18-1988) Penalty, see
Article 1-8
§ 12-6-4 AGREEMENTS OR CONTRACTS FOR SERVICE.
   A.   Application. Service is furnished only upon written application
submitted to and accepted by the city. The conditions of the application and
the resulting agreement or contract for service are binding upon the customer
as well as upon the city. The application will protect both parties from error
or irresponsible actions of others. Applications are accepted by the city with
the understanding that there is no obligation on the part of the city to render
service other than that which is then available from its existing facilities. A
copy of the application and the contract for service will be furnished to the
applicant on request.
   B.   Applications by agents. Applications for service requested by firms,
partnerships, associations, and the like shall be submitted, in writing, to the
city only by duly authorized agents legally empowered to represent them. When
service is rendered under a contract entered between the city and an agent or
the applicant, the use of the service by the applicant shall constitute full
and complete ratification of the contract.
   C.   Developer agreements. Agreements for the provision of water service for
new properties requiring the construction of water facilities shall, upon
request by a developer, be prepared by the city. (See §
12-6-6E.) Final zoning approval of a property must be obtained prior to the
city's preparation of the agreement.
   D.   Prior indebtedness. The city shall withhold or discontinue service
rendered under an application made by any member or agent of a family,
household, organization, or business until all prior indebtedness to the city
of the family, household, organization, or business has been paid in full.
   E.   Multiple premises served through same meter. When two or more premises
are served through the same meter, the owner of the premises must sign the
contract or contracts for water service and accept full responsibility for the
payment for all service rendered, since no method is available to the city for
prorating charges for service among the occupants of the several premises.
   F.   Short-term service. Short-term (or temporary) water service will be
supplied only when the city has available unsold capacity of mains, pipes,
pumps, and other equipment for the service requested. Applicants for the
temporary service shall pay to the city in advance the cost of installing and
removing any facilities necessary to furnish the service. Short-term service
will be rendered only to the designated location and only within the period of
time specified in the contract providing therefor, and shall be utilized only
by the contracting party.
   G.   Change of occupancy. When change of occupancy takes place on any
premises supplied by the city with water service, written notice thereof shall
be given at the office of the Clerk not less than two days prior to the date of
change by the outgoing customer, the outgoing customer to be held responsible
for all water service rendered to the premises until the written notice has
been received and the city has had reasonable time to discontinue service. If
the written notice has not been received by the city, the application of a
successor occupant for water service will automatically terminate the prior
account. For the convenience of its customers, the City Clerk will accept
telephone orders to discontinue or to transfer water service and will use all
reasonable diligence in the execution thereof. However, oral orders or advice
cannot be deemed to be binding and formal notification to the City Clerk.
   H.   Limitation of use. Water service purchased from the city shall be used
by the customer only for the purposes specified in the application for service,
and the customer shall not sell or otherwise dispose of the service to other
parties without the authorization of a formal agreement by the city. Water
service furnished to the customer will be rendered directly to the customer
through the city meter and shall be for the customer's own use and shall not be
remetered by the customer for the purpose of selling or otherwise disposing of
water service to lessees, tenants, or others, and under no circumstances shall
the customer or the customer's agent or any other individual, association, or
corporation install a meter for the purpose of so remetering the service
without the express approval of the city. In no case shall a customer extend
his or her lines across a street, alley, lane, court, avenue or other highway,
or property line without unity of title, in order to furnish service for
adjacent property through one meter, even though the adjacent property is owned
by him or her. In case of the unauthorized remetering, sale, or disposition of
service, the customer's service shall be subject to discontinuance until the
unauthorized remetering, sale, or disposition has been discontinued and full
payment has been made of all bills for service, calculated under proper
classifications and rate schedules, and until reimbursement in full has been
made to the city for all extra expenses incurred for clerical work, testing,
and inspections.
   I.   Customer's responsibility. The customer is responsible for all water
metered to him or her until such time as service is discontinued for one of the
following reasons.
      1.   The city receives notice from the customer to discontinue service as
of a certain advance date.
      2.   Service is discontinued by the city due to nonpayment of a regular
bill within 30 days after mailing of the bill.
      3.   Service is applied for by another customer at which time the former
service is automatically discontinued.
(Ord. 175, passed 1-18-1988)
§ 12-6-5 CONTINUITY OF SERVICE.
   The city will, at all times, use reasonable diligence to provide continuous
service and, having used reasonable diligence, will not be liable to the
customer for failure or interruption of service. The city will not be liable
for any act or omission caused directly or indirectly by strikes, labor
troubles, accidents, litigation, shutdowns for repairs or adjustments,
interference by governmental agencies, failure of electric power, acts of God,
or other causes beyond its control.
(Ord. 175, passed 1-18-1988)
§ 12-6-6 EXTENSIONS TO THE DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM.
   A.   Minimum size. No water line less than six inches inside diameter shall
be accepted as part of the city water utility system. Six-inch water lines will
only be permitted in cul-de-sacs or dead ends when no future extensions can be
made. In all other cases, water lines shall have an inside diameter of no less
than eight inches.
   B.   Grid system. Distribution water lines of 12 inches inside diameter are
required on all section lines and distribution water lines of ten inches inside
diameter are required on all half section lines and distribution water lines of
eight inches inside diameter are required on all one-sixteenth lines.
   C.   Conditions of line extensions.
      1.   Beginning of line extensions. All line extensions to serve a lot,
lots, subdivisions, or developments shall begin at the nearest adequate
existing distribution line as determined by the city and City Engineer.
      2.   Water distribution lines.
         a.   All water distribution lines, other than those provided for in
division E.5. below, shall extend across the total frontage of the property or
development to be served. Where the property or development is on a corner and
fronts two exterior sides, total frontage shall mean one exterior side of the
property or of the development as determined by the City Engineer.
         b.   For a property on a corner that abuts a section line and a half
section line, or that abuts two section lines or two half section lines, the
frontage for a line extension shall mean the longest of the two exterior sides
abutting the section or half section lines.
         c.   Those properties meeting the conditions of division C.2.b. above,
where a line extension is required across the longest exterior frontage of the
property, are exempt from any reimbursement charge for a connection to a line
extension on the property's short exterior frontage when the extension is
required by the city for the purpose of looping the distribution system.
         d.   For those properties meeting the conditions of division C.2.b.
above, and where an adequate water distribution line already exists along one
of the two exterior frontages at the time of development, a line extension is
required to be installed across the property's remaining exterior frontage. The
property is exempt from any reimbursement charge for connection to the existing
water distribution line when required by the city for the purpose of looping
the distribution system.
      3.   Installment location. Distribution lines shall be installed only in
public streets, alleys, roads, and highways, and on other public and private
property where satisfactory rights-of-way can be obtained without involving
direct purchase or lease of land by the city.
      4.   Private streets or thoroughfares. Distribution lines may be
installed in private streets or thoroughfares to provide water service to
premises along the street, upon approval of the city, providing:
         a.   Right-of-way or easement provided is satisfactory to the city;
and
         b.   The city has no responsibility to maintain or repair the surface
of the street other than to restore it to its original condition after cutting
the street for installation of the water line after repairs to the line.
      5.   Property of the city. Distribution lines which are extended or
installed will become the property of the city after final inspection and
acceptance by the city.
      6.   Construction drawings. Construction drawings for water line
extensions, which are certified by a registered engineer, shall be submitted to
the City Engineer for approval and shall be in accordance with the city's
standard specifications for utility installations.
      7.   Payments. Payment is required for all water used in construction,
sterilization, and testing of water main extensions, and the contractor or
developer shall be held accountable for that cost. The amount of water used
shall be estimated by the city's authorized representative.
   D.   Planned extensions. The city may, from time to time, through the
creation by the county of special taxing districts or by other means, plan
water extensions in specific areas of the county. The costs of these extensions
and terms of payment may be set forth individually by county ordinance or
resolution.
   E.   Water extensions other than planned extensions. Where properties are to
be served by extensions which are not planned extensions, water facilities
shall be extended on the following basis.
      1.   Application (by developer or others).
         a.   An application shall be required for extension of water service
under the provisions hereof, and shall be in writing and signed by the
developer or developers desiring city water service. The application shall be
filed with the city and shall include a legal description of the property and
shall indicate the name, street address, lot and block number, and the street
frontage of each site, along with the proposed usage. Each applicant shall
agree to connect to and use the city water service for his or her property.
         b.   No water mains, or connections to mains, will be extended until
the charges for water service, as further outlined, have been provided for.
      2.   Processing of application. Upon receipt by the city of proper
application requesting a water main extension, it will be evaluated and, if not
feasible, returned with the proper explanation. If feasible, the cost to the
developer will be estimated and submitted to the developer for consideration.
If the developer decides to proceed further with the project and final zoning
of the project has been approved, at the developer's request, the city shall
prepare and submit an agreement specifying all terms and conditions for service
and related costs to the developer.
      3.   Basis of payment for extensions. The cost to the developer shall be
the payment of the connection charges and construction costs as further
outlined. The allocation of costs for oversizing water mains and rebates in
regard to off-site water mains are outlined in §
12-6-7A.5. and A.7.
      4.   Water main extended past property line. Each developer may be
required to extend one water main to an upstream limit of his or her property
rather than at the end of the particular extension requested. The charges or
costs to the developer will include the cost of the water main to the upstream
property line of the development.
      5.   Distribution line extensions within or bounding a development.
         a.   Installed by developer. Distribution lines shall be installed
within or bounding the development to locations and grades and of such sizes as
approved by the City Engineer and in conformance with city standards.
Distribution lines of sizes and at locations approved by the City Engineer and
in conformance with the city standards shall be installed for each lot within
the development prior to paving the adjacent street. Where the line extensions,
or a portion of the line extensions, do not meet the requirements listed in
division E.5. above, the developer will be required to pay the full cost of the
line extension or portion of the line extension. The city will enter into a
reimbursement agreement with the developer requiring future customers to pay a
pro rata share of the cost of the line extension if the initial service is
taken during the term of the agreement. (See division G. below.) The developer
shall install a minimum one-inch water service connection for each lot within
the development at his or her expense, concurrently with the water line
construction in the development. The service connections shall be guaranteed
against any and all defects by the developer for a period of one-year after
acceptance of the installations by the city. No one except authorized city
personnel shall be authorized to install, remove, or reinstall water meters
and, in the event the developer's contractor, plumber, or others remove,
change, or relocate water meters, the developer shall be charged the cost to
the city for restoring meters to their authorized and designated locations.
Fire hydrants shall be installed within and along perimeter streets of the
development at locations and to lines and grades approved by the City Engineer
and in conformance with city standards. The developer shall be responsible for
adjusting all water valves, meter boxes, and appurtenances to the approved
final grade before acceptance of the system by the city.
         b.   Installed by city. Subject to the limitation set forth below,
water line extensions of ten inches or larger sizes as required by the grid
system located on section lines and half section lines shall be installed by
city forces or by contract at city expense. Extensions installed and paid for
by the city will include the appropriate valves, tees, crosses, and the like,
as well as fire hydrants. Water service installations to serve individual lots
shall not be considered as a part of the line extension installed at city
expense, but may be included at the time of construction at the developer's
expense.
            i.   Line extensions are limited to a maximum per subdivision or
development per fiscal year as follows:
 
30-acre subdivision 1,320 LF
20-acre subdivision 990 LF
15-acre subdivision 660 LF
10-acre subdivision 330 LF
5-acre subdivision  165 LF
 
            ii.   Any subdivision or single lot five acres in size or smaller
will be limited to a maximum line extension of 165 lineal feet per fiscal year.
Any subdivision or development 30 acres or larger will be limited to a maximum
line extension of 1,320 lineal feet per fiscal year. Any line extensions in
excess of the limitation set forth in this division E.5., as revised, will be
eligible for a reimbursement agreement under provisions of division G. below.
         c.   Limitation on city installation. Funds for city-installed line
extensions are derived from a system development charge, as provided in this
section. The total dollar amount of funds available in any one fiscal year for
construction of distribution line extensions is limited by the city to an
amount equal to the cost of construction of a combination of one-half mile of
ten-inch and 12-inch main extensions. Distribution of available funds for line
extensions each fiscal year shall be on a first-come basis. The project
effective date for availability of funds is the date of the posting of
construction assurances with the City Engineer.
   F.   Right to refuse service. The city shall have the right at all times to
refuse to extend service on the basis of a use detrimental to the water system,
lack of payment of required fees, or for any reason which, in the opinion of
the city, will cause the extension not to be in the public interest. No payment
of any costs, submitting of any petition, or any other act to receive water
service shall guarantee water service.
   G.   Reimbursement agreements.
      1.   Eligibility.
         a.   When a ten-inch or larger line extension, conforming to the Water
Master Plan, is installed outside, abutting, or within the applicant's lot,
lots, subdivision, or development, and does not meet the requirements of
division E.5. above, for a line extension by the city, then the applicant shall
be eligible for a line extension agreement.
         b.   The city will enter into an agreement with the original applicant
for the line extension and will collect and return to the applicant, as
provided in the agreement, a distribution line reimbursement charge from
parties wishing to connect laterally to the line extension.
         c.   To be eligible for a reimbursement agreement, the original
applicant for the line extension must submit the certified costs of the
extension, as prescribed in this division G., within 120 days from the date of
acceptance of the line extension by the city. Eligibility must be established
in a timely manner so that project records and the utility atlas is fully
updated. The applicant shall be notified, in writing, of the availability of a
reimbursement agreement by the city. Before the end of the 120-day period, the
original applicant will be again notified, in writing, by the city of the 120-
day expiration date, and a 60-day extension will be granted if requested by the
original applicant.
      2.   Reimbursement charge.
         a.   The reimbursement charge will be based on one-half the cost per
lineal foot for the water line extension abutting the premises of the party who
desires to obtain a connection or connections to the line, or by a fee per acre
for the area served by the connection.
         b.   The certified cost per lineal foot for the water line extension
shall be obtained by taking the total cost for construction of the extension
divided by the total lineal feet of the water line extension that was
installed. The costs must be certified by both the developer's engineer and the
City Engineer.
         c.   The per acre fee shall be determined either by obtaining the
total cost of construction of the extension minus the pro rata share of cost
for the line extension belonging to the original applicant served by the line
extension, or by setting a fixed cost per acre. The cost to be certified by the
developer's engineer and the City Engineer. The method used for determining per
acre cost shall be determined by the City Manager.
      3.   Cost of construction. The cost of construction of a line extension
shall include the actual materials and installation costs of piping, valves,
and other appurtenances, and the engineering costs for preparation of plans and
specifications and costs of inspection and staking. The cost of water service
connections shall not be included in the cost of construction of the water line
extension for reimbursement purposes.
      4.   Payment by applicant for service connection.
         a.   An applicant for a service connection to a line which is subject
to a reimbursement agreement shall pay the appropriate reimbursement charge(s).
The charge(s) shall be in addition to all other applicable charges provided by
these regulations, including charges for distribution system development
charges, service connections, capacity charges, and fees for meter
installation.
         b.   A corner property meeting the provisions of division C.2. above
is exempt from payment of a reimbursement charge for connection to a line
extension on the property's "other" exterior frontage when the purpose is for
looping the distribution system. Applicants shall pay the distribution line
reimbursement charge prior to constructing their connection to the line
extension. This charge will be in addition to all other applicable charges
provided by these regulations, including charges for service connections,
capacity charges, and meter installations.
      5.   Maximum amount of reimbursement. The maximum amount of any
reimbursement shall be identified in the agreement but shall in no case exceed
100% of the total certified construction cost of the extension plus accumulated
interest. Interest to be compounded yearly and calculated based on the interest
rate of U.S. government treasury bills dated January 1 of each year following
the date of acceptance of the line extension. The interest rate for the last
months of a reimbursement period, if short of a full year, shall be at the
interest rate as of January 1 of that year.
      6.   Terms of reimbursement agreement. The reimbursement agreement shall
have a maximum term of ten years and shall close at the end of that period
whether or not the total amount of reimbursement has been made.
      7.   Agreement compliance. All reimbursement agreements shall comply with
the above terms.
(Ord. 175, passed 1-18-1988) Penalty, see
Article 1-8
§ 12-6-7 CONSTRUCTION OF WATER MAINS; CONNECTIONS.
   A.   Water main construction by developer. Water mains to be constructed by
a developer or his or her contractor shall be constructed in accordance with
the following provisions.
      1.   Plat approval. In the case of subdivisions, the application shall be
accompanied by two copies of a recorded plat, or, in the case of a new
subdivision, an approved tentative plat, or preferably a master tentative plat
or a large scale development plan plus a plan showing location of proposed
water main extensions.
      2.   Other governmental approval. Prior to final acceptance, all the
water main extensions shall be approved by the appropriate state agencies and
the County Department of Public Health.
      3.   Materials and construction standards. All materials and labor shall
meet the specifications currently required by the city. In order to provide
adequate distribution and fire protection service, the normal minimum size for
a water main extension shall be eight inches. All construction shall be
performed under the inspection of the city and in strict compliance with the
standards of the city and/or the county public works manuals, whichever is
applicable. All lines being connected to city mains must meet city minimum
specifications and standards, regardless of whether the lines are inside the
city limits or not.
      4.   Costs. The developer will pay all connection charges and
construction costs prior to connecting to the city system unless otherwise to
the proposed development from the nearest adequately-sized city's water mains.
Connection charges are defined in §
12-6-10.
      5.   Oversizing. The city reserves the right to oversize any extension
and will pay for the oversizing on the basis of additional costs beyond that
necessary to serve only the subject development. The city will pay an
established unit amount based upon the pipe size of a facility multiplied by
the length of that facility. The established unit amount will be determined by
the city based on the flow requirements of the developer and the city's study
of current construction costs. The city will credit the developer for the cost
of the city's share of oversized water mains and this credit will be in the
form of a reduction of the connection charge or a cash payment if the
connection charge is more than offset. The city also reserves the right to
limit the amount of its participation in the cost of oversizing, depending on
current economic conditions or other factors. The rates of credit related to
the difference in diameter between the pipe required for the developer's
project and the pipe required by the city to be installed is $1.35 per inch
diameter per linear foot for pipe sizes greater than eight inches.
      6.   Construction permit. A permit for construction must be obtained by
the developer from the appropriate governmental agency.
      7.   Repayment policy. In those cases where a developer does not utilize
all of the capacity of a water main extension he or she has paid for and which
has not been oversized, others may connect into it. The city will make every
effort to collect applicable construction connection charges from those others
and make repayments to the developer but shall only be liable for moneys
collected. The rate utilized in computing the construction connection charge is
$6 per front foot of the connecting property, measured along the route of the
water main constructed by the developer. The period of the repayment is limited
to eight years from the date of the initial execution of the developer
agreement with the city. A developer shall not be repaid sums in excess of his
or her original investment, less his or her use, in the water main extension.
The repayments shall only be made during an eight-year period commencing with
the date of an executed agreement between the developer and the city for water
services.
   B.   Public easement required. No water main facility will be installed
under the provisions outlined herein and accepted by the city for operation and
maintenance unless it is in a public right-of-way or easement with a minimum
width of 12 feet. Conveyance of all easements shall be by a separate document
in recordable form to be approved by the city and shall be accompanied by a
written certification by an attorney licensed to practice law in the state that
the developer is the owner in fee simple of the property to be conveyed by the
easements and that, upon its execution by the developer, a valid and
enforceable easement in the developer's property will be vested in the city. No
water main facilities to be owned and operated by the city shall be installed
under any building or appurtenance thereto.
   C.   Conveyance and ownership. All water main facilities and appurtenances
to be owned by the city shall be conveyed to the city by proper bill of sale
immediately after the city acceptance, in writing, of the construction of the
facilities. The developer shall also provide copies of paid bills and/or lien
waivers, releases of satisfactions together with a breakdown of the actual cost
of the facilities. Concurrently with the documents required above, the
developer shall furnish the city with one set of as-built Mylar drawings
showing specific locations, depths, elevations based upon city elevation datum,
and the like, of all water main facilities and appurtenances. When accepted and
properly conveyed to the city for ownership, person shall by the payment of any
charges provided for herein, or by causing any construction of facilities
accepted by the city acquire any interest or right in any of these facilities,
or any portion thereof, other than the privilege to have this property
connected thereto for water service in accordance with these procedures and
regulations.
   D.   Approvals. No water main extension will be accepted by the city without
the approvals of the city, the appropriate state agencies, and the County
Department of Public Health.
   E.   Unauthorized work on water system. No person shall tamper with, or in
any way alter or damage, any city water main or appurtenance thereto without
written permission of the city. The offending person shall pay the total cost
of all charges attributable to the tampering and be subject to all penalties as
may be provided by law.
(Ord. 175, passed 1-18-1988) Penalty, see
Article 1-8
§ 12-6-8 CONNECTIONS FOR SERVICE AND METERS; SERVICE CONNECTION FEES.
   A.   Service connection fees.
      1.   The city will provide a standard service line capable of serving the
size of meter requested for a lot or parcel adjacent to an existing
distribution main owned by the city upon advance payment by the customer of a
service connection fee. The fees for various meter sizes are as set forth in §
12-6-10.
      2.   At its option, the city may install a second five-eighths inch meter
on a one-inch service line upon advance payment by the customer of an amount
specified in the resolution. The minimum size of service line between a water
main and a meter shall be one inch.
      3.   In the event that a service line larger than two inches is necessary
to serve the customer with an adequate supply of water, the customer shall
provide the city with both plot plans and plumbing plans for a cost estimate.
After the cost has been determined, the city will install the adequate service
line upon application of the customer and advance payment by him or her of the
total estimated cost of the larger service line.
   B.   Service availability from existing systems. Water service to any
structure upon any given property shall only be rendered from city-owned mains
in public rights-of-way abutting the property. The determination as to the
availability of service from existing facilities shall be at the sole
discretion of the city. The city shall have the right to require extensions of
its water mains and other facilities for proper service or to require the
permanent legal agreements which the city deems necessary in order to carry out
the intent of this section.
   C.   Customer's obligations.
      1.   Customer's installation. Each customer's installation shall include
that part of the service line to be extended by the customer at his or her
expense to a point designated by the city, provided that the designated point
is on the property line of the premises adjacent to a public street, avenue,
court, lane, and the like. The customer's installation shall be extended to the
city's line at one side of the lot.
      2.   Type and maintenance. The customer's water pipes, apparatus, and
equipment shall be selected, installed, used, and maintained in accordance with
standard practice, conformable to rules and regulations of the city, and in
full compliance with all laws and governmental regulations applicable thereto.
The customer expressly agrees to abstain from utilizing any appliance or device
which may adversely affect the service, and the city reserves the right to
withhold or to discontinue service whenever any such apparatus or device is
used.
      3.   Change of customer's installation. No changes or increases in the
customer's installation, which will materially affect the proper operation of
the pipes, mains, or stations of the city, shall be made without the written
consent of the City Manager. The customer will be liable for any damage
resulting from a violation of this rule.
      4.   Inspection of customer's installation. All installations for water
service or changes therein shall be inspected, upon completion, by competent
inspectors to ensure that piping, equipment, and devices have been installed in
accordance with accepted standard practice and in compliance with the local
rules and building codes as may be in effect. Where inspection is required by
governmental rules or ordinances, the city shall discontinue service if the
inspecting agent notifies the city that the installation has not been approved.
The city reserves the right to inspect the customer's installation prior to
rendering service and from time to time thereafter, but assumes no
responsibility whatsoever for any portion thereof.
      5.   Indemnity to city. The customer shall indemnify, hold harmless, and
defend the city from and against any and all liability, proceedings, suits,
costs, or expenses for loss, damage, or injury to persons or property, in any
manner directly or indirectly connected with or growing out of the transmission
and use of water by the customer at or on the customer's side of the point of
delivery.
      6.   Protection of city property. The customer shall properly protect the
city property on the customer's premises, and shall permit no one to have
access thereto, except the inspection agents or persons authorized by law. When
service lines, meters, mains, or other equipment are damaged by contractors,
construction companies, governmental agencies, or others, the damage will be
repaired by the city and the cost thereof charged to the party or parties
causing the damage. In the event of any loss or damage to property of the city
caused by or arising out of carelessness, neglect, or misuse by the customer,
or by unauthorized parties with the customer's sanction, the cost of making
good the loss or repairing the damage shall be paid by the customer.
      7.   Access to premises. The duly authorized agents of the city shall
have access, at all reasonable hours, to the premises of the customer for the
purpose of installing, maintaining, and inspecting or removing city property,
reading meters, and other purposes incident to performance under or termination
of the city contract with the customer, and in that performance shall not be
liable for trespass.
      8.   Right-of-way. The customer shall grant or cause to be granted to the
city, and without cost to the city, all rights, easements, permits, and
privileges which, in its opinion, are necessary for the rendering and
maintaining of service.
   D.   Location of water meters. The customer shall provide meter space for
use of the city at a suitable and readily accessible location, preferably in
the sidewalk adjacent to his or her property. When the city considers it
advisable, adequate, and proper, space for the installation of meters and other
similar devices shall be provided by the customer within the premises to be
served and at no cost to the city. Whenever two or more meters are utilized to
supply the customer's premises, the meters will be grouped and the customer's
installation brought out by the customer to a meter location designated by the
city. Customers and their agents (such as employees, contractor, and the like)
are prohibited from placing any obstacles on or about meters, valves, and other
equipment which in any way obstruct free access to the equipment.
   E.   Installation of meters. The city will install and properly maintain, at
its own expense, all meters and metering equipment as may be necessary to
measure the water delivered to the customer. Submeters inside the customer's
property to measure water not entering a sewer system may be purchased and
installed by the customer at his or her own expense, upon special written
agreement. Title to meters and metering equipment shall be and remain in the
city, except only those meters and other metering equipment sold to the
customer under special written agreement.
   F.   Meter tests; standard of accuracy.
      1.   No meter will be installed which has an error of more than 2%, plus
or minus. Whenever a periodic or any other test shows that a meter exceeds
these limits, it will be adjusted or replaced.
      2.   In the interest of good service, the city will employ every
practicable means to maintain the commercial accuracy of its meters. Further,
upon written request from the customer, the city will test the customer's meter
or meters. If a meter is found to be not more than 2% fast or slow, the expense
of the test shall be borne by the customer. If the meter exceeds these limits,
the expense of the test shall be borne by the city and billing adjustment for a
period of not to exceed three months will be made. All meters are tested in the
city meter shop prior to installation at the customer's premises, and
periodically thereafter.
      3.   Any meter found to be defective or having ceased to register will be
adjusted or changed and the city will estimate the bill for the period either
by adopting and using the registration of a correct meter, or by a comparison
with the amount charged during the corresponding period of a previous year,
taking into account the capacity of the installation. In case of damage or any
injury to the meter or service on the customer's premises, the supply of water
may be discontinued by the city until the necessary repairs have been made and
the cost thereof adjusted between the city and the customer.
   G.   Connections for service.
      1.   Connections to the system for any purpose whatsoever are to be made
only by city employees or contractors with the full approval of the city. No
connection of any description, temporary or otherwise, is permitted on the
customer's installation between that portion of the customer's installation for
domestic water service and that portion of the customer's installation for fire
protection purposes.
      2.   The portion of the customer's installation for domestic water
service shall be so arranged that all domestic water service shall pass through
the meter. No temporary pipes, nipples, or spacers are permanent except for
temporary testing purposes by a plumber authorized by the city, and under no
circumstances are connections allowed which may permit water to bypass the
meter or metering equipment.
      3.   Any and all physical connections or arrangements of pipes are
prohibited between two separate piping systems on the customer's property, one
of which contains potable water from the water mains and another containing a
liquid from any other source such as a private well supply.
      4.   Any unauthorized connections shall render the service subject to
immediate discontinuance without notice, and service will not be restored until
the unauthorized connections have been removed, and unless settlement is made
in full for all water service estimated by the city to have been used by reason
of the unauthorized connections.
(Ord. 175, passed 1-18-1988; Ord. 187, passed 2-21-1989) Penalty, see
Article 1-8
§ 12-6-9 BILLING PROCEDURES.
   A.   Applicability. This section applies to all customers utilizing city
water, sewer, and/or sanitation services.
   B.   Billing periods; due date.  
      1.   Bills for service will be rendered monthly as per §
13-1-1, or for shorter periods if so stated in the applicable schedule or if
notice of a shorter billing period is given to the customer. Bills are due when
rendered and shall be considered as having been received by the customer when
delivered or mailed to the mail address provided by the customer, service
address, or to some other place mutually agreed upon.
      2.   Non-receipt of bills by the customer shall not release or diminish
the obligation of the customer with respect to the payment thereof.
   C.   Minimum bills. Each bill for water service shall not be less than the
minimum charge specified in §
12-6-10. Where service on a monthly basis is discontinued within 30 days after
the beginning of service, and the consumption is less than the quantity covered
by the monthly minimum bill, a minimum monthly bill shall be paid by the
consumer to compensate the city for extra expenses incurred.
   D.   Guarantee deposits.
      1.   Upon opening an account basis, a minimum guarantee deposit as per
Article 13-1 shall be paid for each residential unit, at the time of making
application for service.
      2.   No interest is paid by the city on guarantee deposits.
   E.   Delinquent bills.
      1.   Bills are due when rendered; billing time frame and late penalties
are set forth in §
13-1-1. Upon termination of service, the guarantee deposit shall be applied to
the outstanding bill for that customer and final statement shall be rendered
showing the balance due.
      2.   Service shall not be reinstituted until the final statement is paid
in full and the customer makes application for services and pays the guarantee
deposit at the then established rate, as provided herein above.
      3.   A customer's water service shall be discontinued and no new
application shall be accepted at any new location when there remains an
outstanding final statement for unpaid water service at any previous location.
   F.   Bills from a previous location. A customer's water service shall be
discontinued for nonpayment of a bill for service to the customer at a previous
location served by the city, provided that the bill is not paid within 30 days
after the original bill for the previous location is mailed.
   G.   Evidence of consumption. The service rendered by the city shall be
measured by meters. The meter readings shall serve as prima facie evidence of
the quantity of water delivered to the customer.
   H.   Appeal and hearing procedures. If the customer disagrees with the
amount due, he or she may call or visit City Hall to arrange for a hearing on
the matter. If the city does not hear from the customer on a timely basis and
he or she does not pay their bill by the time specified on the delinquent
notice, water service will be turned off without further notice.
(Ord. 175, passed 1-18-1988)
§ 12-6-10 RATES AND CHARGES.
   A.   Monthly rates.  The monthly rates to be charged and collected by the
Water Department for water supplied to each customer class are hereby fixed as
follows:
Monthly Water Service Rates
Monthly Water Service Rates
Residential Class                        Rate
   Base fee                           $11.50
   Volume rate (gallons) 5,001 - 10,00$2.00
   Volume rate (gallons) 10,001 - 20,0$2.50
   Volume rate (gallons) 20,001 - Abov$3.00
Multi-Family Class
   Base fee                           $12.54
   Volume rate (gallons) 5,001 - Above$2.29
Commercial Class
   Base fee                           $13.63
   Volume rate (gallons) 5,001 - Above$2.40
 
   B.   Rates for water service for fire protection purposes and fire hydrant
service charge. The rates for water service by means of fire lines for fire
protection purposes, based on the size of the connection, are listed below and
payable in advance. All costs associated with making private fire service
connections shall be made at the expense of the applicant.
Fire Protection Water Service Rates
Size of Fire Line Connection Monthly Rate
Fire Protection Water Service Rates
Size of Fire Line Connection Monthly Rate
2 in.                        $16
3 in.                        $16
4 in.                        $16
6 in.                        $16
8 in.                        $24
10 in.                       $24
12 in.                       $24
 
   C.   Bulk water sales used for construction. All water used for construction
purposes shall be metered by a fire hydrant meter. The deposit for construction
meters shall be $650. If the meter is returned in satisfactory condition to the
city at the end of the construction project, the entire deposit amount shall be
refunded.
      1.   All water used will be charged at the monthly rate as set forth
under division A. above: Water fees, Commercial.
      2.   No sewer or sanitation charge will be assessed during the
construction period. These charges shall occur at the time a certificate of
occupancy is issued. At that time, a meter will be installed and regular
billing will begin.
   D.   Water connection charges. All connection to the city's water system
requiring to use of a three-quarter-inch meter or less shall pay a connection
fee of $475. The use of any larger size water meter needed to serve the
facility, shall be based on a charge of $475 per water times the corresponding
"Equivalency Factor" as indicated below:
      1.   The "Equivalency Factor" is determined by the maximum gallons per
minute (GPM) of flow through the water meter. The base for this factor is the
three-quarter-inch meter most commonly used for a single residential unit
having a flow rate of 30 GPM and a factor of one.
 
Connection Meter Size Flow Rate Equivalency Factor Connection Fee
3/4 in.               30 GPM    1.00               $475
1 in.                 50 GPM    1.67               $793
1-1/2 in.             100 GPM   3.33               $1,582
2 in.                 160 GPM   5.33               $2,532
 
      2.   If a meter approved by the City Engineer is installed that differs
from the flow rates stated, the equivalency factor will be used to determine
the connection fee for that meter. This provision will apply to impact fees
also.
      3.   Expenses associated with connection resulting from factors beyond
the city's control shall be absorbed by the person requesting the connection.
This provision will apply to connection charges under §
12-5-12B. also.
(Ord. 175, passed 1-18-1988; Ord. 187, passed 2-21-1989; Res. 2008-042, passed
12-16-2008)
Cross-reference:
   Billing time frame and late penalties; deposits; multi-family dwellings and
trailer parks, see
Art. 13-1
§ 12-6-11 PENALTIES.
   The city may discontinue water service to any customer for an infraction of
these procedures and regulations, for nonpayment of bills, or for any reason
that may be detrimental to the water system. Further, the city has the right to
withhold service until the reason for the discontinuance is corrected and all
costs due the city are paid. These costs may include delinquent billings, turn-
off and turn-on fees, and payment for any damage caused to the water system.
Should a discontinued water service be turned on without authorization, the
city shall have the right to have the water meter removed and to make an
appropriate charge.
(Ord. 175, passed 1-18-1988)
§ 12-6-12 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS.
   The Council may from time to time, by resolution, prescribe any additional
regulations and requirements governing connections to and the use of the water
system as may be proper or expedient.
(Ord. 175, passed 1-18-1988)
ARTICLE 12-7: LIABILITY
Section
   
12-7-1   Interruption of service
   
12-7-2   Liability limited
§ 12-7-1 INTERRUPTION OF SERVICE.
   The city shall notify the consumer in advance of any anticipated
interruption of service when the advance notice is possible. The city shall not
be responsible for any interruption of water and sewer service caused by forces
beyond its control.
§ 12-7-2 LIABILITY LIMITED.
   No liability shall attach to the city for any injury or damages that may
result from turning on or shutting off the water in any main, service
connection, or pipe, or the restriction of use or discontinuance of any water
and sewer service, or any failure of the water supply, regardless of any notice
or lack of notice thereof. The city shall not be held liable, in any respect,
for the condition, effects, failure, or use of any pipe, connection, fixture,
or appurtenance not belonging to the city, on any premises, or for loss or
damage resulting therefrom.
ARTICLE 12-8: REGULATIONS PART OF CONTRACT
   All regulations contained in this chapter shall be considered a part of the
contract of every resident of the city taking water and sewer service from the
city, and the resident taking water and sewer service shall be considered as
having expressly consented to be bound thereby. Consumers outside the city
limits shall, upon application for water and sewer service, be required to sign
a statement agreeing to the regulations set forth in this chapter.
ARTICLE 12-9: FLOW OF FUNDS
   A.   There is hereby created a separate account, to be known as the Utility
Revenue Fund. All revenues from the water and sewer systems rates, as
determined from time to time by Council, shall be placed in the Fund. Necessary
funds for the operation and maintenance of the water and sewer systems shall be
first deducted from the Fund or from the revenues obtained from the water and
sewer system deposits.
   B.   After the expenses of maintenance and operation are deducted from the
Utility Revenue Fund, at least 2% of the gross receipts of the previous month
shall be paid into a revenue fund hereby created and known as the Water and
Sewer System Replacement and Extension Fund until a sum equal to $25,000 or
more has been accumulated and is on deposit in the Water and Sewer System
Replacement and Extension Fund. The city may, at its discretion, limit further
payments as long as the balance of the Water and Sewer System Replacement and
Extension Fund is equal to $25,000. Money in the Fund may be used from time to
time by the city in making replacements and extensions to the water system of
the city water and sewer system.
   C.   Any moneys remaining in the Utility Revenue Fund after the payments for
the operation and maintenance of the water and sewer system have been made and
after payments to the Water and Sewer System Replacement and Extension Fund, as
herein provided, may be used for any lawful purpose by the city.
CHAPTER 13: GENERAL UTILITIES
      Article
         
13-1.   GENERAL UTILITY POLICIES
ARTICLE 13-1: GENERAL UTILITY POLICIES
Section
   
13-1-1   General policy; billing, deposits and late charges
   
13-1-2   Multi-family dwellings and trailer parks
§ 13-1-1 GENERAL POLICY; BILLING, DEPOSITS AND LATE CHARGES.
   A.   Billing; late charges. Bills will be issued on or near the first day of
each month and payable on or before the fifteenth day of the month. If the bill
is not paid by the last day of the month it is considered to be past due and
late charge of 1.5% will be assessed on the amount owed.
   B.   Delinquent accounts.  
      1.   Past due bills not paid by the fifteenth of the second month are
considered to be delinquent and service will be disconnected. A $40 service
charge and the past due amount plus late charge penalties owed must be paid
before service will be re-connected.
      2.   A customer's water service shall be discontinued and no new
application for services shall be accepted at any new location when there
remains an outstanding final bill for unpaid water service at any previous
location.
   C.   Customer deposits.  Upon application for services, a deposit of $150
shall be paid for each account as a guarantee of payment for future services
provided.
      1.   A customer requesting a temporary portable (floating) meter shall
pay guarantee deposit of $500.
      2.   Governmental agencies, public utilities, and other agencies having
reciprocal agreements with the city are not required to make guarantee
deposits. At the discretion of the City Manager, churches, synagogues and
charitable organizations may not be required to make guarantee deposits.
      3.   In the event of hardship, where there is demonstrated financial
burden upon the customer, the deposit amount may be paid in three monthly
installments. The determination shall be made at the discretion of the City
Manager and/or the Finance Director.
      4.   All deposits shall be returned upon occurrence of the following
events.
         a.   Termination of services and satisfactory payment of all charges
for one full year.
         b.   Termination of services prior to one full year; deposit shall be
applied to any outstanding balance.
         c.   A satisfactory payment history having no past due charges for one
full year.
         d.   A satisfactory payment history not more than one past due charge
for two full years.
(Res. 2008-042, passed 12-16-2008; Ord. 2013-006, passed 12-17-2013)
Cross-reference:
   Discontinuation of service for delinquent accounts, see
Art. 12-4
§ 13-1-2 MULTI-FAMILY DWELLINGS AND TRAILER PARKS.
   Multi-family dwellings are defined as two or more units capable of providing
living quarters for one or more person(s). Included, but not restricted to this
definition, are apartment complexes, trailer parks and lots containing two or
more living quarters.
(Res. 2008-042, passed 12-16-2008)
CHAPTER 16: PARKS AND RECREATION
      Article
         
16-1.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
         
16-2.   PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION
ARTICLE 16-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
16-1-1   Park closing regulations
   
16-1-2   Consumption of alcohol in parks; glass beverage containers prohibited
§ 16-1-1 PARK CLOSING REGULATIONS.
   A.   All city parks, inclusive of all adjoining parking areas which are
provided for parking by park users, are closed to the public from 11:00 p.m. to
one hour prior to sunrise daily.
   B.   All city athletic fields and recreation centers and gymnasiums which
may be located adjacent to park properties are excluded from this provision
when they are being provided for programs and/or activities which are co-
sponsored by the city.
   C.   Special permits granted by the city for overnight camping in parks are
not subject to this section.
   D.   CITY PARK is defined as an area of land owned, leased, or operated by
the city and developed for recreational use by the general public within the
city limits.
(Ord. 291, passed 3-15-2005; Ord. 2017-002, passed 4-18-2017)
§ 16-1-2 CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOL IN PARKS; GLASS BEVERAGE CONTAINERS PROHIBITED.
   A.   Definitions. The following definition shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES. All those items falling within the definition of
beer, spirituous liquor, and wine, as defined in A.R.S. § 4-101.
   B.   Park classifications.
      1.   Mini-park. Local and close to home space. Specialized facilities
that serve a concentrated or limited population or specific group such as tots
or senior citizens. Service area for this type of park is less than one-fourth
mile. The size of the park is less than one acre. The desirable characteristics
are close to neighborhoods and in close proximity to apartment complexes.
      2.   Neighborhood park. An area for intense recreational activities such
as field games, court games, crafts, playground apparatus area, skating,
picnicking, wading pools, and the like. Service area for this type of park is
between one-fourth to one-half mile radius to serve a population up to 5,000
people in a neighborhood. The desirable size is from one to 15 acres. The
desirable characteristics are suitable for intense development and easily
accessible to the neighborhood population, geographically centered, with safe
walking and bike access. May be developed as a school park facility.
      3.   Community parks/specialized facilities. An area of diverse
environmental quality. These parks may include areas suited for intense
recreational facilities such as athletic complexes and large swimming pools.
These areas may be ones of natural quality or outdoor recreation such as
walking, viewing, sitting, picnicking, and other passive activities. It may be
all or any combination of the above depending on the site suitability and
community need. The service area to the community for this type of park is one
to two miles and the size is from 15 to 25 acres. Community parks may also
include features such as water bodies and areas suited for intense development.
These parks are easily accessible to the neighborhood served.
   C.   Consumption prohibited. The consumption of alcoholic beverages is
prohibited at all mini-parks. The consumption of alcoholic beverages may be
permitted at neighborhood and community parks by permit.
   D.   Permit authorization. The Parks and Recreation Department is empowered
to issue permits authorizing the consumption and possession of beer or malt
liquor in neighborhood and community parks and to adopt rules and procedures
for the issuance of such permits. Nothing herein, however, shall be deemed to
authorize the consumption and possession of any alcoholic beverage in
neighborhood and community parks which is prohibited by state law.
   E.   Exception.
      1.   Those areas specified as the premises covered by a city liquor
license.
      2.   Other city facilities where special permits have been obtained
pursuant to the present or future city rules and regulations for parks and
recreational facilities.
   F.   Glass beverage containers prohibited. It shall be unlawful for a person
to have a glass beverage container in his possession in any public park under
the jurisdiction of the city.
(Ord. 291, passed 3-15-2005; Ord. 2017-002, passed 4-18-2017)
ARTICLE 16-2: PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION
Section
   
16-2-1   Creation
   
16-2-2   Composition
   
16-2-3   Appointments
   
16-2-4   Terms of appointment
   
16-2-5   Filling of vacancies
   
16-2-6   Compensation
   
16-2-7   Attendance
   
16-2-8   Powers and duties
§ 16-2-1 CREATION.
   There is hereby created a Parks and Recreation Commission.
(Ord. 291, passed 3-15-2005; Ord. 2017-002, passed 4-18-2017)
§ 16-2-2 COMPOSITION.
   The Commission shall consist of up to seven members. The Director of Parks
and Recreation shall serve as an ex officio member of the Commission and shall
be permitted to participate in discussions but shall have no vote.
(Ord. 291, passed 3-15-2005; Ord. 2017-002, passed 4-18-2017; Ord. 2021-002,
passed 4-20-2021)
§ 16-2-3 APPOINTMENTS.
   Members of the Commission shall be appointed by majority vote of the
Council.
(Ord. 291, passed 3-15-2005; Ord. 2017-002, passed 4-18-2017)
§ 16-2-4 TERMS OF APPOINTMENT.
   A.   The initial members of the Commission shall be appointed as follows,
after which appointments shall be for two-year staggered terms.
      1.   Three members: one year term; and
      2.   Four members: two year term.
   B.   No more than two of the members, at the time of their appointment,
shall be non-residents of the city residing in the 85350 zip code area, as
determined by the United States Postal Service, and north of County 19th
Street.
(Ord. 291, passed 3-15-2005; Ord. 2017-002, passed 4-18-2017; Ord. 2021-007,
passed 8-17-2021)
§ 16-2-5 FILLING OF VACANCIES.
   In the event of the death, resignation, or removal of a member of the
Commission, the majority of the Council shall appoint a new member to serve
during the remainder of the unexpired term.
(Ord. 291, passed 3-15-2005; Ord. 2017-002, passed 4-18-2017)
§ 16-2-6 COMPENSATION.
   The members of the Commission shall serve as such without compensation.
(Ord. 291, passed 3-15-2005; Ord. 2017-002, passed 4-18-2017)
§ 16-2-7 ATTENDANCE.
   Any member who is unable to attend at least 70% of the regular meetings of
the Commission during a calendar year, or three consecutive regular meetings
without good cause or notified absences, may be considered as not fulfilling
the obligation assumed by acceptance of appointment to the Commission. The
Commission shall, for any of the above stated reasons, recommend to the Council
that the member be removed and that the alternate member be appointed as
successor. Should the Commission recommend to the Council that the alternate
member be removed for any of the above stated reasons, the Commission shall
request that the Mayor and Council appoint a new alternate member. Under no
circumstances shall the Commission request the appointment of any particular
person (by name) as a regular or alternate member.
(Ord. 291, passed 3-15-2005; Ord. 2017-002, passed 4-18-2017)
§ 16-2-8 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Commission shall have the following powers and duties with approval of
the Council:
   A.   To establish such rules and regulations as it deems necessary for its
operation and the faithful performance of its duties;
   B   To organize by electing one of its members Chairman of the Commission
and one of its members Secretary, and to notify the Council thereof;
   C.   To act in an advisory capacity to the Council, City Administrator, and
the Director of Parks and Recreation concerning matters affecting the planning
and development of the city recreation program and the planning and development
of a park system;
   D.   To act as supportive a liaison between the city government and the
residents of the city on subjects including, but not limited to, proposed
capital improvement projects, bond issues, and recreation and park system
extension policies; and
   E.   To recommend to the Council rules and regulations for the control and
management of all lands, structures, and facilities owned by or under the
control of the city and operated by it for recreational purposes.
(Ord. 291, passed 3-15-2005; Ord. 2017-002, passed 4-18-2017)
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Arizona Revised Statutes
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO ARIZONA REVISED STATUTES
A.R.S. Cite Code Section
A.R.S. Cite                    Code Section
1-211–1-215                  Art. 1-3
1-243                          3-5-255
Title 4                        11-5-5
4-101                          16-1-2
9-240(B)(7)                    4-1-6
9-462.04                       2-6-8
9-462.06                       2-6-8
                               7-3-2,
                               7-3-3,
9-463.05                       7-3-5,
                               7-3-7,
                               7-3-15
9-463.05(K)                    7-3-2
9-463.05(N)                    7-3-16
9-463.05(O)                    7-3-16
9-463.05(R)                    7-3-2
9-463.05(S)                    7-3-2,
                               7-3-5
9-463.05(T)(4)                 7-3-11
9-463.05(T)(5)                 7-3-3
9-463.05(T)(10)                7-3-3
9-500.05                       7-3-3,
                               7-3-13
Title 9, Ch. 7, Art. 1         7-1-1
9-801 et seq.                  7-1-1
Title 11, Ch. 6, Art. 3        7-1-3
11-862                         7-1-3
11-1001 et seq.                6-2-4
11-1008                        6-2-3
11-1010                        6-2-2
13-3401                        10-1-19
16-204                         2-3-1
Title 22, Ch. 2, Art. 4        11-7-3
Title 28                       10-1-25,
                               11-2-3
Title 28, Ch. 5, Art. 4        11-7-1
28-1402                        10-1-25
28-2091 et seq.                10-1-25
33-1343                        9-5-1
Title 34                       3-5-24,
                               3-5-60
34-201 et seq.                 7-3-13
36-601-01                      10-1-19
36-603                         9-5-1
36-1601                        10-1-29
36-2801 et seq.                10-1-19
38-260                         2-1-7
38-431 et seq.                 2-4-2,
                               2-8-5
38-431.01(G)                   2-4-6
38-431.02                      2-4-6
38-431.02(K)                   2-4-6
38-503                         3-5-221
39-121                         3-5-241
Title 39, Ch. 2                3-5-60
39-204                         3-5-60,
                               3-5-62
Title 41                       3-5-1
42-5001                        8-2-4
Title 48, Chapter 4, Article 6 7-3-8
49-457                         9-6-3
49-504.4                       9-6-3
                               
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
233      2-18-1997   11-6-4
293      8-2-2005    9-6-1–
                     9-6-4 
297      9-6-2005    10-1-28
300      10-18-2005  9-7-1–
                     9-7-8
860      11-2-2004   4-3-2
907      7-19-2005   9-6-1–
                     9-6-4
916      8-16-2005   10-1-28
926      10-4-2005   9-7-1–
                     9-7-8
2007-040 8-21-2007   11-6-4
2008-001 5-6-2008    7-3-1–
                     7-3-12
2008-006 5-6-2008    4-3-2
                     3-5-1–
                     3-5-8,
                     3-5-20–
                     3-5-47,
                     3-5-60–
                     3-5-81,
                     3-5-95–
                     3-5-98,
                     3-5-110–
                     3-5-114,
                     3-5-125–
                     3-5-128,
                     3-5-140,
                     3-5-141,
                     3-5-155–
2008-011 2-19-2008   3-5-158,
                     3-5-170–
                     3-5-173,
                     3-5-185–
                     3-5-193,
                     3-5-205,
                     3-5-206,
                     3-5-220–
                     3-5-228,
                     3-5-240–
                     3-5-243,
                     3-5-255, Art. 3-5 Appendices
                     A–
                     E and Appx E Attachments
                     I–
                     V
2008-018 4-15-2008   Art. 3-5 Appx E, Att. VI
                     9-1-4,
                     12-5-12,
2008-042 12-16-2008  12-6-10,
                     13-1-1,
                     13-1-2
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
-        - -         2-6-8
-        - -         2-7-1
106      10-15-1975  11-4-7
112      9-20-1978   12-3-2,
                     12-3-3
115      4-18-1979   2-4-7
121      12-4-1979   12-5-1–
                     12-5-14
126      6-17-1980   12-2-4,
                     12-2-5
127      7-15-1980   11-3-8
130      11-18-1980  10-1-13
135      6-16-1981   6-1-4
139      8-4-1981    11-6-3
138      8-18-1981   7-1-13 
142      12-7-1982   11-3-2
148      1-17-1984   11-7-3
143      8-1-1984    3-4-8
157      4-7-1985    3-2-5
160      5-21-1985   3-2-1
165      9-2-1986    8-3-1–
                     8-3-9
174      1-4-1988    8-3-3
175      1-18-1988   12-6-1–
                     12-6-12
182      10-5-1988   9-5-10
185      2-21-1989   8-3-8,
                     8-3-9
186      2-21-1989   12-5-12
187      2-21-1989   12-6-8,
                     12-6-10
191      8-1-1989    2-2-4
197      5-15-1990   7-1-13
199      11-6-1990   10-1-14
202      5-22-1991   4-2-11
222      8-15-1995   7-1-1
233      2-18-1997   11-5-6,
                     11-6-4
262      9-4-2001    1-4-4
272      7-15-2003   2-6-2
281      6-1-2004    3-4-2,
                     3-4-3
282      8-3-2004    11-2-3
288      9-21-2004   2-2-1
                     4-3-1,
290      11-2-2004   7-1-1,
                     7-1-2 
                     16-1-1,
291      3-15-2005   16-1-2,
                     16-2-1–
                     16-2-8
293      8-2-2005    9-6-1–
                     9-6-4
297      9-6-2005    10-1-28
300      10-18-2005  9-7-1–
                     9-7-8
305      5-16-2006   7-4-1–
                     7-4-3
                     7-1-1–
312      11-7-2006   7-1-4,
                     7-1-6,
                     7-1-8
2007-008 11-20-2007  2-4-1
2008-004 3-18-2008   3-4-4
2008-005 4-1-2008    8-1-7
2008-006 5-6-2008    4-3-2
2008-007 6-3-2008    7-1-13
2008-009 10-7-2008   8-3-8
                     9-4-4,
2009-    - -2009     9-4-5,
                     9-4-8
2009-006 8-25-2009   2-4-1
2010-002 5-18-2010   Adopting Ordinance
2011-006 7-19-2011   7-1-1
2011-007 6-21-2011   8-2-1–
                     8-2-3
2011-015 12-20-2011  5-4-2,
                     5-4-4
2012-003 4-17-2012   8-2-1,
                     8-2-2
                     6-2-1,
                     6-2-4–
2012-004 6-19-2012   6-2-6,
                     6-2-8,
                     6-2-9
2012-005 12-31-2012  Adopting Ordinance
2013-002 6-4-2013    8-2-1,
                     8-2-2
2013-003 8-20-2013   2-3-2
2013-004 8-20-2013   2-3-4
2013-006 12-17-2013  2-5-10,
                     13-1-1
2013-007 12-17-2013  11-6-4
2014-003 3-18-2014   3-5-99
2014-004 6-17-2014   7-3-1–
                     7-3-16
2015-003 4-21-2015   2-4-1
2016-003 9-20-2016   4-3-1,
                     7-1-1
                     16-1-1,
2017-002 4-18-2017   16-1-2,
                     16-2-1–
                     16-2-8
2017-005 10-17-2017  2-7-1
                     3-1-1,
                     3-2-2,
2018-002 8-7-2018    4-1-2,
                     4-1-3,
                     4-1-5
2018-005 10-2-2018   3-4-4
2019-001 3-19-2019   10-1-14
2019-002 9-17-2019   7-1-1,
                     7-1-7
2020-002 6-2-2020    10-1-29
2020-006 12-15-2020  2-5-11
2021-002 4-20-2021   16-2-2
2021-003 6-15-2021   8-2-4,
                     10-1-19
2021-007 8-17-2021   16-2-4
2021-002 5-3-2022    7-4-1 -
                     7-4-3
2025-002 8-18-2025   2-4-1
                     6-1-1,
                     6-1-4,
                     6-2-1–
2025-004 10-7-2025   6-2-7,
                     6-2-9,
                     6-2-10,
                     6-3
                    
 
