TUCSON, ARIZONA
CHARTER AND GENERAL ORDINANCES
________
Adopted, October 19, 1964
Effective, January 20, 1965
________
Published by Order of the Mayor and Council
________
Republished 1987
________
Contains Supplement No. 148
Current through December 16, 2025
________
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
(800) 445-5588
www.amlegal.com 
OFFICIALS OF THE CITY OF TUCSON, ARIZONA
________


OFFICIALS OF THE CITY OF TUCSON, ARIZONA
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION
________
MAYOR
Lew Davis
COUNCIL MEMBERS 
Ward 1 .... G. Freeman Woods
Ward 2 .... James N. Corbett, Jr.
Ward 3 .... Kirk Storch
Ward 4 .... M. James Southard
Ward 5 .... James L. Kirk
Ward 6 .... Thomas J. Rallis
APPOINTED BY MAYOR AND COUNCIL 
City Manager .... Mark E. Keane
City Attorney .... Calvin Webster
City Clerk .... Mary Fields
________


OFFICIALS OF THE CITY OF TUCSON, ARIZONA
AT THE TIME OF THIS REPUBLICATION
________
MAYOR
Lewis C. Murphy
COUNCIL MEMBERS 
Ward 1 .... Rodolfo C. Bejarano
Ward 2 .... Brent L. Davis
Ward 3 .... George Miller
Ward 4 .... Charles Ford
Ward 5 .... Roy B. Laos
Ward 6 .... Tom Volgy
APPOINTED BY MAYOR AND COUNCIL 
City Manager .... Joel D. Valdez
City Attorney .... Frederick S. Dean
City Clerk .... Donald L. DeMent
________
PREFACE
This volume contains the Charter and Code of Ordinances of the City of Tucson,
Arizona. The Code of Ordinances is a revision and codification of all
ordinances of a general and permanent nature that it was considered advisable
to include.
This Code is an entirely new codification and, as expressed in the Adopting
Ordinance, supersedes all general and permanent ordinances not included herein
or expressly saved from repeal by the Adopting Ordinance. Only ordinances of a
general and permanent nature prescribed for and affecting the public as a whole
are included herein. Special ordinances dealing with only a portion of the
inhabitants of the city, rather than all of them, or relating to special
purposes, such as levying special assessments, providing for bond issues,
paving, vacating, opening and naming specified streets, etc., are not included.
For a more specific enumeration of the types of ordinances which are not
included, see section 3 of the Adopting Ordnance.
As will be noted, the chapters have been conveniently arranged, and the
sections within each chapter have been appropriately catchlined to facilitate
use. Attention is also directed to the footnotes which tie related provisions
of the Code together and also refer to relevant provisions of the Arizona
Revised States.
The numbering system used in this Code of Ordinances is the same system used in
many state and municipal codes and is similar to that used in the Arizona
Revised Statutes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated
by a dash, the figure preceding the dash referring to the chapter number and
the figure following the dash referring to the position of the section within
the chapter. Thus, the first section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-1 and the
twentieth section of chapter 14 is numbered 14-20. New sections may be inserted
in their proper place simply by using a decimal system for amendments. Thus, if
new material is to be included consisting of three sections that would
logically come between sections 4-21 and 4-22, the new sections would be
numbered 4-21.1, 4-21.2 and 4-21.3. Sections have been reserved at the end of
articles and divisions to provide for future expansion.
New chapters may be included by the addition of a capital letter after the
chapter number. For example, if new material is to be included between chapters
12 and 13, it should be designated as chapter 12A. New articles and divisions
may be included in the same way, or in the case of articles, may be placed at
the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions,
may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject the next
successive number being assigned to the article or division.
The ordinance or provision of the 1953 Code from which each section is derived
is cited in parentheses at the end of the section. Wherever reference is made
to the 1953 Code, it includes the 1957 published Supplement to that Code, so
that reference should be made to the Supplement as well as the original Code in
tracing derivation. Furthermore, there have been many ordinances subsequent to
1957 which have expressly amended the 1953 Code to add new sections and
chapters. Where this has occurred, the editors have cited both to the
amendatory ordinance and the chapter and section numbers of the 1953 Code
assigned by the amendatory ordinance.
The history notes accompanying each section are located in two different
styles. If the 1953 Code section or subsequent ordinance amends a section in
its entirety or amends an unnumbered subsection, the history note will be
included following the section, beginning on a separate line, as in section 2-
18. If a numbered minor section is amended, the history note will accompany
only that particular subsection, on the same line, as in section 2-45(2).
A special feature of this Code to which the attention of the user is directed
is the innovation of the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing
for the Code, by means of which the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically.
Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited
and the page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be
distributed to the holders of the Codes with instructions for inserting them
and deleting obsolete pages. Each subsequent amendment, when incorporated into
this Code, may be cited as a part hereof as provided in section 4 of the
Adopting Ordinance The successful maintenance of this Code will depend largely
upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received it will become
the responsibility of the holder to have them inserted according to the
attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publishers that all
such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them,
and that all deleted pages be preserved and filed for purposes of historical
reference.
The indices to the Charter and Code have been prepared with the greatest of
care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some being
couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in
language generally used by city officials and employees. There are numerous
cross references within each index itself which stand as guideposts to direct
the user to the particular item in which he is interested.
The publishers are most grateful to all city officers and employees for their
cooperation and interest during the preparation of this Code. Special
appreciation is due to Mr. Calvin Webster, City Attorney; Mr. Enos P. Schaffer,
Assistant City Attorney; and Mr. Mark E. Keane, City Manager.
The publication of this Code was under the direct supervision of George R.
Langford, President, and C. Julian Manson, Editor, of the Municipal Code
Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other
members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance
throughout the project.
The 1986 Republication of the Code was supervised by A. Lawton Langford,
President, Bob Laslie, Vice President--Supplements, and John Welch, Editor, of
the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Special appreciation is
due to Ms. Sandra O'Neill, Deputy City Clerk, and Mr. Donald DeMent, City
Clerk, of the City of Tucson.
This Code is presented for the use and benefit of the citizens of the City of
Tucson.
ADOPTING ORDINANCES
ORDINANCE NO. 2681
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a Codification and Revision of the
Ordinances of the City of Tucson, Arizona; Establishing the Same Providing for
the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein Except as Expressly
Provided; Providing for Amendments to Such Code; Providing a Penalty; and
Providing an Effective Date. 
Be It Ordained by the Mayor and Council of the City of Tucson, Arizona, as
follows: 
Section 1. That this Ordinance, consisting of chapters 1 to 28, each inclusive,
is hereby adopted and enacted as the "Tucson Code" and shall be treated and
considered as a new and original comprehensive ordinance which shall supersede
all other general and permanent ordinances duly enacted on or before June 15,
1964, except such as by reference thereto are expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force and effect for any purpose.
Section 2. That all provisions of said Code shall be in full force and effect
on and after January 20, 1965, and all ordinances of a general and permanent
nature of the City of Tucson enacted on or before June 15, 1964, and not in
such Code or recognized or continued in force by reference therein are hereby
repealed from and after the effective date of this Ordinance, except as
hereinafter provided.
Section 3. That the repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not affect
any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or
any contract, right or obligation established or accruing before the effective
date of this Ordinance; nor shall such repeal affect any ordinance:
   (1)   Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by or to the city;
   (2)   Authorizing the issuance or execution of any bonds or other evidence
of indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed or incurred by the city;
   (3)   Providing for the internal administration or management of city
government, not inconsistent with said Code;
   (4)   Granting any right of franchise to any person, firm or corporation;
   (5)   Accepting, abandoning, vacating, naming, renaming, locating,
relocating, establishing, opening, paving, widening or improving any street,
sidewalks, alley, easement or public way;
   (6)   Making appropriations;
   (7)   Levying taxes or special assessments;
   (8)   Providing for local improvements;
   (9)   Relating to zoning;
   (10)   Establishing salaries or other compensation for city officers or
employees;
   (11)   Establishing, extending, contracting or otherwise affecting the
boundaries of the city;
   (12)   Calling an election;
   (13)   Relating to the position classification plan of the city for
creating, abolishing, fixing the duties for or establishing the compensation
for any employment of the city, not inconsistent with this Code;
   (14)   Amending the building, plumbing, gas, electrical, mechanical or fire
prevention code of the city;
   (15)   Regulating traffic or parking at special locations or on specific
street or portions of streets;
   (16)   Amending the Charter of the city.
Nor shall such repeal be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that
has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this
Ordinance.
Section 4. That any and all additions or amendments to such Code, when passed
in such form as to indicate the intention to make the same a part thereof,
shall be deemed to be incorporated into such Code so that reference to the
"Tucson Code" shall be understood and intended to include such additions and
amendments.
Section 5. That a copy of such Code shall be kept on file in the office of the
city clerk. It shall be the express duty of the city clerk, or someone
authorized by the city clerk, to insert in their proper places all amendments
or ordinances which indicate the intention to make the same a part of such
Code, when the same have been printed or reprinted in page from, and to extract
from such Code all provisions which may be from time to time repealed. This
copy of such Code shall be available for all persons desiring to examine the
same during regular business hours and shall be considered the official Code of
the city.
Section 6. Wherever in such Code or any ordinance of the city any act is
prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or a misdemeanor, when no
specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provisions of
this Code or ordinance of the city may be punishable by a fine not to exceed
three hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the city jail not to exceed six
months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Every day any violation of this
Code or any such ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
Section 7. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are, to
the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
Section 8. Severability. If any provision of this Ordinance or the application
thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity shall not
affect other provisions or applications of this Ordinance which can be given
effect without the invalid provision or circumstance; and to this end the
provisions of this Ordinance are severable.
Section 9. Emergency. WHEREAS, it is necessary for the preservation of the
peace, health and safety of the City of Tucson that this Ordinance become
immediately effective, an emergency is hereby declared to exist, and this
ordinance shall be effective immediately upon its passage and adoption.
PASSED, ADOPTED AND APPROVED by the Mayor and Council of the City of Tucson,
Arizona, October 19, 1964.
(SEAL)
Lew Davis
____________________
MAYOR
ATTEST:
Mary Fields
____________________
CITY CLERK
APPROVED AS TO FORM:
REVIEWED BY:
Calvin Webster
Mark E. Keane
CITY ATTORNEY
CITY MANAGER
CERTIFICATE OF CLERK
I, Mary Fields, the duly appointed, qualified and acting City Clerk of the City
of Tucson, Arizona, do hereby certify that the foregoing is a true, correct,
and compared copy of Ordinance No. 2681, which was passed and adopted by the
Mayor and Council of the City of Tucson, Arizona, at a meeting held on the 19th
day of October, 1964, at which a quorum was present, by the affirmative vote of
not less than five-sixths of the Council, taken by ayes and noes.
Witness my hand and the seal of the City of Tucson, Arizona, this 20th day of
October, 1964.
(SEAL)
Mary Fields
CITY CLERK
ORDINANCE NO. 3038
RELATING TO PLANNING AND ZONING; ADOPTING A RECODIFICATION OF ARTICLE I
ENTITLED "ZONING" CHAPTER 23 OF THE TUCSON CODE; SUPERSEDING ARTICLE I OF
CHAPTER 23 OF THE TUCSON CODE BEING SECTIONS 23-1 THROUGH 23-509 OF THE TUCSON
CODE; ADOPTING A NEW ARTICLE I OF CHAPTER 23 OF THE TUCSON CODE, BEING SECTIONS
23-1 THROUGH 23-509* OF THE TUCSON CODE.
__________
*   Editors Note: Article I, as updated to June 2, 1986, contains, §§ 23-1--23-
471.15.
__________
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF TUCSON, ARIZONA, AS
FOLLOWS:
Section 1. That this Ordinance consisting of Article I of Chapter 23 of the
Tucson Code be, and the same hereby is adopted as the "Tucson Zoning Code." of
the City of Tucson and shall be treated and considered as a recodification of
present Article I of Chapter 23 of the Tucson Code without substantive changes,
and shall supersede said Article I, as amended.
Section 2. That any and all additions or amendments to such Zoning Code, when
passed in such form as to indicate the intention to make the same a part
thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into such Zoning Code so that the
reference to the "Tucson Zoning Code," shall be understood and intended to
include such additions and amendments.
Section 3. That three copies of said adopted Tucson Zoning Code and all
subsequent amendments thereto shall be kept on file in the Office of the City
Clerk. It shall be the express duty of the City Clerk, or someone authorized by
the City Clerk, to insert in their proper places all amendments of Article I
indicating the intention to make the same a part of such Zoning Code, when the
same have been prepared in page form, and to extract from said Zoning Code all
provisions which may be from time to time repealed. A copy of such Zoning Code
shall be available for all persons desiring to examine the same during regular
business hours. This Zoning Code shall be considered the official Zoning Code
of the City of Tucson and shall be a public record of the City of Tucson.
Section 4. Whenever in such Zoning Code or any ordinance amending same, any act
is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or a misdemeanor, when no
specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision
thereof may be punishable by a fine not to exceed Three Hundred Dollars or by
imprisonment in the city jail not to exceed six months, or by both such fine
and imprisonment. Every day any violation of this Tucson Zoning Code or any
such ordinance amending same shall continue shall constitute a separate
offense.
   Editors Note: Section 4 was later amended by § 1 of Ord. No. 5796, adopted
June 20, 1983. Pursuant to instructions of the city the original unamended
section has been included.
Section 5. Severability. If any provision of this ordinance or the application
thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity shall not
affect other provisions or application of this ordinance which can be given
effect without the invalid provision or circumstance, and to this end the
provisions of this ordinance are severable.
Section 6. Operative Date. That this ordinance shall become operative on
January 1, 1968.
Section 7. WHEREAS, it is necessary for the preservation of the peace, health
and safety of the City of Tucson that this ordinance become immediately
effective, an emergency is hereby declared to exist, and this ordinance shall
be effective immediately upon its passage and adoption.
PASSED, ADOPTED AND APPROVED by the Mayor and Council of the City of Tucson,
Arizona, September 11, 1967.
(SEAL)
Lew Davis
____________________
MAYOR
ATTEST:
Mary Fields
____________________
CITY CLERK
APPROVED AS TO FORM:
REVIEWED BY:
Gordon Kipps
Roger O'Mara
CITY ATTORNEY
CITY MANAGER
CERTIFICATE OF CLERK
I, Mary Fields, the duly appointed, qualified and acting City Clerk of the City
of Tucson, Arizona, do hereby certify that the foregoing is a true, correct,
and compared copy of Ordinance No. 3038, which was passed and adopted by the
Mayor and Council of the City of Tucson, Arizona, at a meeting held on the 11th
day of September, 1967, at which a quorum was present, by the affirmative vote
of not less than five-sixths of the Council, taken by ayes and noes.
Witness my hand and the seal of the City of Tucson, Arizona, this 18th day of
September, 1967.
(SEAL)
Mary Fields
CITY CLERK
ORDINANCE NO. 6624
Relating to Planning and Zoning; Repealing Ordinance No. 3038; Adopting a
Recodification in the Tucson Code of Tucson Zoning Code Chapter 23, Article I
Zoning; Article II, Administration and Procedures; Article III Subdivisions;
Article IV Off-Street Parking; Article V, Off-Street Loading. Authorizing
Publication of the Tucson Zoning Code Chapter 23 as a Separate Publication. 
Be It Ordained by the Mayor and Council of the City of Tucson, Arizona as
Follows: 
Section 1. That Ordinance No. 3038 passed and adopted by the Mayor and Council
September 11, 1967, is hereby repealed.
Section 2. That Tucson Zoning Code, chapter 23, sections 23-1 through 23-661 is
recodified in the Tucson Code as follows: Article I, Zoning; Article II,
Administration and Procedures; Article III, Subdivisions; Article IV, Off-
Street Parking, Article V, Off-Street Loading.
Section 3. Chapter 23 of the Tucson Code may hereafter be published as a
separate official publication entitled the Tucson Zoning Code, in addition to
being incorporated into the Tucson Code.
Section 4. Severability. If any provision of the Tucson Zoning Code or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the
invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the Tucson
Zoning Code which can be given effect without the invalid provision or
circumstance, and to this end the provisions of the Tucson Zoning Code are
severable.
Section 5. The various city officers and employees are authorized and directed
to perform all acts necessary or desirable to give effect to this resolution.
Section 6. Whereas, it is necessary for the preservation of the peace, health
and safety of the City of Tucson that this resolution become immediately
effective, an emergency is hereby declared to exist, and this resolution shall
be effective immediately upon its passage and adoption.
PASSED, ADOPTED AND APPROVED by the Mayor and Council of the City of Tucson,
Arizona, January 5, 1987.
Lewis C. Murphy
____________________
MAYOR
ATTEST:
Donald L. DeMent
____________________
CITY CLERK
APPROVED AS TO FORM:
REVIEWED BY:
Frederick S. Dean
____________________
CITY ATTORNEY
Joel D. Valdez
____________________
CITY MANAGER
ORDINANCE NO. 8509
Relating to Planning and Zoning; Adopting the Land Use Code, Chapter 23, Which
Shall Become Effective On July 1, 1995. 
WHEREAS, the City of Tucson acting through public hearings, citizen
participation and in conjunction with the Citizens Advisory Planning Committee
(CAPC), the Zoning Code Revision Subcommittee and City staff have conducted a
complete review, amendment and recodification of the Tucson Zoning Code over a
period of several years to create the Land Use Code (LUC) which is effective as
of July 1, 1995; and
WHEREAS, the implementation of that review, amendment and recodification has
occurred in phase segments which have been adopted by the mayor and council
over several months; and
WHEREAS, it is desirable to provide for the passage of the LUC in a single
ordinance to establish the relationship of the Land Use Code to the Zoning Code
and to provide for a single date of enactment;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF TUCSON,
ARIZONA, AS FOLLOWS:
Section 1. Ordinance No. 8299 which was duly adopted on June 13, 1994 and which
established the Office and Commercial Zones and related development regulations
under the LUC is incorporated herein by reference.
Section 2. Ordinance No. 8409 which was duly adopted on November 28, 1994, and
which amended the effective date of the LUC Office and Commercial Zones from
January 1, 1995, to July 1, 1995 is hereby incorporated by reference.
Section 3. Ordinance No. 8443 which was duly adopted on February 6, 1995 and
which established Motor Vehicle and Bicycle Parking Regulations, Subdivision
Regulations, Landscaping and Screening Regulations, and the Overlay Zones,
including Hillside Development zone (HDZ), Scenic Corridor Zone (SZC), Major
Streets and Routes (MS&R) Setback Zone, Gateway Corridor Zone, Airport Environs
Zone (AEZ), Environmental Resource Zone (ERZ), and Downtown Heritage Incentive
Zone and related use and development regulations under the LUC is hereby
incorporated by reference.
Section 4. Ordinance No. 8484 which was duly adopted on April 10, 1995 and
which established the administration provisions of the LUC and related
development and use regulations and amended certain portions of the previous
enactments under the LUC is hereby incorporated by reference.
Section 5. Ordinance No. 8497 which was duly adopted on May 8, 1995 and which
established Residential and Industrial Zones, the Specific Plan Zone, and the
Multiple Use Zone and related development and use regulations under the LUC and
which amended certain provisions of the LUC which had been previously adopted
is incorporated by reference.
Section 6. Ordinance No. 8498 which was duly adopted on May 8, 1995, and which
established the rules for the transition from the Zoning Code to the LUC is
incorporated herein by reference.
Section 7. Ordinance No. 8499 which was duly adopted on May 8, 1995 and which
established the Rural Village Center Zone (RVC) and related development and use
regulations is incorporated herein by reference.
Section 8. Ordinance No. 8501 which was duly adopted on May 15, 1995 and which
established the Historic Preservation Zone under the LUC is incorporated herein
by reference.
Section 9. Ordinance No. 8505 which was duly adopted on May 22, 1995 and which
established the use and development regulations governing large bars and dance
halls is incorporated herein by reference.
Section 10. Ordinance No. 8508 which was duly adopted on May 22, 1995 and which
established the Off-Street Loading Requirements, added and amended definitions,
and reconciled various provisions and use and related development regulations
within the LUC is incorporated herein by reference.
Section 11. The adoption of this Land Use Code supercedes all prior provisions
of Chapter 23, Tucson Zoning Code, as of July 1, 1995. Subject to the
transition provisions established in Ordinance No. 8498 all provisions of the
Tucson Zoning Code, Chapter 23, effective prior to July 1, 1995, shall cease to
have any effect as of July 1, 1995, except such effect as may be necessary for
the interpretation or application of other ordinances, resolutions, agreements
or other legal documents which are in effect as of July 1, 1995.
Section 12. In the event that any provision or section of the Land Use Code is
declared to be invalid for any reason, the prior comparable provisions of
Chapter 23, the Tucson Zoning Code shall be in effect in place of any such
invalid provision as those such sections had not been repealed and to the
extent that any such provisions are consistent with all portions of the LUC
which remain in effect.
Section 13. The various city officers and employees are authorized and directed
to perform all acts necessary or desirable to give effect to this ordinance.
Section 14. Three copies of the Land Use Code shall be filed with the City
Clerk's Office and maintained as public records of the City of Tucson. The Land
Use Code shall be published separately from the Tucson Code.
Section 15. Whereas, it is necessary for the preservation of the peace, health
and safety of the City of Tucson that this ordinance become immediately
effective, an emergency is hereby declared to exist, and this ordinance shall
be effective immediately upon its passage and adoption.
PASSED, ADOPTED AND APPROVED BY THE MAYOR AND COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF TUCSON,
ARIZONA, May 22, 1995.
George Miller
____________________
MAYOR
ATTEST:
Kathleen S. Detrick
____________________
CITY CLERK
APPROVED AS TO FORM:
REVIEWED BY:
Thomas J. Burning
____________________
CITY ATTORNEY
Michael F. Brown
____________________
CITY MANAGER
PART I
CHARTER*
__________
*   Editors Note: Tucson was first incorporated as a city on Feb. 7, 1877, and
became a charter city on March 7, 1883. Part I hereof contains the present
Charter of the city, which was ratified March 26, 1929, and became effective
upon approval of the governor May 23, 1929. Catchlines in boldface type
preceding each section have been added by the editor, but section numbers
remain unchanged. Amendments have been inserted in their proper places, and
amended and repealed provisions have been deleted. Amendments are noted in
parentheses following sections amended by citing the ordinance setting out the
amendment followed by the date such amendment was signed by the governor and
became effective. The absence of any such citation indicates that the provision
has not been amended since the Charter was adopted. In some instances, the
editor has added words or phrases in brackets to clarify meaning. Obvious
typographical errors have been corrected without comment. The editor has also
made certain stylistic changes for the sake of conformity, but no substantive
changes have been made.
__________
Chapter I. Name
Sec. 1.   Municipality continued; name specified.
Sec. 2.   Rights and liabilities continued.
Chapter II. Boundaries
Sec. 1.   Omitted.
Chapter III. Government
Sec. 1.   Government vested in mayor and council.
Chapter IV. Powers of City
Sec. 1.   Enumerated.
Sec. 2.   Business privilege tax.
Sec. 3.    Business privilege tax for transportation and public safety
improvements.
Sec. 5.    Additional business privilege and use tax for the Gene Reid Park
Zoo.
Chapter V. Officers and Salaries
Sec. 1.   Elective officers specified.
Sec. 2.   Appointive officers.
Sec. 2.1.   Appointive officers and department directors not in the classified
service.
Sec. 3.   Appointment, term, removal of city manager.
Sec. 4.   Appointment, term, removal of city attorney and city clerk.
Sec. 4.1.   Appointment, term, removal of city magistrates.
Sec. 5.   Repealed by Ord. No. 2080, Nov. 10, 1960.
Sec. 6.   Appointment, term, removal of engineer, superintendent of streets,
superintendent of water, officers provided by ordinance.
Sec. 7.   Appointment, term, removal of police chief and fire chief.
Sec. 8.   Salary of mayor.
Sec. 9.   Salaries of councilmembers.
Sec. 9.1.   Compensation of elected city officers; commission on salaries for
elected officers.
Sec. 10.   Salary of other officers.
Sec. 11.   Salaries of engineer, superintendent of streets, superintendent of
water, and officers provided by ordinance.
Sec. 12.   Citizenship of clerks and deputies.
Sec. 13.   Appointment, removal of deputies, clerks and employees generally.
Chapter VI. The Mayor
Sec. 1.   Executive duties generally.
Sec. 2.   To preside at council meetings.
Sec. 3.   Reports and recommendations to council.
Sec. 4.   Recognition by courts and state officials as official city head.
Sec. 5.   Emergency powers.
Chapter VII. Powers of Mayor and Council
Sec. 1.   Enumerated.
Sec. 2.   Advisory arbitration of wage disputes.
Chapter VIII. Vacancies
Sec. 1.   Authority of vice-chairman of council in absence or disability of
mayor.
Sec. 2.   Procedures for filling vacancies in office of mayor or councilmember.
Sec. 3.   When vacancies exist.
Sec. 4.   Time for filling vacancies; term of appointees.
Sec. 5.   Mayor and councilmen not to hold other public office.
Chapter IX. Legislation
Sec. 1.   Mayor and council to exercise legislative power.
Sec. 2.   Organization and meetings of mayor and council.
Sec. 3.   Meeting of mayor and council to be public; journal required.
Sec. 4.   Mayor and council to adopt rules of proceedings; substantive action
to be by ordinance or resolution.
Sec. 5.   Quorum for mayor and council; vote required except for procedural
motions; signature, attestation of ordinances and resolutions.
Sec. 6.   Form of ordinances and resolutions; enacting clause.
Sec. 7.   Vote on motion to reconsider ordinance.
Sec. 8.   Signing, attestation, effective date of ordinances, resolutions,
franchises; emergency measures; publication and posting required.
Sec. 9.   Manner of revising, amending, reenacting ordinances.
Sec. 10.   Publication, effective date of ordinances.
Sec. 11.   Manner of repealing or suspending ordinances.
Sec. 12.   Minutes to be public.
Sec. 13.   Right to petition mayor and council; consideration of petitions.
Sec. 14.   Failure to vote.
Sec. 15.   Exercise of powers under Charter when no procedure prescribed by
law.
Chapter X. Powers and Duties of Officers Other Than Mayor and Members of the
Council
Sec. 1.   City manager.
Sec. 2.   Repealed by Ord. No. 2080, § 1, eff. Aug. 26, 1960.
Sec. 3.   Repealed by Ord. No. 2080, § 1, eff. Aug. 26, 1960.
Sec. 4.   City attorney.
Sec. 5.   City engineer.
Sec. 6.   Superintendent of streets.
Sec. 7.   Police department and chief of police.
Sec. 8.   Superintendent of water department.
Sec. 9.   Fire department and fire chief.
Sec. 10.   City clerk.
Chapter XI. City Board of Health
Sec. 1.   Repealed by Ord. No. 2080, § 1, eff. Nov. 10, 1960.
Chapter XII. City Court
Sec. 1.   Established; when open; conducting business on nonjuridical days.
Sec. 2.   Jurisdiction generally.
Sec. 3.   Appointment, duties, term of magistrate.
Sec. 4.   Mayor and council to provide courtroom, supplies, clerical help;
records required; disposition of fines, fees.
Sec. 5.   Authority to issue writs and processes; service; authority to
administer oaths.
Sec. 6.   Exercise of statutory powers and jurisdiction.
Sec. 7.   Appeals.
Sec. 8.   Justice of the peace to perform duties if magistrate does not.
Sec. 9.   Ordinances giving effect to chapter required.
Chapter XIII. Finance and Taxation
Sec. 1.   Fiscal year.
Sec. 2.   Mayor and council to provide for assessments, levy, collection of
taxes; use of county services; statutory powers authorized.
Sec. 3.   Annual estimate of expenditures required.
Sec. 4.   Submission of estimate of expenses and revenues to mayor and council.
Sec. 5.   Annual budget, required; publication; notice of meeting to fix tax
levy.
Sec. 6.   Adoption of budget and tax levy.
Sec. 7.   Adoption of ordinance setting tax rate.
Sec. 8.   Additional power to tax for bonds, libraries, advertising.
Sec. 9.   Taxes to be uniform, for public purposes only.
Sec. 10.   Property exempt from taxation; general requirements for taxes.
Sec. 11.   Deposit of city funds; interest required.
Sec. 12.   Investment of city funds.
Sec. 13.   Disposition of unexpended budget balances.
Sec. 14.   Counter-signature of warrants, checks.
Sec. 15.   Annual independent audit required.
Chapter XIV. Official Bonds
Sec. 1.   Authority to require; execution; approval of sureties; payment of
premiums.
Chapter XV. Procurement
Sec. 1.   Application of this chapter.
Sec. 2.   Procurement organization.
Sec. 3.   Source selection and contract formation.
Sec. 4.   Legal and contractual remedies.
Sec. 5.   Violation.
Sec. 6.   Contracts voided for collusion; letting new contracts.
Chapter XVI. Elections
Sec. 1.   To be primary, general or special.
Sec. 2.   Date of primary elections; general laws regarding nominations
adopted.
Sec. 3.   Date of general elections; terms; oath of officers.
Sec. 4.   Terms of mayor and councilmen staggered.
Sec. 5.   Qualifications for candidates for mayor and councilmen.
Sec. 6.   General conduct and control of elections; sample ballots and
instructions authorized.
Sec. 7.   Applicability of general laws; duties of mayor and council and clerk.
Sec. 8.   City to be divided into wards; redistricting.
Sec. 8.1.   Redistricting advisory committee.
Sec. 9.   Mayor nominated and elected at large; councilmen nominated from
wards, elected at large.
Sec. 10.   Number of polling places; open hours.
Sec. 11.   Qualifications for electors.
Sec. 12.   Ordinance to provide for absentee voting.
Sec. 13.   Voting machines required.
Sec. 14.   Filing and disposition of returns.
Sec. 15.   Canvassing returns, declaring results.
Sec. 16.   Certification and delivery of results to persons elected; oath of
office required.
Sec. 17.   Statutes relative to violations of election laws and publicity of
finances applicable in city elections.
Sec. 18.   General election provisions applicable.
Subchapter A. Campaign Contribution Limitations
Sec. 1.   Applications.
Sec. 2.   Contributions limited.
Subchapter B. Voluntary Expenditure Limitation
Sec. 1.   Campaign contract.
Sec. 2.   Candidates' contribution limitations.
Sec. 3.   Expenditure limitations.
Sec. 4.   Eligibility for public matching funds.
Sec. 5.   Public matching funds.
Sec. 6.   Establishment of an election campaign account.
Sec. 7.   Permitted use of public matching funds.
Sec. 8.   Campaign finance administrator; duties thereof.
Sec. 9.   Penalties.
Sec. 10.   Additional powers of mayor and council.
Chapter XVII. Franchises and Public Utilities
Sec. 1.   Election required on franchises.
Sec. 2.   Franchises to clearly identify affected public property.
Sec. 3.   Authority to regulate public utility rates and services.
Sec. 4.   Terms of franchises, rights privileges to be unambiguous;
construction of ambiguities.
Sec. 5.   Franchise ordinances to prohibit issuing stock on account thereof.
Sec. 6.   Utility license and tax authorized.
Sec. 7.   Franchised public carriers not to charge mail carriers, policemen,
firemen.
Sec. 8.   Authority to require raising or lowering of railroad tracks.
Sec. 9.   Franchises subject to certain rights of city.
Sec. 10.   Exclusive franchises prohibited; renewal of franchises before
expiration.
Sec. 11.   Consent required to lease or assign franchises.
Sec. 12.   Provisions applicable to changes in existing franchises; exemptions
from franchise provisions.
Sec. 13.   Manager to keep franchise record.
Sec. 14.   Temporary permits for franchise holders to use streets, public
places.
Sec. 15.   Maximum period of twenty-five years for granting, extending,
renewing franchises.
Sec. 16.   A tax on gross income or gross value or gross proceeds of sales and
services of public utilities.
Chapter XVIII. Provisions Relating to Officers and Employees
Sec. 1.   Mayor and councilmen holding other offices prohibited.
Sec. 2.   Conflict of interest of officers and employees.
Sec. 3,   Political or religious discrimination prohibited.
Sec. 4.   Strikes or work interruptions.
Chapter XIX. The Initiative
Sec. 1.   Petition authorized; number of signatures.
Sec. 2.   Form of initiative petition.
Sec. 3.   Provisions relative to recall applicable to initiative.
Sec. 4.   Mayor and council to either adopt ordinance or call election.
Sec. 5.   Printing and publication of propositions required to be submitted to
voters.
Sec. 6.   Form of ballots; proclamation of results of election.
Sec. 7.   Number of proposed ordinances to be voted on not limited.
Sec. 8.   Limit on number of special initiative elections.
Sec. 9.   Repeal or amendment of initiated ordinances.
Sec. 10.   Additional powers of mayor and council.
Chapter XX. The Referendum
Sec. 1.   Limitation of effective date of ordinances; petition referendum;
reconsideration of ordinances; election required; applicability of recall
provisions.
Sec. 2.   Submission of ordinances to electors upon motion of mayor and
council; submission of additional questions at special elections; conflicting
measures adopted by electors.
Sec. 3.   Additional powers of mayor and council.
Chapter XXI. Recall
Sec. 1.   Officers subject to recall.
Sec. 2.   Procedure for initiating recall; petitions required.
Sec. 3.   Form, number of signatures on petitions; oath; filing, endorsement of
petitions.
Sec. 4.   Adding or removing signatures prohibited after petition filed.
Sec. 5.   Clerk to examine, certify petitions.
Sec. 6.   Notice of insufficiency of petitions; filing additional signatures
authorized.
Sec. 7.   Clerk to certify sufficient petitions to mayor and council; notice to
officer; calling elections.
Sec. 8.   Arrangement for and conduct of election.
Sec. 9.   Candidacy of officer sought to be removed.
Sec. 10.   Nominations, notice, conduct of recall elections to conform to
election provisions.
Sec. 11.   Incumbent continued in office until election; persons declared
elected; vacancy for failure of successor to qualify.
Sec. 12.   Recall prohibited until officer serves six months.
Sec. 13.   Appointing recalled officers to public office.
Sec. 14.   Additional powers of mayor and council.
Chapter XXII. Civil Service
Sec. 1.   Appointment, terms, qualifications of commissioners; political
affiliation.
Sec. 2.   Organization of commission; removal of commissioners; vacancies;
mayor and council to provide equipment.
Sec. 3.   Persons in classified service; status of covered persons; removal,
demotion, suspension procedure; taxpayer's right of action for violating
provisions.
Sec. 4.   General duties of commission.
Sec. 5.   Administrative support to commission.
Sec. 6.   Compensation of commission; appropriation to carry out civil service
provisions.
Sec. 7.   Layoffs.
Chapter XXIII. Pension Fund
Sec. 1.   Established; authority of mayor and council.
Chapter XXIV. Boards, Commissions, Committees, Etc.
Sec. 1.   Authority to establish, prescribe Powers and duties.
Chapter XXV. Miscellaneous Provisions
Sec. 1.   Additional compensation of officers prohibited; rewards for police
excepted.
Sec. 2.   Existing offices and employees continued in office; effective date of
salaries of mayor and councilmen.
Sec. 3.   Original employment of city manager.
Sec. 4.   Existing ordinances, resolutions, regulations continued in effect.
Sec. 5.   Violations of Charter and ordinances.
Sec. 6.   Authority to annex territory.
Sec. 7.   Plenary powers of mayor and council.
Sec. 8.   Political activities by employees prohibited.
Sec. 9.   Continuation of previously commenced prosecutions.
Sec. 10.   Previously employed policemen and firemen declared under civil
service.
Sec. 11.   Effect of civil service on police and fire chiefs.
Sec. 12.   Limitations on claims for damages.
Sec. 13.   Neighborhood protection; voter approval of freeways, parkways,
controlled-access highways and grade-separated interchanges.
Chapter XXVI. Amendments
Sec. 1.   Authorized; procedure.
Chapter XXVII. Reserved
Chapter XXVIII. Reserved
Chapter XXIX. Department of Finance
Sec. 1.   Established; qualifications of director.
Sec. 2.   Director to be bonded.
Sec. 3.   Powers, duties of director.
Sec. 4.   Appointment of director; term; removal; applicability of civil
service; salary.
Chapter XXX. Department of Human Resources
Sec. 1.   Established; qualifications of director.
Sec. 2.   Duties of director.
Sec. 3.   Appointment of director; term; removal; applicability of civil
service; salary.
Chapter XXXI. Department of Parks and Recreation
Sec. 1.   Established; qualifications for director.
Sec. 2.   Duties of director.
Sec. 3.   Appointment of director; term; removal; applicability of civil
service; salary.
CHAPTER I.
NAME
Sec. 1. Municipality continued; name specified.
The municipal corporation now existing and known as the City of Tucson shall
remain and continue a body politic and corporate in name and in fact, by the
name of City of Tucson, and by such name shall have perpetual succession.
Sec. 2. Rights and liabilities continued.
The City of Tucson shall remain vested with and continue to have, hold and
enjoy all property, rights of property and rights of action, of every nature
and description, now belonging to pertaining to it. It shall be subject to all
the liabilities that now or may hereafter exist against it.
CHAPTER II.
BOUNDARIES
Sec. 1. Omitted.*
__________
*   Editors Note: The boundaries of the city have not been printed in this
Charter, but a legal description is on file in the office of the city clerk.
   Cross References: Authority and procedure for annexation,
ch. XXV, 6.
__________
CHAPTER III.
GOVERNMENT*
__________
*   Cross References: Powers and duties of the mayor generally,
ch. VI.
__________
Sec. 1. Government vested in mayor and council.
The government of said city shall be vested in a mayor and a council of six (6)
members, one (1) from each ward. They shall be nominated, elected, and have
such powers and duties as are provided by this Charter.
   Cross References: Elective officers specified,
ch. V, § 1; mayor and council to exercise legislative power,
ch. IX, § 1; division of city into wards.
ch. XVI. § 8.
CHAPTER IV.
POWERS OF CITY*
__________
*   Cross References: Powers of mayor and council,
ch. VII; exercise of powers under Charter when no procedures prescribed by law,
ch. IX, § 15.
   State Law References: General municipal powers. see art. 13, §§ 1--6 of the
Constitution of Arizona and A.R.S., title 9.
__________
Sec. 1. Enumerated.
The city shall have power:
   (1)   Perpetual succession. To have perpetual succession.
   (2)   Corporate seal. To have and use a corporate seal and alter it at
pleasure.
   (3)   To sue and be sued. To sue and be sued in all courts and in all
actions and proceedings whatsoever.
   (4)   Purchase, receipt, etc., of property.* To purchase, receive, have,
take, hold, lease, use and enjoy property of every kind and description, both
within and without the limits of said city, and control and dispose of the same
for the common benefit.
   (5)   Receipt of gifts, devises, etc. To receive bequests, devises and
donations or property of every kind, either absolutely or in trust for
charitable, or other purposes, and do all acts necessary to carry out the
purpose of such bequests, devises and donations, and to manage, control, sell
or otherwise dispose of such property in accordance with the terms of such
bequests, devises or donations.
__________
*   Annotation--The city has authority under ch. IV, 1(4) to exchange property
without advertising for bids or following other requirements of statute because
the statute is not applicable to charter cities having inconsistent provisions.
City of Tucson v. Arizona Alpha of Sigma Alpha Epsilon, 67 Ariz. 330, 195 P. 2d
562.
__________
   (6)   Acquisition of property for certain public purposes. To acquire, by
purchase, condemnation or otherwise, and to erect and maintain buildings for
municipal purposes, and to acquire by purchase, lease, condemnation,
construction or otherwise, and to establish, own, equip, maintain, conduct,
operate, regulate, and control libraries, reading rooms, art galleries,
assembly halls, museums, schools, kindergartens, parks, playgrounds,
gymnasiums, places of recreation, baths, public toilets and comfort stations,
markets, market houses, abattoirs, dairies, municipal tenements, dispensaries,
infirmaries, hospitals, charitable institutions, jails, housed of correction,
and farm schools, work houses, detention homes, morgues, cemeteries,
crematories, garbage collection, garbage disposal and garbage reduction works,
street cleaning, street paving and sprinkling plants, quarries, rockcrushers,
sewer farms, sewage disposal plants, and any and all works, buildings,
establishments, institutions and places, whether situated within or without the
city limits, which are necessary or convenient for the transaction of public
business, or for promoting the health, morals, education or welfare of the
inhabitants of the city or for their benefit; to exclude cemeteries from the
limits of the city or any portion thereof.
   (7)   Acquisition, establishment, etc., of certain public utilities. To
acquire by purchase, condemnation or otherwise, and to establish, maintain,
equip, own and operate works and appliances within and without the city for
supplying the city and its inhabitants, also persons, firms and corporations
outside the city, including other municipal corporations, with water, gas,
electric light, heat or power, telephone service, telegraphic service, or other
works or appliances, for the production or distribution of any public utility
within or without the city.
   (8)   Acquisition, construction, etc., of transportation system. To acquire
by purchase, condemnation or otherwise, and to construct, establish, own,
equip, maintain and operate, electric, steam or other railways or
transportation systems, or services, within or without the city, and to sell or
lease the same.
   (9)   Acquisition of property for street, etc., railway purposes. To acquire
by purchase, condemnation or otherwise, lands, rights-of-way and property, both
real and personal, within or without the city, for street or interurban or
other railways, or other public ways, or other transportation systems, and all
necessary equipment and terminals and terminal facilities therefor, or to
control, operate, sell or lease the same.
   (10)   Care of sick and helpless, etc. To provide for the care of the sick
and helpless, and to make regulations to prevent the spread of diseases.
   (11)   Improvement and maintenance of streets, alleys, etc. To establish and
change the grade and to lay out, open, extend, widen, change, vacate, pave,
repave, gravel, surface, resurface, or otherwise improve streets, alleys,
sidewalks, crossings, and other highways, and public squares and places, to
make provisions for cleaning and sprinkling the same, and to construct therein
any works necessary or convenient for providing any public service or utility.
   (12)   Construction and maintenance of sewers. To construct and maintain
sewers, drains, and all other works for disposition of sewage and storm waters,
both within and without the city.
   (13)   Acquisition of land for carrying underground wires, conduits, etc.,
use or lease of facilities. To acquire by purchase, condemnation, construction,
lease or otherwise, land or rights-of-way, and to construct, maintain, equip
and operation tunnels and conduits through or under any street, right-of-way or
any public property, for carrying wires, pipes or other means of conduct for
public utilities, or other purposes, and to use, or lease or rent to persons,
firms, or corporations, the use of such tunnels and conduits.
   (14)   Sale and purchase of water, heat, etc. To sell, within or without the
city, water and any form of heat or power, and all products of, or service by,
any public utility conducted or operated by the city, and to purchase the same.
   (15)   Assessment of property for taxation; levy and collection of taxes for
various municipal purposes.* To assess property within the city for taxation
for any municipal purpose, and to levy and collect taxes on such property, or
to provide for such assessments, levy and collection of taxes by officers of
the county in which the city is situated, or otherwise, and to assess, levy and
collect, or Cause to be assessed, levied and collected, assessments upon
property to pay for the acquisition of lands for parks and playgrounds, and to
pay for acquiring, grading, regrading, laying out, opening, widening, extending
or improving or rights-of-way, streets, alleys, sidewalks, crossings and other
highways, and public squares and places, and to pay for the construction of
sewers, water, storm water, gas and other pipes, mains and conduits, and for
the construction in any street or streets or public place or places, of any
works or means necessary or convenient for providing therefor any public
service or utility; to pay for planting, maintenance and care of grass, trees
and shrubbery upon property belonging to or under the control of the city, and
for the removal of grass, weeds, or obstructions therefrom, and for the removal
from lands or lots of weeds, rubbish or other material. Provided: That any law
of the State of Arizona, now existing or hereafter passed, and applicable to
the City of Tucson, as to manner, methods or means of assessment, collection
and enforcement of taxes or special assessments may be available of [sic] by
the city. (Ord. No. 1142, eff. 6-23-48)
__________
*   Cross References: Taxation generally,
ch. XIII, § 6 et seq.
__________
   (16)   Reserved.
   Editor's note--Pursuant to the provisions of Ord. No. 5130, adopted Apr. 7,
1980, at a special election held June 30, 1980, ch. IV, § 1(16), relating to
creation and limitation on indebtedness and method of increase of debt
limitation, approved by the governor Oct. 1, 1980, was repealed.
   (16a)   Vote required for certain types of bond issues. Notwithstanding any
other provisions of this Charter, and with the exception of refunding bond
issues, special assessment or improvement district and redevelopment or tax
increment bonds, after the effective date of this subsection the city shall not
issue or authorize the issuance of any bonds which pledge city tax revenues as
a guarantee for their payment, in whole or in part, without the approval of a
majority of the qualified electors of the city voting at an election called for
that purpose. (Ord. No. 4704, eff. 11-28-77)
   (17)   Reserved.
   Editor’s note—Ch. IV, § 1(17) was repealed by Ord. No. 1142, eff. 6-23-48.
The provision was inadvertently retained in the published version of the
Charter until April, 2015.
   (17a)   Added by Ord. No. 1835; repealed by Ord. No. 2297.
   (18)   Licensing and regulation of professions, trades, etc.; regulations
and restraint of certain businesses; suppression of gambling, bawdy houses,
etc.* To license and regulate places of amusement and the carrying on of any
and all professions, trades, callings, occupations and kinds of business
carried on within the limits of said city, and to fix the amount of license tax
thereon, to be paid by all persons engaged in carrying on such places of
amusement and such professions, trades, callings, occupations and kinds of
business in said city; and to provide for the manner of enforcing the payment
of such license tax; and to regulate, restrain, suppress or prohibit hawking
and peddling, and the carrying on of any laundry, garage, gasoline or other oil
or service stations, livery and sale stable, cattle or horse corral, planing
mill, rolling mill, rockcrusher, tank or refinery, foundry, brick yard,
slaughterhouse, butcher shop, manufactory or manufacturing plant, and the
keeping of animals, cattle or fowls within the limits, or within any designated
portion of, said city; and to prohibit and suppress all games of chance,
gambling houses, bawdy houses, and all places where intoxicating liquors are
sold or kept, or offered for sale or given away, and any and all obnoxious,
offenses [offensive], immoral, indecent or disreputable places or practices
within the said city.
__________
*   Annotations--Ch. IV, § 1(18) authorizes the city to license and regulate
electricians, so long as said licensing and regulatory provisions are not
arbitrary or unreasonable. City of Tucson v. Stewart, 45 Ariz. 36, 40 Pac. 2d
72.
Person who raises plants and sells them as seedlings for transplanting is
liable for occupational tax as nurseryman even though many plants are
nonbearing fruit trees. Plaintiffs contention that the tax was illegal because
of statute providing right of producer to sell his own food products would not
be restricted was rejected. Monthan v. City of Tucson, 80 Ariz. 179, 294 P. 2d
668.
Mortuaries are subject to reasonable police regulation as to location as well
as the manner in which they are conducted. City of Tucson v. Arizona Mortuary,
34 Ariz. 495, 272 Pac. 293.
__________
   (19)   Protection against fires, floods, etc.; police and sanitary
regulations. To make, adopt and enforce all necessary rules and regulations for
the prevention of fires, floods and riots, and to make and enforce all such
local, police, sanitary and other regulations as are deemed expedient to
maintain the public peace, protect property, promote the public morals and
welfare, and preserve the health of the inhabitants of the city.
   (20)   Municipal elections; boards of election.* To provide for the manner
in which and the times at which any municipal election shall be held and the
result thereof determined; and for the manner in which and the times at which,
and the terms for which, the members of all boards of election shall be elected
or appointed, and for the constitution, regulation, compensation and government
of such boards, and of their clerks and attaches; and for all expenses incident
to the holding of any election, except as otherwise provided in this Charter.
__________
*   Cross References: Elections generally,
ch. XVI.
__________
   (21)   Violation of ordinances. To make the violation of its ordinances a
misdemeanor, and to prescribe the punishment of such violations, which
punishment shall be by fine or imprisonment, or by both fine and imprisonment.*
__________
*   Code references--General penalty,
1-8; imprisonment in city or county jail, §
1-9.
__________
   (22)   Eminent domain. To exercise the right of eminent domain for the
purpose of acquiring real and personal property of every kind, including water,
water rights and waterworks, within or without the corporate limits, necessary
or convenient for the use of the said city or its inhabitants.
   (23)   Joining with other public corporations for certain municipal
purposes. To join with one (1) or more public corporations for the purpose of
acquisition, construction, ownership, operation, control, or use, within or
without, or partly within and partly without the city, of public utilities, or
of works, property or rights, necessary or convenient for the disposition of
garbage, sewage, storm water, or refuse matter, upon such terms and conditions
and to the extent provided for by general law or by ordinance, and to incur
bonded indebtedness for such purposes; provided, that the city shall not so
join for any such purpose or purposes without the assent of a majority of the
qualified electors of the city voting on the question at a general or special
election at which such questions may be submitted. (Ord. No. 5861, § 1, eff.
11-22-83)
   (24)   Acquisition of property for other public utility purposes;
disposition of property acquired. To acquire by purchase, condemnation or
otherwise, such lands or other property or rights within or without the city,
as may be necessary or convenient for the establishment, maintenance and
operation of any public utility, or to provide for and effectuate any other
public purpose, and to hold, use, improve, operate, control, lease, convey or
otherwise dispose of the same for the benefit of the city.
   (25)   Lease of public utilities owned by city; lease procedure; authority
of electors as to acquisition and disposition of public utilities. To lease to
persons, firms or corporations for the purpose of maintenance, operation or
use, any public utility owned or controlled by the city, and to provide for the
leasing of any lands now or hereafter owned by the city by ordinance duly
adopted, provided, that any such leases shall reflect fair market value of the
leasehold unless the legislative body determines that the public interest
requires otherwise, provided, that no public utility shall be purchased,
leased, acquired, sold or in any manner disposed of without the assent of a
majority of the taxpayers, who must be qualified electors of the city, voting
on the question at a general or special election at which such question may be
submitted. (Ord. No. 7274, § 1, eff. 12-11-89)
   (26)   Acquisition of lands for parks and recreational purposes. To acquire,
own and control, within or without the city, lands for parks and recreational
purposes, and to maintain or control the same, and to construct and maintain
highways in connection therewith.
   (27)   Borrowing money. To borrow money for any of the purposes for which
the city is authorized to provide for, for carrying out of any of the powers
which the city is authorized to enjoy and exercise, and to issue bonds and
warrants therefor, subject, however, to the restrictions and limitations in
this Charter otherwise provided. (Ord. No. 1142, eff. 6-23-48)
   (28)   Civil service commission.* To establish a civil service commission,
prescribe its duties and powers, and to do all things necessary to carry into
effect and maintain civil service rules and regulations in the departments of
the city as provided by this Charter.
__________
*   Cross References: Civil service,
ch. XXII.
__________
   (29)   Additional powers; cumulative powers. The city shall have and may
exercise all further and additional powers necessary or appropriate to a
municipal corporation and the general welfare of its inhabitants, or granted by
the laws of the state, and which it would be competent and lawful for this
Charter to enumerate or set forth specifically, and the specification or
enumeration herein of any particular powers shall not be deemed to be
exclusive. Whenever any power is conferred by this Charter, and different
methods of procedure are provided for the exercise thereof, or if the power be
conferred in different terms, in two (2) or more provisions, such different
methods or manner of exercising such power or powers shall not the one affect
or modify the other, but they shall be deemed accumulative and selective.
Sec. 2. Business privilege tax.
Notwithstanding the limitations, restrictions, and conditions set forth in
section 1, chapter IV, and in
chapter XIII of the Charter of the City of Tucson, for the purpose of reducing
the tax levy on real and personal property, and for the payment of any, and all
kinds of city expense, the city shall have the power to impose, levy and
collect a transaction privilege tax not exceeding two (2) percent of the gross
income, or gross value, or gross proceeds of sale, as the case may be, of the
business done by the taxpayer; provided, however, that while and during the
time a tax is imposed by authority of and pursuant to this section, the
taxpayer upon whom the tax is imposed, except liquor dealers and licensees,
shall be exempted from payment of the city occupational tax specified and
authorized in subsection (18) of
section 1 of chapter IV, of the Charter of the City of Tucson; and also
provided, however, that while and during the time a tax is imposed by authority
of and pursuant to this section, the taxpayer upon whom the tax is imposed is
hereby exempted from payment of the tax to the extent of the gross income. or
gross value, or gross proceeds, as the case may be, of the business done by the
taxpayer from the sale of food products for human consumption, excepting,
however, those food products ordinarily consumed on the premises such as in
restaurants, or at stands, or at drive-ins, or prepared carried out foods such
as pizzas or delicatessen foods, and also provided that, while and during the
time any tax is imposed and for which it is collected pursuant to and by
authority of this section, no ad valorem tax shall be assessed, levied, or
collected upon any real or personal property within the corporate limits by the
City of Tucson in excess of one dollar and seventy-five cents ($1.75) per
hundred dollars assessed value.
(Ord. No. 2297, § 1, eff. 7-2-62; Ord. No. 3346, § 1, eff. 12-29-69)
   Editors Note: Ch. IV. § 2, was amended at a referendum election held Dec.
16, 1969, pursuant to the mandate of Ord. No. 3346, § 1, enacted Oct. 16, 1969.
The mayor certified the result of the election on Dec. 22, 1969. and the
governor approved the amendment on Dec. 29, 1969. The amendment increased the
tax from 1 to 2 and added the exception for sales of food products.
   Code reference--Sales of food products for human consumption exempt from
transaction privilege taxes, §
19-120.
Sec. 3. Business privilege tax for transportation and public safety
improvements.
   A.   In addition to the powers described in
Chapter IV, Section 2 of this charter, during the time period beginning on July
1, 2017 and ending on June 30, 2032, the city shall have the power to impose,
levy and collect a transaction privilege tax and use tax not exceeding five-
tenths of one percent (0.5%) for the payment of city expenses for the following
purposes:
   (1)   Street improvements: restoration, repair, resurfacing and improvement
of the condition of local, neighborhood city streets, including all necessary
costs in connection therewith; and
   (2)   Street safety improvements, including but not limited to bicycle and
pedestrian safety improvements, sidewalks, traffic signal technology, and
lighting.
   B.   There shall be established a street improvements fund which shall
consist of one hundred percent (100%) of all revenues collected from the tax
authorized under section 3(a) above, as well as any interest earned on those
monies. The director of finance shall deposit all monies received from the
designated tax revenues into this fund, and shall invest monies in the fund,
and all accounts therein as provided by
Chapter XXIX of this Charter. The director of finance shall credit monies
earned from these investments to the fund. The street improvements fund shall
be administered as follows:
   1.   Eighty cents ($0.80) of each dollar in the street improvement fund
shall be used for restoration, repair, resurfacing and improvement of the
condition of local, neighborhood streets;
   2.   Twenty cents ($0.20) of each dollar in the street improvement fund
shall be used for street safety improvements, including but not limited to
bicycle and pedestrian safety improvements, sidewalks, traffic signal
technology, and lighting.
   3.   Monies from the street improvement fund shall be appropriated by the
mayor and council only for the purposes set forth in this section.
   C.   The power to impose, collect and levy the taxes authorized by section 3
(a) above shall expire on June 30, 2032, unless that power is extended or
renewed by the approval of a majority of the qualified electors of the city
voting at an election called for that purpose.
   D.   Nothing in this section shall modify or affect the collection or
expenditure of taxes authorized by the city's voters under proposition 101
approved at the special election held on May 16, 2017.
   Editors Note: Ch. IV. § 3, was added at a special election held May 16,
2017, pursuant to the provisions of Ord. No. 11421. The mayor certified the
result of the election on June 8, 2017. and the governor approved the amendment
on June 21, 2017. The amendment authorized a tax to fund street improvements
and public safety investments for a period of five years. Ch. IV. § 3, was
amended at a special election held May 17, 2022, pursuant to the provisions of
Ord. No. 11904. The mayor certified the result of the election on May 25, 2022
and the governor approved the amendment on September 8, 2022. The amendment
authorized a tax to fund street improvements and public safety investments for
a period of ten years.
Sec. 5. Additional business privilege and use tax for the Gene Reid Park Zoo.
   A.   In addition to the powers otherwise described in Chapter IV of this
Charter, and over and above any existing tax, the city shall have the power to
impose, levy and collect a transaction privilege and use tax not exceeding one-
tenth of one percent (0.1%) for the sole and exclusive purpose of providing
additional funding to the Gene Reid Park Zoo as described in this section.
   B.   There shall be established a Gene Reid Park Zoo improvement fund, which
shall consist of all revenues collected from the tax authorized under section 5
(A), above, as well as any interest earned on those monies. The director of
finance shall deposit all monies in the fund, and all accounts therein as
provided by Chapter XXIX of this Charter. The director of finance shall credit
monies earned from these investments to the fund.
   C.   The Gene Reid Park Zoo improvement fund shall be administered as
follows:
   1.   Every dollar in the Gene Reid Park Zoo improvement fund shall be used
for capital improvements, operations, and maintenance at the Gene Reid Park
Zoo.
   2.   Monies from the Gene Reid Park Zoo improvement fund shall be
appropriated by the mayor and council only for the purposes set forth in this
section.
   3.   Monies from the Gene Reid Park Zoo improvement fund shall supplement
and not supplant the monies that would otherwise be appropriated by the mayor
and council to the Gene Reid Park Zoo.
   D.   The power of the city described in section 5(A) above shall be
effective on January 1, 2018, and shall terminate on December 31, 2027.
   Editor’s note—Ch. IV. § 5, was added at a special election held November 7,
2017, pursuant to the provisions of Ord. No. 11485. The mayor certified the
result of the election on December 1, 2017.
CHAPTER V.
OFFICERS AND SALARIES*
__________
*   Cross References: Filling of vacancies,
ch. VIII; powers and duties of officers other than mayor and councilmen,
ch. X; recall of officers,
ch. XXI; civil service,
ch. XXII; pension fund,
ch. XXIII; additional compensation of officers prohibited and exception for
police,
ch. XXV, § 1; salary of director of finance,
ch. XXIX, § 4; salary of director of parks and recreation,
ch. XXXI, § 3.
__________
Sec. 1. Elective officers specified.
The elective officers of the city shall be:
   (1)   A mayor; and
   (2)   Six (6) councilmen.
   Cross References: Government vested in mayor, council,
ch. III, § 1; elections generally,
ch. XVI; mayor and councilmen holding other offices prohibited,
ch. XVIII, § 1.
Sec. 2. Appointive officers.
The appointive officers of the city shall be:
   (1)   City manager;
   (2)   City finance director;
   (3)   City attorney;
   (4)   City magistrate;
   (5)   City engineer;
   (6)   Superintendent of the water department;
   (7)   Superintendent of streets;
   (8)   City clerk;
   (9)   Chief of police;
   (10)   Fire chief;
   (11)   Director of parks and recreation;
   (12)   Members of the library board;
   (13)   Members of the civil service commission; and
   (14)   Such other officers as from time to time may be provided for by
ordinance.
(Ord. No. 2080, eff. 11-10-60; Ord. No. 5036, eff. 11-10-80)
   Editors Note: Section 1 of Ord. No. 2080, calling an election on various
Charter amendments, contained propositions (B)(2) and (C)(1), both purporting
to amend ch. V, § 2. Both propositions were ratified by the electors and
approved by the governor, but they were inconsistent in that item (12) of said
section as proposed by proposition (B)(2) referred to the members of the park
board, whereas item (12) of said section as proposed by proposition (C)(1)
referred to the director of parks and recreation. The editors have set out ch.
V, § 2 above as amended by proposition (C)(1), referring to the director rather
than the board, in view of the fact that other amendments proposed by Ord. No.
2080 amended ch. XXIV, § 1, to delete a requirement that a park board be
established and amended this Charter to add ch. XXXI creating a department of
parks and recreation under the supervision of a director.
Ord. No. 5036, § 1, called an election on Nov. 6, 1979, and was approved by the
governor Nov. 10, 1980.
Sec. 2.1. Appointive officers and department directors not in the classified
service.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Charter, the appointive officers of
the city and the directors or heads of city departments, including those whose
office is provided for by ordinance under Section 2(14) of this Chapter, shall
not be in the classified service, and none of the civil service provisions of
the Charter, ordinances or regulations shall apply to such officers, directors
or deputies unless otherwise expressly provided in this Charter.
(Prop. 404, eff. 2-2-2016)
Sec. 3. Appointment, term, removal of city manager.
The city manager, hereinafter in this Charter designated "manager," shall be
appointed by the mayor and council and shall hold office until removed by four
(4) members of the mayor and council voting affirmatively therefor.
(Prop. 403, eff. 2-2-2016)
Sec. 4. Appointment, term, removal of city attorney and city clerk.
The city attorney and city clerk, hereinafter in this Charter designated
"attorney" and "clerk," respectively, shall be appointed by the mayor and
council. They shall hold office for a term of two (2) years from the date of
their appointment, unless sooner removed by four (4) members of the mayor and
council voting affirmatively therefor.
(Ord. No. 4816, eff. 10-16-78; Ord. No. 5036, eff. 11-10-80; Prop. 403, eff. 2-
2-2016)
   Editors Note: The office of treasurer has been abolished by repeal of ch. X,
§ 3 and his duties transferred to the director of finance under
ch. XXIX hereof. The office of auditor and ex officio assessor has been
abolished by repeal of ch. X, § 2, and his functions are now performed by the
director of finance and the post auditor under
chs. XXIX and
XXX hereof. Subsequently, Ord. No. 5036, approved at an election held Nov. 6,
1979, approved by the governor Nov. 10, 1980, deleted the office of post
auditor.
   Cross References: General duties of city clerk,
ch. X, § 10; similar provisions for two-year term of magistrate.
ch. XII, § 3.
Sec. 4.1. Appointment, term, removal of city magistrates.
City magistrates shall be appointed by the mayor and council and shall hold
office for the terms hereinafter provided, unless sooner removed by four (4)
members of the mayor and council voting affirmatively therefor. The initial
five (5) appointments after the effective date of this section shall be for a
two-year term, two (2) three-year terms, and two (2) four-year terms.
Subsequent appointments shall be for four-year terms.
(Ord. No. 2080, eff. 11-10-60; Ord. No. 4816, eff. 10-16-78; Prop. 403, eff. 2-
2-2016)
   Editors Note: Section 4.1 above is derived from Ord. No. 2080, § 1(B)(3).
Section (1)(B)(2) of said ordinance amended ch. V, § 2 to add the position of
city post auditor. The provisions codified as § 4.1 above were not expressly
amendatory to any given section of this Charter but have been codified in this
manner by the editor despite the fact that they are partly repetitious of § 4
above.
Apparently § 4.1 was intended to supersede § 4. This would have added to § 4
[post auditor] and ["post auditor"] and deleted from § 4 [city treasurer]
["auditor"] ["treasurer"] and ["the treasurer shall not hold office more than
two (2) consecutive terms."] However, since § 4 was not amended or repealed
when § 4.1 was added, both sections remain in the Charter.
   Cross References: Qualifications and duties of city attorney,
ch. X, § 4; general duties of city clerk,
ch. X, § 10; similar provisions of two-year term of magistrate,
ch. XII, § 3.
Sec. 5. Repealed by Ord. No. 2080, Nov. 10, 1960.
   Editors Note: Prior to its repeal by Ord. No. 2080, ch. V, § 5, provided for
appointment, term of office and powers of the health officers and members of
the board of health. Such provisions were rendered obsolete by repeal of
ch. XI as set out herein.
Sec. 6. Appointment, term, removal of engineer, superintendent of streets,
superintendent of water, officers provided by ordinance.
The city engineer, the city superintendent of streets, and the city
superintendent of water, hereinafter in this Charter designated "engineer",
"superintendent of streets" and "superintendent of water department",
respectively and such other officers as from time to time may have heretofore
or may hereafter be provided for by subsection 14 of section 2 of this chapter,
shall be appointed by the manager, subject to the consent and approval of the
mayor and council, and shall hold office until removed by the manager; and none
of the civil service provisions of the Charter, ordinances or regulations shall
apply to these officers.
(Mo. of 4-1-41, eff. 5-16-41; Prop. 404, eff. 2-2-2016)
__________
   Cross References: Qualifications and duties of city engineer,
ch. X, § 5; qualifications and duties of superintendent of streets,
ch. X, § 6; powers and duties of superintendent of water department generally,
ch. X, § 8.
Sec. 7. Appointment, term, removal of police chief and fire chief.
The city chief of police and city fire chief, hereinafter in this Charter
designated as "chief of police" and "fire chief," respectively, shall be
appointed by the manager, by and with the consent and approval of the mayor and
council, and each of said officers shall hold office until removed or reduced
in rank by the manager. None of the civil service provisions of the Charter,
ordinances or regulations shall apply to these officers, except that the
removal or reduction in rank of these officers is subject to the advisory
appeal provisions of Section 3(c) of Chapter XXII of this Charter.
(Prop. 404, eff. 2-2-2016)
   Cross References: Police department and chief of police generally,
ch. X, § 7; fire department and fire chief generally,
ch. X, § 9.
Sec. 8. Salary of mayor.
Effective the first Monday of December, 2023, the annual salary of the Mayor
shall be 1.25 times the annual salary of members of the Pima County Board of
Supervisors, as set by Arizona Revised Statutes (A.R.S.) Section 11-419(A) or
any successor statute, payable in bi-weekly installments; PROVIDED ALWAYS THAT,
consistent with Article 4, Part 2, Section 17 of the Arizona Constitution, any
subsequent increase in the Mayor's salary based on an increase to the salary of
members of the Board of Supervisors through amendment of A.R.S. § 11-419(A) or
any successor statute shall not take effect until the next succeeding first
Monday of December of an odd year, when, pursuant to the Tucson Charter, all
newly elect-ed or re-elected members of Mayor and Council begin their new
terms.
(Ord. No. 1142, eff. 6-23-48; Ord. No. 1642, eff. 5-16-56; Ord. No. 3466, eff.
2-5-71; Ord. No. 5860, § 1, eff. 11-23- 83; Ord. No. 8573, § 1, 9-5-95; Ord.
No. 9270, § 1, eff. 12-2-99; Prop. 413, eff. 12-4-23)
   Editors Note: Proposition No. 100, approved at a Charter Amendment Special
Election held on November 2, 1999 became effective December 2, 1999. Salary
adjustments went into effect December 6, 1999.
Sec. 9. Salaries of councilmembers.
Effective the first Monday of December, 2023, the annual salary of the Council
Members shall equal the annual salary of members of the Pima County Board of
Supervisors, as set by Arizona Revised Statutes (A.R.S.) Section 11-419(A) or
any successor statute, payable in biweekly installments; PROVIDED ALWAYS THAT,
consistent with Article 4, Part 2, Section 17 of the Arizona Constitution, any
subsequent increase in the Council Members' salaries based on an increase to
the salary of members of the Board of Supervisors through amendment of A.R.S. §
11-419(A) or any successor statute shall not take effect until the next
succeeding first Monday of December of an odd year, when, pursuant to the
Tucson Charter, newly elected or re-elected members of Mayor and Council begin
their new terms.
(Ord. No. 1142, eff. 6-23-48; Ord. No. 3466, eff. 2-5-71; Ord. No. 5860, § 1,
eff. 11-23-83; Ord. No. 8573, § 1, 9-5-95; Ord. No. 9270, § 1, eff. 12-2-99;
Prop. 413, eff. 12-4-23)
   Editors Note: Proposition No. 100, approved at a Charter Amendment Special
Election held on November 2, 1999 became effective December 2, 1999. Salary
adjustments went into effect December 6, 1999.
Sec. 9.1. Compensation of elected city officers; commission on salaries for
elected officers.
   (a)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Charter, the salaries for
elected city officials shall be set in conformity with this Charter provision.
Such salaries as are presently established may be altered from time to time by
the procedures established in this provision.
   (b)   There is hereby established a commission to be known as the Citizens'
Commission on Public Service and Compensation (hereinafter referred to as the
"Commission"), the first such Commission to be appointed prior to January 15,
1995.
   (c)   The Commission shall be composed of seven (7) persons who are
qualified electors of the city. Members will be nominated from the community at
large after the city publicly advertises for nominations from interested
organizations or individuals. Appointments from these nominations shall be made
by the city manager, and shall serve for two-month terms. The first Commission
is to take office January 15, 1995, and new appointments are to be made every
two (2) years thereafter, said members to take office on January 15 of the
respective year.
   (d)   All members shall be selected in such a way as to provide for the
maximum representation from among the city's diverse economic, environmental,
racial, ethnic and cultural groups.
Members of the Commission shall be selected without regard to political
affiliation, and should be selected from among persons who have experience or
expertise in such areas as government, personnel management, or public
administration.
No person shall serve as a member of the Commission who is an officer or
employee of the City of Tucson, or a parent, sibling, spouse, child or
dependent relative of an officer or employee of the City of Tucson.
A vacancy in the membership of the Commission shall be immediately filled by
the manager with an individual possessing the same qualifications as the person
originally appointed, and that individual shall serve for the balance of the
term of the vacancy so filled.
The members of the Commission shall serve without compensation. The city shall
provide the Commission with such staff as is necessary to perform its functions
and shall provide recordkeeping or other facilities as needed.
   (e)   The Commission shall, during its two-month term, conduct a review of
the salaries of elected city officials. Such review shall be made for the
purpose of determining and recommending the appropriate salaries commensurate
with the duties and responsibilities of the positions covered by such review.
At no time may the Commission recommend a salary for councilmembers which
exceeds the salary set for members of the Pima County Board of Supervisors
pursuant to A.R.S. section 11-419(A).
At no time may the Commission recommend a salary for the mayor which exceeds
one and one-half (1 1/2) times the salary set for members of the Pima County
Board of Supervisors pursuant to A.R.S. section 11-419(A).
   (f)   The commission shall file, no later than March 15, 1995, and no later
than March 15th of every second year thereafter, a report of the results of
each review conducted by the Commission together with its recommendations. The
city clerk shall post the Commission's report in a prominent position at the
office of the city clerk for a period of thirty (30) days subsequent to the
filing of the report.
   (g)   The Commission's salary recommendations shall be placed on the ballot
for voter approval or rejection at the next general election, and shall be
effective only if approved by a majority of the voters voting thereon. If the
recommendations are rejected by a majority of the voters at the next general
election, the salaries for elected city officials shall continue at their pre-
existing levels.
(Ord. No. 8118, eff. 9-7-93)
   Editors Note: Proposition No. 100, approved at a special election held on
November 2, 1993.
Sec. 10. Salary of other officers.
The salaries of all city officers, except those specified in
section 11 of this chapter, shall be fixed, and may be changed, increased or
modified by ordinance of the mayor and council. (Mo. of 4-1-41, eff. 5-16-41)
Sec. 11. Salaries of engineer, superintendent of streets, superintendent of
water, and officers provided by ordinance.
The salaries of the engineer, the superintendent of streets, the superintendent
of the water department, and such other officers as from time to time may have
heretofore or may hereafter be created pursuant to subsection 14 of
section 2 of this chapter shall be fixed by the manager, and may be changed,
increased or modified by the manager; provided, however, that such salaries and
all changes therein shall be in accordance with the compensation plan adopted
by the mayor and council.
(Mo. of 4-1-41, eff. 5-16-41; Prop. 404, eff. 2-2-2016)
Sec. 12. Citizenship of clerks and deputies.
All clerks and deputies of the city must be citizens of the United States, or
have declared their intention to become citizens of the United States.
Sec. 13. Appointment, removal of deputies, clerks and employees generally.
   (a)    The manager shall appoint and remove all deputies, clerks and
employees in his or her own office and those of all boards whose members serve
without compensation from the city. The officer, director or head of any
department or office who is appointed by the manager shall, with the manager’s
approval, appoint and remove all deputies, clerks and employees in his or her
respective department or office, and the officer, director or head of any
department or office, appointed by the mayor and council, shall appoint all
deputies, clerks and employees in their respective departments or offices;
provided, however, that all such appointments and removals of deputies, clerks
or employees shall be made solely on the basis of merits as determined by the
civil service rules and regulations as provided for elsewhere in this chapter.
   (b)    Notwithstanding the civil service provisions of this Charter, the
mayor and each member of the council shall appoint and remove all employees in
their respective offices, and none of the civil service provisions of the
Charter, city ordinances or civil service rules and regulations shall apply to
such employees.
(Mo. of 4-1-41, eff. 5-16-41; Ord. No. 4394, eff. 19-76; Ord. No. 7274, § 1,
eff. 12-11-79; Prop. 404, eff. 2-2-2016)
   Editors Note: Proposition 104 of an election called by Ord. No. 7274 for
Nov. 7, 1989, approved by the governor Dec. 11, 1989, designated the existing
text of § 13 as subsection (a) and added new subsection (b).
CHAPTER VI.
THE MAYOR*
__________
*   Cross References: Mayor and council declared governing body,
ch. III, § 1.
__________
Sec. 1. Executive duties generally.
The mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the city, and ex officio
chairman of the council, and shall see that the ordinances thereof are
enforced.
Sec. 2. To preside at council meetings.
The mayor, when present, shall preside at all meetings of the council.
   Cross References: Authority of vice-chairman of the council during absence
or disability of mayor,
ch. VIII, § 1.
Sec. 3. Reports and recommendations to council.
The mayor shall annually, and from time to time, give the council information
relative to the affairs of the city, and recommend for its consideration such
matters as he may deem expedient.
Sec. 4. Recognition by courts and state officials as official city head.
The mayor shall be recognized as the official head of the city by the courts
for the purpose of service of civil process upon the city and instituting any
action or proceeding at law or equity for and in behalf of the city, and
appearing in any manner before the courts on behalf of the city; he shall be
recognized by the governor and other state officials as the chief and official
head of the city.
Sec. 5. Emergency powers.
The mayor shall take command of the police and govern the city by proclamation
during times of great danger.
CHAPTER VII.
POWERS OF MAYOR AND COUNCIL*
__________
*   Cross References: Powers of city.
ch. IV; powers and duties of mayor,
ch. VI: organization and meetings of mayor and council,
ch. IX, § 2 et seq.; exercise of powers under Charter with no procedure
prescribed by law,
ch. IX, § 15; election of mayor and council,
ch. XVI; provisions relating to officers and employees,
ch. XVIII; plenary powers of mayor and council,
ch. XXV, § 7.
__________
Sec. 1. Enumerated.
In addition to the powers provided by
chapter IV of this Charter, the mayor and council shall have power:
   (1)   Meetings; attendance of witnesses and production of papers; punishment
for contempt. To fix the time and place of their meetings; to provide for the
manner of giving notice, of special meetings; to compel the attendance before
them to witnesses and the production of papers in any matter under
investigation; to judge of the qualification and election of their own members;
and to punish any member or other city officer by a fine of not exceeding fifty
dollars ($50.00), for disorderly or contemptuous behavior in their presence.
   (2)   Passage of ordinances. To make and pass all ordinances, resolutions
and orders not repugnant to the Constitution of the United States. or to the
Constitution and laws of the State of Arizona, or to the provisions of this
Charter, necessary for municipal government and the management of the affairs
of the city, for the execution of the powers vested in the city, for carrying
into effect the provisions of this Charter.
   (3)   Levy and collection of taxes; claims and demands against the city. To
levy and collect taxes and assessments for city purposes on all property within
the city which is by law taxable for such purposes, subject, however, to
subsection (15) of
section 1 of chapter IV of this Charter; to pass upon all claims and demands
against, and control any and all expenditures of the city, subject to the
provisions of this Charter.
   (4)   Street lighting. To provide for the lighting of the streets and public
buildings and places of the city, and to regulate such lighting.
   (5)   Regulation and removal of poles and wires. To cause the removal and
placing underground of all telephone, telegraph, electric light or other wires
within the city, or within and [any] designated portion thereof, and to
regulate and prohibit the placing of poles and the suspending of wires along or
across any of the streets, alleys and public places of the city.
   (6)   Regulation, etc., of construction of billboards and signs. To
regulate, license or prohibit the construction and use of billboards and signs
within the city.
   (7)   Licensing and regulation of animals. To license and regulate the
keeping of animals and fowl and to prevent the same from running at large, and
to authorize the destruction thereof.
   (8)   Establishment of animal pounds sale and destruction of certain
animals. To establish pounds and pound districts which shall be under the
supervision of a poundmaster, and restrain the running at large of poultry,
horses, mules, cattle, swine, sheep, and other animals, and to authorize the
destruction or sale of the same.
   (9)   Markets and market houses. To establish, license and regulate markets
and market houses.
   (10)   Inspection of meats and other foods, destruction, etc., of unsound
foodstuffs. To provide for and regulate the inspection by the health officer*
of meats, poultry, fish, game, bread, butter, cheese, lard, eggs, vegetables,
flour, meal, milk and other food products offered for sale in the city, and to
provide for the taking and summarily destroying of any such products as are
unsound, spoiled, adulterated, or unwholesome, and to regulate and prevent the
bringing into the city, or having or keeping within the city, such as spoiled,
adulterated or unwholesome products.
__________
*   Editors Note:
Chapter XI, § 1, providing for the appointment of a health officer has been
repealed. The county health officer is given his duties by §
2-15 of the Code of Ordinances.
__________
   (11)   Weights and measures. To provide for the inspection and sealing of
all weights and measures used in the city and to enforce the keeping and use by
dealers of proper weights and measures duly tested and sealed.
   (12)   Construction of buildings; plumbing; wiring; application of
subsection to public school buildings.* To regulate the construction of and the
materials used in all buildings, chimneys, stacks, and other structures; and to
prevent the erection and maintenance of insecure or unsafe buildings, walls,
chimneys, stacks or other structures, and to provide for their summary
abatement or destruction; to prescribe the depth of cellars and basements, the
materials used in and the method of construction of foundations and foundation
walls, the manner of construction and location of drains and sewers, the
material used in and the thickness and construction of party walls, partition
and outside walls, the thickness and construction of chimneys, the construction
and character of bathrooms, water closets, privies and vaults, the manner and
materials used in wiring buildings or other structures for the use of
electricity for lighting, power or other purposes, and the manner and materials
used in piping buildings or other structures, for the purpose of supplying same
with water and gas; to prohibit the construction of buildings and structures
which to not conform to such regulations.
__________
*   Annotation--The city has the power, under
ch. VII, § 1(12), to regulate electrical wiring and electricians. City of
Tucson v. Stewart, 45 Ariz. 36, 40 P. 2d 72.
__________
This subdivision shall not and nothing in this Charter shall be taken or
construed as exempting or withdrawing any public school buildings from
regulations made by the mayor and council pursuant to this and other similar
grants of power, but such buildings and the electrical wiring and plumbing
installations therein shall be subject to any such regulations equally and to
the same extent as other buildings.*
__________
*   Annotation--This paragraph now void. Board of Regents of Universities, etc.
v. City of Tempe, 88 Ariz. 299, 356 P. 2d 399.
__________
   (13)   Requirements for fire escapes, etc., on buildings. To require the
owners and lessees of buildings or other structures to place upon or in them
fire escapes and appliances for protection against fires.
   (14)   Protection against fires generally. To prevent the construction and
cause the removal of dangerous chimneys, fireplaces, hearths, stoves, ovens,
boilers, apparatus and machinery used in any building in the city; to regulate
the carrying on of manufactories liable to cause fire; to prevent the
accumulation of shavings, rubbish, or any combustible materials in unsafe
places, and to make provisions to guard against fire.
   (15)   Fire limits and construction within boundaries. To prescribe fire
limits, and determine the character and height of buildings that may be erected
therein, and the nature of the materials to be used in the construction,
alteration or repair of such buildings or in the repair or alteration of
existing buildings within said fire limits.
   (16)   Entrance, exit and ventilation of public buildings. To regulate the
entrance to and the exit from all theaters, lecture room, public halls,
schools, churches, and public buildings of every kind; to prevent the placing
of seats, chairs, benches or other obstructions in the halls, aisles or open
places therein; and to provide for proper ventilation of all such buildings.
   (17)   Regulation, etc., of blasting; regulation of other dangerous
apparatus. To regulate or prohibit the operation of blasts and blasting and the
construction and operation of derricks, windlasses and other structures, and
apparatus and operations hazardous to life and property, and to regulate the
operation and provide for the inspection of freight and passenger elevators,
boilers, engines, dynamos and other apparatus generating steam, gas or
electricity.
   (18)   Definition, prevention and abatement of nuisances. To define
nuisances, and to prevent, remove and abate the same, and provide that said
nuisances may be removed or abated at the expense of the party or parties
creating, causing, committing or maintaining such nuisances, and to prohibit
offensive or unwholesome businesses or establishments within the city.
   (19)   Regulation of lodging and tenement houses. To regulate lodging,
tenement and apartment houses and to prevent the overcrowding the same and to
require the same to be put and kept in proper sanitary condition.
   (20)   Naming streets; numbering houses, etc. To provide for the naming of
streets and the numbering of houses, and to regulate or prohibit the exhibition
of banners, flags, placards, or signs across the streets, sidewalks or public
places of the city.
   (21)   Loading storage, etc., of gunpowder and other explosive and
combustible material. To regulate or prohibit the loading or storing of
gunpowder and other combustibles and explosive materials in the city, and the
transportation of the same through the streets of the city.
   (22)   Regulation of railroads and trains; regulation of traffic generally.
To regulate the speed of railroad trains engines, and cars passing through the
city and the speed of cars of street railway companies using the public streets
of the city; to require railroad companies to station flagmen, place gates or
other safety devices or viaducts at all such street crossings as it may deem
proper; to regulate and prohibit the crossing of streets by railroad[s] at
grade; to require street cars to be provided with fenders or other appliances
for the better protection of the public; to prohibit the making up of railroad
trains upon any of the streets, street crossings, or street intersections of
the city; to regulate all traffic of persons and vehicles upon any of the
streets or highways of the city.
   (23)   Stands for public vehicles for hire. To establish stands for public
vehicles for hire and require schedules for service charges to be posted in or
upon such public vehicles.
   (24)   Injury of trees and shrubs in public places. To prohibit the injury
to or interference with the ornamental trees and shrubbery in the streets and
public places of the city, and to prescribe the punishment for such injury and
interference.
   (25)   Franchises.* To grant the right to erect or lay telegraph or
telephone wires; to construct and operate street railroads; to lay gas or water
pipes; to erect poles and wires or lay conduits for carrying wires for
transmitting electric energy for lighting, heating or power purposes along or
upon the public streets and highways of the city; provided, however, that all
such rights and franchises shall be granted subject to all the restrictions and
limitations in this Charter contained relating to the granting of franchises,
and subject to any laws of the state as to the granting of franchises.
__________
*   Cross References: Franchises and public utilities generally,
ch. XVII.
__________
   (26)   Care of municipal prisoners. To make arrangements for the care,
feeding and clothing of all persons imprisoned by municipal authority or
sentenced to imprisonment by the magistrate's court, and to provide that all
such persons may work upon the streets, or do other public work, and provide
that compensation for such work be paid to those dependent on such persons.
   (27)   Obnoxious, offensive, immoral, lewd, indecent and disorderly conduct.
To regulate and punish all obnoxious, offensive, immoral, lewd, indecent and
disorderly conduct and practice within the city.
   (28)   Disease prevention. To make all regulations which may be necessary or
expedient for the preservation of the health and the suppression of disease; to
make regulations to prevent the introduction of contagious, infectious, or
other diseases into the city; to make quarantine laws and regulations and to
enforce the same within the city; to regulate, control and prevent the entry
within the city of persons, baggage, merchandise or other property infected
with contagious disease.
   (29)   Sale of city property. To provide for the sale of property belonging
to the city, which is not needed by, or which is not suited for the use of, the
city, or which is held in trust for the city or the inhabitants thereof.
   (30)   Protection of animals. To prohibit and punish perpetrators of acts of
cruelty to animals, and to require the places where such animals are kept to be
maintained in a healthful condition.
   (31)   Dedication of boulevards. To set apart and dedicate as a boulevard
any street or streets, or portions of a street or streets in the city.
   (32)   Measures for protection of health, safety, etc.; not expressly
enumerated. To adopt and enforce by ordinance all such measures and to
establish all such regulations in case no express provisions is in this Charter
made, as the mayor and council may from time to time deem expedient or
necessary for the promotion and protection of the health, comfort, safety,
life, welfare and property of the inhabitants of the city, the preservation of
peace and good order, the promotion of public morals, and the suppression of
vice in the city.
   (33)   Additional powers. To pass ordinances and resolutions and to adopt
orders upon any subject of municipal control, or to carry into force and effect
any powers of the municipality, subject to the provisions of this Charter.
   (34)   Assessment, levy and collection to taxes. To adopt by ordinances at
any time any provisions made by the General Laws of the State of Arizona, for
the assessment, levy and collection, or either of them, of city taxes by and
through the officers of the county in which the city is situated.
   (35)   Duties of officers not defined in Charter; fixing office hours for
city officials, etc. To prescribe by ordinance the duties of all officers whose
duties are not defined by this Charter; and may by ordinance prescribe for any
officer's duties in addition to those herein prescribed, when the same are not
inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter, and may fix the hours during
which the public office of any city official shall remain open, if not
otherwise provided for; and, in general, the mayor and council shall exercise
all of the powers of the city, and shall pass any and all ordinances or
resolutions necessary to carry out the provisions of this Charter.
(Ord. No. 8953, § 1, 9-2-97)
   Editors Note: Added as a result of a Charter Amendment Special Election held
November 4, 1997. This amendment became effective on December 9, 1997.
   Cross References: Power to levy and collect taxes to pay interest and
maintain the sinking fund of bonded indebtedness of the city, power to
establish and support free public libraries, power to advertise the advantages
of the city,
ch. XIII, § 8.
Sec. 2. Advisory arbitration of wage disputes.
The mayor shall, within ten (10) days of the submission of the position-
compensation plan by the human resources director to the mayor and council by
authority of
chapter XXX, section 2(2) of this Charter, as amended, hold a public hearing
affording all interested parties reasonable time to discuss the proposed plan.
If a dispute is raised by the employees or their representatives concerning the
proposed plan, the mayor and council shall meet with such employees of their
representatives in good faith to resolve the dispute. Should such dispute fail
to be resolved within fifteen (15) days after consideration by the parties, the
mayor shall forthwith appoint an advisory arbitration committee to study the
merits of such dispute. Such committee shall consist of a member of the city
council, and a representative of the employee group that raised the dispute.
Within three (3) days thereafter a member not connected with the city shall be
chosen to constitute the full committee. If the representatives fall to agree
upon such third member, they shall jointly request the federal mediation and
conciliation service to furnish a list of five (5) persons qualified to act as
such arbitrator. Upon receipt of said list, the representatives will attempt to
select one (1) of the five (5) persons satisfactory to both. Falling to agree,
they shall alternately strike one (1) name from the list (the right to strike
the first name having been determined by lot) until only one (1) name remains
and that person shall thereupon be accepted as the arbitrator. The cost of
arbitration shall be borne half by the city and half by the employees of the
employee group.
The advisory arbitration committee shall render to the mayor and council its
recommendations concerning the merits of the dispute, in writing, no later than
the first of April next preceding the fiscal year. The mayor and council may
consider such recommendations concerning the merits of the position-
compensation plan submitted by the advisory arbitration committee. The mayor
and council may adopt such recommendations, in whole or in part, and shall
enact such recommendations into law, modify in whole or in part the position-
compensation plan originally submitted by the human resources director, and
shall enact such into law, next preceding the fiscal year.
(Ord. No. 3706, eff. 11-26-71)
   Editors Note: Ord. No. 3706, § 1, adopted by the mayor and council Aug. 25,
1971, approved by a referendum election Nov. 2, 1971, certified by the mayor
Nov. 17, 1971, and approved by the governor Nov. 26, 1971, amended ch. VII by
adding § 2 to read as hereinabove set out.
Proposition 105 of an election called by Ord. No. 7274 on Nov. 7, 1989,
approved by the governor Dec. 11, 1989, instructed the replacement of
references regarding the civil service commission with references to the human
resources director created by new ch. of the Charter. The actual text of this §
2 was not included in Proposition 105; the editor has made the proposed change
in this section.
CHAPTER VIII.
VACANCIES*
__________
*   Cross References: Officers and employees,
ch. XVIII; filling vacancies on civil service commission,
ch. XXII, § 2.
__________
Sec. 1. Authority of vice-chairman of council in absence or disability of
mayor.
During the absence or disability of the mayor, the vice-chairman of the council
shall act as mayor pro tempore. In case of a vacancy in the office of mayor,
the vice-chairman of the council shall actas mayor until such vacancy is filled
as provided in this Charter. During such absence, disability or vacancy, the
powers and duties of the office of mayor shall devolve upon said vice-chairman.
While acting as mayor pro tempore during the absence or disability of the
mayor, or as acting mayor during a vacancy, the vice-chairman shall be entitled
to vote as mayor only, and not both as councilman and mayor.
Annotation--Under similar provision of 1883 Charter, it was held that when
vice-chairman was acting in absence of mayor he could sign ordinances and such
ordinances would be valid. City of Tucson v. Arizona Mortuary, 34 Ariz. 495,
272 Pac. 923.
Sec. 2. Procedures for filling vacancies in office of mayor or councilmember.
   (a)   As used in this section, the term "governing body" shall mean, in the
case of a vacancy in the office of councilmember, the mayor and council, and in
the case of a vacancy in the office of mayor, the council.
   (b)   In filling any vacancy in the office of mayor or councilmember, the
procedure shall be as follows:
   1.   The governing body shall meet within a reasonable time to select an
elector of the City, and, in the case of a councilmember, of the ward from
which the councilmember whose office has been vacated was elected or appointed,
to fill such vacancy.
   2.   Such selection may occur at any regular or special session of the
governing body called for that purpose, and the selection of such mayor or
councilmember shall be duly noted in the minutes.
   3.   Upon qualification, such selected mayor or councilmember shall continue
in office as mayor or councilmember until the expiration of the term for which
the mayor or councilmember whose office has been vacated had been elected or
appointed.
   4.   The governing body may provide by ordinance for additional procedures
to be used in selecting a mayor or councilmember pursuant to this subsection
(b).
   (c)   Should the governing body select a council member to fill a vacancy in
the office of mayor, the office of the councilmember so selected shall
thereupon become vacant, and shall be filled by the governing body in the
manner set forth in subsection (b).
(Ord. No. 8951, § 1, 9-2-97)
   Editors Note: Added as a result of a Charter Amendment Special Election held
November 4, 1997. This amendment became effective on December 9, 1997.
Sec. 3. When vacancies exist.
A vacancy shall exist in any elective or appointive office, except under the
recall provisions of this Charter, when an officer fails to qualify within
thirty (30) days after commencement of his term, dies, resigns, removes from
the city, absents himself continuously for thirty (30) days from the duties of
his office without the consent of the council, for two (2) consecutive months,
is incapacitated so that he is unable to attend to the duties of his office, is
convicted of violating any of the provisions of this Charter, or of a felony,
or is judicially declared a lunatic as defined by statute, or, in the office of
councilman, when a member of the council is selected to fill a vacancy in the
office of mayor, as hereinbefore provided.
(Ord. No. 8951, § 1, 9-2-97)
   Editors Note: Added as a result of a Charter Amendment Special Election held
November 4, 1997. This amendment became effective on December 9, 1997.
Sec. 4. Time for filling vacancies; term of appointees.
In the event of a vacancy in office; the appointing power or authority shall
immediately, or within such time as is expressly provided in this Charter, fill
the vacancy, which, in the event the office is for a term, shall be for the
remainder of term.
(Ord. No. 8951, § 1, 9-2-97)
   Editors Note: Added as a result of a Charter Amendment Special Election held
November 4, 1997. This amendment became effective on December 9, 1997.
Sec. 5. Mayor and councilmen not to hold other public office.
No person holding any civil office of the City of Tucson, the County of Pima,
the State of Arizona (except that of notary public), or of the United States of
America shall be eligible to the office of mayor or councilman; and the
acceptance by the mayor or any member of the council of any other civil office
of the City of Tucson, the County of Pima, the State of Arizona (except that of
notary public), or the United States of America shall operate to vacate the
office as mayor or councilman.
(Ord. No. 8951, § 1, 9-2-97)
   Editors Note: Added as a result of a Charter Amendment Special Election held
November 4, 1997. This amendment became effective on December 9, 1997.
CHAPTER IX.
LEGISLATION*
__________
*   Cross References: Adoption of ordinance setting tax rate,
ch. XIII, § 7; initiative,
ch. XIX; referendum,
ch. XX; existing ordinances, resolutions, resolutions and regulations continued
in effect,
ch. XXV, § 4; violations of Charter and ordinances,
ch. XXV, § 5.
__________
Sec. 1. Mayor and council to exercise legislative power.
The legislative power of the city shall be vested in the mayor and council.
   Cross References: Government vested in mayor and council,
ch. III, § 1.
Sec. 2. Organization and meetings of mayor and council.
At 10:00 a.m. on the first Monday in May, following a general municipal
election at which a mayor is elected, the mayor and council shall meet at the
usual place for holding meetings of the mayor and council, at which time the
newly elected mayor and the newly elected councilmembers shall assume the
duties of their office, and the mayor and council shall organize and, among
other things, shall elect a vice mayor from their number, to serve for one (1)
year from that date. A like meeting shall be held on the first Monday in May in
the years when only councilmembers are elected, and a vice mayor selected
likewise. The mayor and council, by ordinance, shall schedule a regular meeting
to be held during the first full week of each month, and may schedule such
additional regular meetings during any month as they deem necessary or
desirable. Special meetings may be called at any time by the mayor or, in the
mayor's absence or failure to act, by any four (4) members of the council.
(Ord. No. 9271, § 1, eff. 12-2-99)
   Editors Note: Proposition No. 101, approved at a Charter Amendment Special
Election held on November 2, 1999 became effective December 2, 1999.
Sec. 3. Meeting of mayor and council to be public; journal required.
All meetings of the mayor and council shall be public, and a journal of their
proceedings shall be kept by the clerk under their direction, and the ayes and
noes shall be taken and entered in such journal upon the passage of all
ordinances and resolutions, and on the final action of the mayor and council in
the granting of franchises, in the authorization of contracts, in the ordering
of work to be done or supplies or other public improvements; in all other
cases, upon the call of any member.
Sec. 4. Mayor and council to adopt rules of proceedings; substantive action to
be by ordinance or resolution.
The mayor and council shall establish rules for their proceedings, and shall
act only by resolution or ordinance.
Sec. 5. Quorum for mayor and council; vote required except for procedural
motions; signature, attestation of ordinances and resolutions.
Four (4) members of the mayor and council, or, in the absence or disability of
the mayor, four (4) members of the council, shall constitute a quorum to do
business, and four affirmative votes of the mayor and council, or, in the
absence or disability of the mayor, four (4) affirmative votes of the members
of the council, shall be necessary to adopt any ordinance, resolution or
motion, or pass any measure, unless a greater number is specifically required
by this Charter. Every ordinance or resolution adopted by the mayor and council
must be signed by the mayor and attested by the clerk.
(Prop. 403, eff. 2-2-2016)
Annotation--Under provision of 1883 Charter authorizing the vice-chairman of
the council to act as mayor in the absence of mayor, similar to
ch. VIII, § 1, hereof, held that the vice-chairman may sign ordinances when
acting as mayor. City of Tucson v. Arizona Mortuary, 34 Ariz. 495, 272 Pac.
923.
Sec. 6. Form of ordinances and resolutions; enacting clause.
Each proposed ordinance or resolution shall be introduced in written or printed
form. The enacting clause of all ordinances adopted by the mayor and council
shall be
      "BE IT ORDAINED by the Mayor and Council of the City of Tucson."
Sec. 7. Vote on motion to reconsider ordinance.
When an ordinance put upon final passage fails to pass, and a motion is made to
reconsider, the vote on such motion shall not be taken within twenty-four (24)
hours thereafter.
Sec. 8. Signing, attestation, effective date of ordinances, resolutions,
franchises; emergency measures; publication and posting required.
All ordinances, resolutions or franchises shall be signed by the mayor and
attested by the clerk, and transcribed in the proper books therefor, but no
ordinance, resolution or franchise shall take effect and become operative until
thirty (30) days after its passage, except measures necessary for the immediate
preservation of the peace, health or safety of the city; but no such emergency
measure shall become immediately operative unless it shall state, in a separate
section, the reasons why it is necessary that it should become immediately
operative, and be approved by the affirmative vote of five (5) members of the
mayor and council, taken by ayes and noes; provided, further, that all
ordinances and resolutions having the effect of ordinances or required to be
published, except emergency ordinances and resolutions, shall be published at
least three (3) consecutive times in the official newspaper of the city, and a
copy thereof posted on a bulletin board in front of the City Hall, before they
become effective and operative.
(Prop. 403, eff. 2-2-2016)
   Cross References: Printing and publication of propositions required to be
submitted to voters,
ch. XIX, § 5.
Annotations--Adoption of an electrical code by resolution which was in turn
adopted by an ordinance which complied with the requirements of
ch. IX, § 8. constituted an effective adoption of the electrical code, City of
Tucson v. Stewart, 45 Ariz. 36, 40 p. 2d 72.
Chapter IX, § 10 does not mean that emergency measures passed pursuant to
ch. IX, § 8 will not become effective until thirty days after passage; they
become effective upon passage under
ch. IX, § 8 above. Burton v. City of Tucson, 88 Ariz. 320, 356 P. 2d 413.
Sec. 9. Manner of revising, amending, reenacting ordinances.
Ordinances shall not be revised, reenacted or amended by reference to title
only, but the ordinance to be revised or reenacted, or the section or sections
thereof to be amended, or the new section or sections to be added thereto,
shall be set forth and adopted in the method provided in this chapter for the
adoption of ordinances.
Sec. 10. Publication, effective date of ordinances.
All ordinances adopted under this Charter, except emergency ordinances, shall
be published forthwith in the usual manner three (3) consecutive times in the
official newspaper, and no [such] ordinance shall take effect until thirty (30)
days after its passage.
Annotation--
Chapter IX, § 10 does not mean that emergency measures passed pursuant to
ch. IX, § 8 will not become effective until thirty days after passage; they
become effective upon passage under
ch. IX, § 8, Burton v. City of Tucson, 88 Ariz. 320, 356 P. 2d 413. The word
[such] was inserted by editors to show effect of said case.
Sec. 11. Manner of repealing or suspending ordinances.
No ordinance or section thereof shall be repealed or suspended except by
ordinance adopted in the manner provided in this chapter.
Sec. 12. Minutes to be public.
Any citizen of the city may have access to the minutes, upon application to the
clerk.
Sec. 13. Right to petition mayor and council; consideration of petitions.
Any citizen of the city may appear before the mayor and council at any regular
meeting, and present a written petition; such petition shall be acted upon by
the mayor and council in the regular course of business, within fifteen (15)
days.
Sec. 14. Failure to vote.
No member shall be excused from voting except upon matters involving the
consideration of his own official conduct. In all other cases a failure to vote
shall be entered on the minutes as an affirmative vote.
Sec. 15. Exercise of powers under Charter when no procedure prescribed by law.
Wherever, by any provision of this Charter, it is prescribed that any power,
duty or procedure shall or may be exercised, performed or adopted in the manner
established by any law of the State of Arizona, and there be no procedure
established by state law therefor, then the mayor and council shall by
ordinance prescribe the procedure.
CHAPTER X.
POWERS AND DUTIES OF OFFICERS OTHER THAN MAYOR AND MEMBERS OF THE COUNCIL*
__________
*   Cross References: Officers and salaries generally,
ch. V; work day, minimum wage, citizenship requirements for employees,
ch. XV, § 5; officers and employees generally,
ch. XVIII; civil service,
ch. XXII; political activities by employees prohibited,
ch. XXV, § 8; purchasing agent,
ch. XXVII; director of finance,
ch. XXIX; director of parks and recreation,
ch. XXXI.
__________
Sec. 1. City manager.
Subject to the control of the mayor and council, the manager shall have the
general supervision and direction of the administrative operation of the city
government; he shall supervise and direct the official conduct of all
appointive city officers except the auditor,* attorney, treasurer,† health
officer,† clerk and magistrate; he shall supervise the performance of all
contracts made by any person for work done for the city, and in that
behalfrepresent the city except as it may be otherwise provided in this
Charter; he shall appoint, employ and discharge, from time to time, as occasion
requires, all officers, deputies and employees of the city, who elsewhere in
this Charter he is authorized to appoint, employ and discharge; he shall
appoint all officers of the city, the appointment or election of whom is not
otherwise provided for in this Charter, and may remove them when the interests
of the city require; he shall make a written report to the mayor and council,
at their first meeting in each month, of the state of the condition and
business affairs of the city, with his recommendations in regard thereto; and
he shall, whenever required by the mayor and council, make a written or verbal
report, as may be indicated by the mayor and council, in detail of any
particular matter relating to the affairs of the city within his supervision;
he may require written monthly reports, or may require them oftener, from each
of the appointed officers of the city, of the business and conditions of such
office, and shall submit the same to the mayor and council upon their request
therefor. The manager may direct reports other than the monthly reports herein
provided for to be made verbally. All written reports shall be safely kept by
the proper officers, as a part of the records of the city, and be open to the
inspection of the electors of the city during office hours.
It shall be his duty, as well as that of the mayor, to see that all of the
ordinances of the city are enforced.
(Ord. No. 1287, eff. 9-4-52)
__________
†   Editors Note: The office of auditor was abolished by repeal of §
2 of this chapter, and his functions are now performed by the director of
finance under
ch. XXIX hereof. The office of treasurer was abolished by repeal of §
3 of this chapter, and his functions are now performed by the director of
finance under
ch. XXIX hereof.
Chapter XI, § 1, providing for a health officer has been repealed.
   Cross References: Appointment, term and removal of city manager,
ch. V, § 3; budgetary duties of city manager,
ch. XIII, §§ 3,
4; duty of manager to keep franchise record,
ch. XVII, § 13; duty of manager to issue temporary permits for franchise
holders to use streets and public places,
ch. XVII, § 14.
Sec. 2. Repealed by Ord. No. 2080, § 1, eff. Aug. 26, 1960.
   Editors Note: Chapter X, § 2, of this Charter, which was repealed by Ord.
No. 2080, dealt with the auditor and ex officio city assessor. These provisions
were repealed because rendered obsolete by the adoption of amendments to
ch. XXIX, relating to the department of finance and director of finance.
Sec. 3. Repealed by Ord. No. 2080, § 1, eff. Aug. 26, 1960.
   Editors Note: Prior to repeal of ch. X, § 3, by Ord. No. 2080, the section
dealt with the duties and powers of the city treasurer and ex officio tax
collector. Said provisions were rendered obsolete by amendments to
ch. XXIX, relating to the department of finance and director of finance.
Sec. 4. City attorney.
The attorney shall have been duly admitted to the practice of his profession in
the Supreme Court of the State of Arizona, and shall have been actually engaged
in the practice of his profession for a period of at least five (5) years. He
shall prosecute, in behalf of the city, all criminal cases arising from
violations of the provisions of this Charter and the ordinances of the city. He
shall attend to all suits and proceedings in which the city may be legally
interested; provided, however, that the mayor and council shall have control of
all litigation of the city, and may employ other attorneys to take charge of or
assist in any litigation. He shall be in attendance at meetings of the mayor
and council when required by the mayor and council, and shall give his advice
or opinion in writing, whenever requested so to do by the mayor and council, or
any officer of the city. He shall approve the form of all bonds given to, and
all contracts made by, the city, endorsing his approval thereon in writing. He
shall, whenever required by the mayor and council, or any member thereof, draft
any and all proposed ordinances for the city, and amendments thereto, and shall
advise and consult with the mayor and council whenever requested, and shall do
and perform all such things touching his office as the mayor and council may
from time to time require. On vacating the office, he shall surrender all
books, papers, files and documents pertaining to the city business to his
successor. He shall perform such other and further duties as may be at any time
required of him by ordinance or by the laws of the state.
   Cross References: Appointment, term and removal of city magistrates,
ch. V, § 4.1.
Sec. 5. City engineer.
The engineer shall have not less than five (5) years' practical experience as a
civil engineer. He shall perform all the engineering and surveying required in
the carrying on of public works and improvements done under the authority of
the mayor and council. All maps, plats, profiles, filed notes, estimates and
other memoranda of surveys and other professional work made or done for or
under his direction or control during his term of office shall be and continue
to be the property of the city. He shall be custodian of and responsible for
all maps, plats, profiles, field notes and other records and memoranda
belonging to the city, pertaining to his office and the work thereof, all of
which he shall keep in proper order and condition, with full and complete
indexes thereto. He shall have the decision, subject, however, to any
ordinances that the mayor and council may enact, as to the proper locality and
height of telegraph, telephone, electric light and other poles, as well as. the
proper alignment and height above the ground of telegraph, telephone, electric
light and other wires, the depth below the surface and alignment of all water,
gas, sewer and other pipes and conduits, the grade and proper alignment of all
streets and street railway tracks. He shall perform such other and further
duties as are or may be required of him by this Charter, by ordinance, or the
laws of the state.
   Cross References: Appointment, term and removal of city engineer,
ch. V, § 6.
Sec. 6. Superintendent of streets.
It shall be the duty of the superintendent of streets to see that all laws,
ordinances, resolutions, orders and regulations relative to the public streets
and highways are fully carried into execution, and the penalties for breaches
thereof are rigidly enforced. He shall superintend and direct the sweeping,
cleaning and sprinkling of the streets, and the cleaning and flushing of all
sewers, and shall keep himself informed of the condition of all public streets,
highways and alleys. He shall have the general care of, and frequently inspect
the streets, highways and alleys of the city. He shall receive and investigate
all complaints as to their condition, and shall have charge of the enforcement
of all ordinances and laws pertaining to street obstructions. He shall
frequently inspect all public works, pertaining to street improvement, while
same are in course of construction; inspect all work and material used in such
construction; and reject all material or work not in conformity with good
engineering or the contract, and shall at once report to the manager all
deviations from contracts and the use of improper material and bad workmanship
in such construction, and deliver to the clerk a duplicate of such report for
the use and benefit of the mayor and council. He shall perform such other
duties as are or shall be required of him by this Charter, ordinance,
resolution or the laws of the state.
   Cross References: Appointment, term and removal of superintendent of
streets,
ch. V. § 6.
Sec. 7. Police department and chief of police.
There shall be maintained a police department, the members of which, other than
the chief of police, shall be qualified and appointed under civil service rules
and regulations. There shall be appointed a chief of police as provided in
chapter V., Section 7 of this Charter. Such chief of police shall keep a public
office, to be provided by the mayor and council, which office shall be open day
and night. The chief of police shall devote his or her entire time to the
discharge of the duties of that office, and shall have full control of the
police force of the city.
In addition to the chief of police, the mayor and council, in the organization
of the police department, shall provide for a permanent police force, which
shall consist of such number of policemen as the mayor and council shall, from
time to time, deem necessary to preserve the peace, protect the lives and
property of the citizens, and enforce the laws and ordinances within the city.
The chief and members of the police department shall have power to make arrests
for violations of the ordinances of the city, and shall have the same power and
authority to make arrests, and to serve processes, within the city, other than
civil processes issued from the superior or justice of peace courts, or is or
may be vested in sheriffs or other peace officers by the laws of the state.
They shall have such other powers and duties as the mayor and council may, by
ordinance, provide.
(Prop. 404, eff. 2-2-2016)
   Cross References: Appointment, term and removal of police chief,
ch. V, 7; authority of police to serve process of magistrates court,
ch. XII. § 5; previously employed policemen declared under civil service,
ch. XXV, § 10; effect of civil service on police chief,
ch. XXV, § 11.
Sec. 8. Superintendent of water department.
The superintendent of the water department shall have such powers and perform
such duties as the mayor and council shall by ordinance provide, but subject,
however, to the control and supervision of the manager.
   Cross References: Appointment, term and removal of superintendent of water
department,
ch. V, § 6.
Sec. 9. Fire department and fire chief.
There shall be maintained a fire department, the members of which, other than
the fire chief, shall be qualified and appointed under civil service rules and
regulations. There shall be appointed a fire chief as provided in chapter V.,
Section 7 of this charter. The fire chief shall devote his or her entire time
to the discharge of the duties of that office, and shall have control of the
officers and men employed in the fire department. The fire chief shall see that
all rules of the civil service commission relating to the fire department are
enforced, and shall be charged with the special duty of superintending the
extinguishment of fires, and seeing that all property imperiled thereby is
protected and guarded. He shall have such other and further powers and duties
as the mayor and council may, by ordinance, provide.
(Prop. 404, eff. 2-2-2016)
   Cross References: Appointment, term and removal of the fire chief,
ch. V, § 7; previously employed firemen declared under civil service,
ch. XXV, § 10; effect of civil service on fire chief,
ch. XXV, § 11.
Sec. 10. City clerk.
The clerk shall have the custody and be responsible for the corporate seal of
the city, all books, papers, records and archives belonging to the city, not in
actual use by other officers, or elsewhere by special provisions committed to
other custody. He shall be present at each meeting of the mayor and council,
and keep a record of its proceedings. He shall keep separate books in which,
respectively, lie shall record all ordinances, resolutions, contracts and
official bonds. He shall keep all the books properly indexed and open to public
inspection, when not in actual use. He shall have power to take affidavits and
administer oaths in all matters relating to the business of the city, and shall
make no charge therefor. He shall devote his entire time to the duties of his
office. He shall be the custodian of the City Hall and all personal property,
the custody of which has not been otherwise provided for in this Charter. He
shall have such other powers and perform such other duties as are or shall be
provided by the laws of the state, or by ordinance of the mayor and council.
   Cross References: Appointment, term and removal of city clerk,
ch. V, § 4; duty of clerk to countersign and register contracts,
ch. XV, § 1.
CHAPTER XI.
CITY BOARD OF HEALTH
Sec. 1. Repealed by Ord. No. 2080, § 1, eff. Nov. 10, 1960.
CHAPTER XII.
CITY COURT
Sec. 1. Established; when open; conducting business on nonjuridical days.
There shall be and is hereby established in the city a municipal court, to be
known and designated "The City Court of The City of Tucson, Pima County, State
of Arizona," which court shall always be open, except on nonjuridical days, and
on such nonjuridical days it may transact such business within its jurisdiction
as is authorized by general law to be transacted by courts of justice of the
peace, relative to businesses within their jurisdiction.
Sec. 2. Jurisdiction generally.
Said court shall, within the territorial limits of said city, have and exercise
jurisdiction as follows:
It shall have and exercise exclusive original jurisdiction of all proceedings
of a criminal nature for the violation of any ordinance of said city, and of
every action of a civil nature for the enforcement of a penalty, or the
recovery of a penalty or forfeiture imposed by any ordinance of said city for
violation thereof, or for neglect to perform any duty by any ordinance imposed,
and of every action for the collection of any license, fine, or penalty due
from any person to said city, and required to be paid, or which is due and
collectible under the ordinance[s] of said city.
Sec. 3. Appointment, duties, term of magistrate.
There shall be at least one (1) city magistrate appointed by the mayor and
council, who shall be judge of the city court. He shall hold office for a term
of two (2) years, or until his successor is appointed and qualified, unless
sooner removed from office in the manner provided in this Charter.
   Cross References: Manner of removing magistrates,
ch. V, §§ 4,
4.1.
Sec. 4. Mayor and council to provide courtroom, supplies, clerical help;
records required; disposition of fines, fees.
The mayor and council shall provide each magistrate with a proper court room,
and with all necessary stationery, furniture and paraphernalia. The mayor and
council shall also provide proper and necessary clerical force for the keeping
and maintaining of a proper record of the transactions of the magistrate's
court, and of the acts, judgments and orders of the said magistrate, and the
clerk may be assigned to that duty. All fines, penalties and fees collected by
the magistrate in the course and performance of his duties shall be paid to the
treasurer on the first day of each and every month, and proper receipt taken
therefor. The moneys so paid by the magistrate may, by ordinance of the mayor
and council, be apportioned to any particular fund, and shall thereafter be
used in accordance with such ordinance.
   Editors Note: The powers and duties of the city treasurer are now performed
by the director of finance under
ch. XXIX.
Sec. 5. Authority to issue writs and processes; service; authority to
administer oaths.
For the proper carrying out of the jurisdiction, vested in said magistrate, he
shall be entitled and authorized to issue and cause to be served, any and all
writs and processes, and he shall have full authority to hear and determine all
matters properly coming before him and coming within his jurisdiction herein
specified. The writs and processes to be used by said magistrate shall be
similar to those used by justices of the peace in cases of a similar nature,
and proper record shall be kept of the issuance of writs and processes and
returns, and of any and all other actions taken relative thereto, and the
actions of the court thereon. Any person may be authorized by the court and
directed to execute and serve any and all writs and processes issued out of
said magistrate's court by said magistrate, and proper return shall be made by
such person to the same extent as is required of constables and sheriffs in the
service and execution of similar papers.
Other methods for service of writs and processes that may from time to time be
authorized by the laws of the State of Arizona shall be valid.
The magistrate shall have power to administer oaths to witnesses, and all oaths
necessary or incident to the performance of the duties of his office.
(Ord. No. 4394, eff. 1-9-76)
   Cross References: Authority of police to serve process of superior or
justices of the peace court,
 ch. X, § 7.
Sec. 6. Exercise of statutory powers and jurisdiction.
Said court shall, in addition, have such powers and jurisdiction as is now or
may hereafter be granted under the laws of the state for police courts in
cities incorporated under the general laws of the state.
   State Law References: Police courts generally, A.R.S. § 22-401 et seq.
Sec. 7. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved at the decision of the magistrate may appeal therefrom to
such higher court as is now or may hereafter be provided for appeals from
justices' courts in criminal cases, and in accordance with the provisions of
the laws of Arizona regulating the same.
Annotation--Despite the fact that an appeal to Superior Court under this
section and general law is tried de nova, it is not necessary that any
information be filed and the cause may be prosecuted by the city attorney
rather than the county attorney, Ex Parte Coone, 67 Ariz. 299, 195 P. 2d 149.
   State Law References: Appeals from justices' courts in criminal cases,
A.R.S. 22-371 et seq.
Sec. 8. Justice of the peace to perform duties if magistrate does not.
If at any time the magistrate refuse or fail to perform the duties of his
office, or in case of his absence or inability to act, it is hereby made the
duty of any justice of the peace within said city to perform the duties of said
magistrate, with all the jurisdiction conferred by law upon said magistrate;
provided, however, that said mayor and council may designate the particular
justice who shall exercise said jurisdiction, in which case no other justice
shall possess the same.
Sec. 9. Ordinances giving effect to chapter required.
The mayor and council shall pass all necessary ordinances to give effect to the
provisions of this chapter, not otherwise herein provided.
CHAPTER XIII.
FINANCE AND TAXATION*
__________
*   Cross References: General power to tax.
ch. IV. § 1(15); limitations on claims for damages,
ch. XXV, § 12; department of finance,
ch. XXIX.
__________
Sec. 1. Fiscal year.
The fiscal year of the city shall commence upon the first day of July of each
year.
Sec. 2. Mayor and council to provide for assessments, levy, collection of
taxes; use of county services; statutory powers authorized.
The mayor and council shall by ordinance provide a system for the assessment,
levy and collection of all city taxes, not inconsistent with the provisions of
this Charter.
The city shall have power to avail itself by ordinance of any law of the State
of Arizona, now or hereafter in force, and comply with the requirements
thereof, whereby assessments may be made by the assessor of the county in which
the city is situated, and taxes collected by the tax collector of said county
for and in behalf of the said city, and may avail itself by ordinance of the
laws of the state, nor or hereafter in force, and comply with the requirements
thereof in regard to the ordering, making and collecting of special assessments
upon any and all property benefited. Other provisions of this Charter
concerning the assessment, levy and collection of taxes shall be subject to the
provisions of any such ordinance while the same shall be in force.
Sec. 3. Annual estimate of expenditures required.
On or before the first Monday in May of each year, or on such date in each year
as shall be fixed by the mayor and council, the manager shall prepare a careful
estimate in writing of the amounts of money, specifying in detail the objects
thereof, required for tile business and conduct of the affairs of the city
during the next ensuing fiscal year.
Sec. 4. Submission of estimate of expenses and revenues to mayor and council.
On or before the first Monday in June of each year, or on such date in each
year as shall be fixed by the mayor and council, the manager shall submit to
the mayor and council the estimates of each department and his own personal
report and recommendation and estimate as to the probable expenditures of the
city for the next ensuing fiscal year, stating the amount in detail required to
meet all expenditures necessary for city purposes, including interest and
sinking funds, and outstanding indebtedness, if any there be; also an estimate
of the amount of income expected from all sources in each department, and the
probable amount required to be raised by taxation to cover such expenditures,
interest and sinking fund.
Sec. 5. Annual budget, required; publication; notice of meeting to fix tax
levy.
The mayor and council shall meet annually prior to fixing the tax levy, and
make a budget of the estimated amounts required to pay the expenses of
conducting the business of the city for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget
shall be prepared in such detail as to show the aggregate sum and the items
thereof allowed for each and every purpose, and such budget, together with a
notice that the mayor and council will meet for the purpose of making tax
levies, in accordance with said budget, at the time and place set out in said
notice, shall be published in the official newspaper of the city once a week
for at least two (2) consecutive weeks following the tentative adoption of such
budget.
(Ord. No. 1142, eff. 6-23-48)
Sec. 6. Adoption of budget and tax levy.
The mayor and council shall meet one (1) week previous to the day on which tax
levies are made, and at the time and place designated in such notice, when and
where any taxpayer who may appear shall be heard in favor of or against any
proposed tax levy. When such hearing shall have been concluded, the mayor and
council shall adopt the budget as finally determined upon. All taxes shall be
levied or voted upon in specific sums, and shall not exceed the sum specified
in such published estimate.
(Ord. No. 1142, eff. 6-23-48)
Sec. 7. Adoption of ordinance setting tax rate.
On the day set for making tax levies, and not later than the third Monday in
August, the mayor and council shall meet and adopt an ordinance levying upon
assessed valuation of property within the city, subject to the provisions of
this Charter, a rate of taxation upon each one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the
assessed value of all real and personal property within the city for municipal
expenses, sufficient to raise the amounts estimated to be required in the
annual budget, less the amount estimated to be received from fines, licenses
and other sources of revenue.
(Ord. No. 1142, eff. 6-23-48)
Sec. 8. Additional power to tax for bonds, libraries, advertising.
The mayor and council shall have the power to levy and collect taxes in
addition to the taxes herein authorized to be levied and collected, sufficient
to pay the interest and maintain the sinking fund of the bonded indebtedness of
the city, and to provide for the establishment and support of free public
libraries, and for advertising the advantages of the city.
Annotation--The authority to collect taxes to advertise the city is not subject
to the limitation of amount imposed by A.R.S. § 9-493. City of Tucson v.
Sunshine Climate Club, 64 Ariz. 1, 164 P. 2d 598.
   Cross References: Limitations on ad valorem tax,
ch. IV, § 2.
Sec. 9. Taxes to be uniform, for public purposes only.
All taxes shall be uniform upon the same class of property within the corporate
limits, and shall be levied and collected for public purposes only.
Sec. 10. Property exempt from taxation; general requirements for taxes.
There shall be exempt from taxation all federal, state, county and municipal
property; property of educational, charitable and religious associations and
institutions not used or held for profit shall be exempt from taxation.
Public debts, as evidenced by the bonds of Arizona, its counties,
municipalities, or other subdivisions, shall be exempt from taxation. There
shall further be exempt from taxation the property of widows and others,
residents of this city, where by the laws of the state such property is made
exempt from the state and county taxation.
All property in the city not exempt under the laws of the United States, the
laws of the State of Arizona, under the Charter and ordinances of this city,
shall be subject to taxation, to be ascertained as provided by ordinance.
No tax shall be levied except in pursuance of this Charter and the laws of the
State of Arizona, and every ordinance imposing a tax shall state distinctly the
object of the tax, to which object only it shall be applied.
(Ord. No. 1142, eff. 6-23-48)
Sec. 11. Deposit of city funds; interest required.
The mayor and council shall cause the city's monies, other than sinking funds,
to be deposited in any bank or banks in the city designated by said mayor and
council, upon sufficient security, of the kind and character mentioned in the
following section, to assure the safety of any such deposit or deposits, being
given the city therefor by said bank or banks, said security to be approved by
the mayor and council.
Said monies shall at all times be deposited in or with any such bank at the
best obtainable rate of interest per annum on the daily balance of such
deposits, to be computed monthly.
Sec. 12. Investment of city funds.
   (a)   Sinking Funds. All city monies collected or held as sinking funds, and
interest thereon, shall be deposited by ordinance or policy of the governing
body in those investments as set forth in the Arizona Revised Statutes as being
permissible investments for state monies.
   (b)   Surplus and Idle Funds. All city monies which are surplus funds or
idle funds, and interest thereon, shall be invested as provided by ordinance or
policy of the governing body in those investments as set forth in the Arizona
Revised Statutes as being permissible investments for state monies.
(Ord. No. 4086, § 1, eff. 11-28-73; Ord. No. 7684, § 1, eff. 12-30-91)
   Editors Note: Section 12 was amended in its entirety by Ord. No. 7684,
adopted Sept. 3, 1991; approved at referendum Nov. 5, 1991; certified by the
mayor Nov. 12, 1991; and approved by the governor Dec. 30, 1991.
Sec. 13. Disposition of unexpended budget balances.
At the end of each fiscal year any and all amount or amounts, balance or
balances, remaining unexpended in any budget, item or items, account or
accounts, fund or funds, other than funds for the payment of interest upon or
redemption of city bonds, shall no longer be available for expenditure for the
purpose or purposes for which budgeted, but shall be and become a part of
treasurer's* balance on hand, and shall be deducted from the amount or amounts
required to be raised by taxation for the ensuing year.
__________
*   Editors Note: The office of treasurer has been abolished and his functions
are now performed by the director of finance under
ch. XXIX hereof.
__________
Sec. 14. Counter-signature of warrants, checks.
The mayor and council shall, by proper ordinance, provide for the safeguarding
of monies, funds and deposits by counter-signatures on warrants and checks, in
such manner as they may deem such action necessary.
Sec. 15. Annual independent audit required.
The mayor and council shall annually have made an audit of the books and
accounts of the city by a competent public accountant, not connected with the
administration of city affairs.
CHAPTER XIV.
OFFICIAL BONDS*
__________
*   Cross References: Officers and employees generally,
ch. XVIII.
__________
Sec. 1. Authority to require; execution; approval of sureties; payment of
premiums.
The mayor and council shall by proper ordinance provide for the bonding of all
officials and employees of the city whose duties require or result in the
handling of monies, funds or securities. Every such bond shall be executed to
the city by a qualified surety company, as surety, to be approved by the mayor
and council. All premiums for such bonds shall be paid by the city.
   Cross References: Duty of city attorney to approve form of bonds,
ch. X, § 4.
CHAPTER XV.
PROCUREMENT*
__________
*   Editors Note: Former ch. XV, §§ 1--8, was titled "Contracts" and had been
amended by Ord. Nos. 2080 and 7274. A new chapter, §§ 1--6, was added by Ord.
No. 7684, adopted Sept. 3, 1991; approved at an election held Nov. 5, 1991;
certified by the mayor Nov. 12, 1991; and approved by the governor Dec. 30,
1991.
__________
Sec. 1. Application of this chapter.
This chapter shall apply to every expenditure of public monies, by this city,
irrespective of their source, including federal assistance monies, under any
contract, except that this chapter shall not apply to either grants or
contracts between the city and other governments. This chapter shall also apply
to the disposal of city materials. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the
city from complying with the terms and conditions of any grant, gift, bequest,
or cooperative agreement.
(Ord. No. 7684, § 1, eff. 12-30-91)
Sec. 2. Procurement organization.
   (a)   Creation of the Department of Procurement. There is hereby created the
department of procurement, the head of which shall be the director of
procurement.
   (b)   Authority of the Director of Procurement.
   (1)   Principal contracting officer of the city. The director shall serve as
the central procurement officer of the city pursuant to rules and regulations
established by ordinance.
   (2)   Duties. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the
director shall, in accordance with ordinances adopted by the mayor and council:
   (i)   Procure or supervise the procurement of all materials, services, and
construction needed by the city;
   (ii)   Exercise general supervision and control over all inventories of
materials belonging to the city;
   (iii)   Sell, trade, or otherwise dispose of surplus material belonging to
the city; and
   (iv)   Prepare, issue, revise, maintain, and monitor the use of
specifications for materials, services, and construction required by the city.
   (c)   Delegation of Authority by the Director of Procurement. The director
may delegate authority to designees or to any department or official of the
city.
Sec. 3. Source selection and contract formation.
   (a)   Methods of Source Selection. Unless otherwise authorized by law, all
city contracts shall be awarded by competitive sealed bidding, pursuant to
ordinance duly adopted, except contracts awarded by competitive sealed
proposals, small purchases, sole source procurement, emergency procurements or
competitive selection procedures for specified professional services.
   (b)   Preparation, Form, Execution, Registration. Except as it may be
otherwise provided, either in this Charter, by law or ordinance, all contracts
shall be drawn under the supervision of the attorney, must be in writing,
executed in the name of the city by the mayor and must be countersigned by the
clerk, who shall number and register the same in a book kept for that purpose.
   (c)   Progressive Payments Authorized; Limitation. Any contract may provide
for progressive payments under such rules and regulations, and with such
exceptions as may be prescribed by ordinance; provided however, that an amount
be retained sufficient to insure the proper performance of the contract.
   (d)   Cancellation of Invitations for Bids or Requests for Proposals. An
invitation for bids, a request for proposals or other solicitation may be
cancelled, or any or all bids or proposals may be rejected in whole or in part
as may be specified in the solicitation, when it is in the best interest of the
city in accordance with procedures prescribed by ordinance.
(Ord. No. 7684, § 1, eff. 12-30-91)
Sec. 4. Legal and contractual remedies.
   (a)   Authority To Resolve Protested Solicitations and Awards. The director
shall have the authority to settle and resolve a protest concerning the
solicitation or award of a contract.
   (b)   Authority To Debar or Suspend. After reasonable notice to the person
involved and reasonable opportunity for that person to be heard, the director
shall have the authority in accordance with ordinances duly adopted to debar or
suspend a person for cause from consideration for award of contracts.
(Ord. No. 7684, § 1, eff. 12-30-91)
Sec. 5. Violation.
Any officer or employee of the city, who intentionally or knowingly contracts
for or purchases any material, services or construction in a manner contrary to
the requirements of this Charter, or the ordinances adopted pursuant thereto,
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be removed from office or
terminated from employment.
(Ord. No. 7684, § 1, eff. 12-30-91)
Sec. 6. Contracts voided for collusion; letting new contracts.
If at any time it shall be found that the person to whom a contract has been
awarded has, in presenting any bid or bids, colluded with any other party or
parties for the purpose of preventing any other bid being made, then the
contract so awarded shall be null and void, and the director of procurement
shall advertise for a new contract for said work or provide for such public
work to be done by the city under the direction of the manager.
(Ord. No. 7684, § 1, eff. 12-30-91)
CHAPTER XVI.
ELECTIONS*
__________
*   Cross References: Authority to provide for municipal elections,
ch. IV, § 1(20); elective officers specified,
ch. V, § 1; franchise elections,
ch. XVII, § 1.
__________
Sec. 1. To be primary, general or special.
Elections to be held in the city shall be either primary, general or special.
PRIMARY ELECTION AND NOMINATIONS OF OFFICERS
Sec. 2. Date of primary elections; general laws regarding nominations adopted.
Primary elections under this Charter shall be held on the third Tuesday in
September of each year in which a general election for the offices of mayor and
councilmen, or councilmen only, shall be held as hereinafter provided in this
chapter. The provisions of the general laws of the State of Arizona relating to
and governing primary elections and the nomination of elective officers,
whether by primary or certificate of nomination (being the whole of title 16,
Arizona Revised Statutes, 1956, and each and every provision of said title with
all amendments and supplements thereto) applicable to a city of the population
and the class of this city, shall apply and govern the holding of primaries and
nominations of elective officers. The mayor and council shall have power to
make any further and additional provisions relating to primaries and
nominations of officers not repugnant or contrary to the provisions of the
constitution and the laws of the state or any amendments and supplements
thereto.
(Ord. No. 1142, eff. 6-23-48: Ord. No. 2080, eff. 11-10-60)
GENERAL ELECTION
Sec. 3. Date of general elections; terms; oath of officers.
The municipal general election shall be held on the first Tuesday after the
first Monday in November of each election year as provided in
section 4 of this chapter, except during the year 1962 when the municipal
general election shall be held on the third Tuesday of November. The terms of
the mayor and members of the council shall commence at 10:00 a.m. on the first
Monday in December following their election and, except as otherwise provided
in this chapter, shall be for four (4) years and until their successors are
elected and qualified. Each officer so elected shall take and subscribe to his
oath of office as in this chapter provided.
(Ord. No. 2080, eff. 11-10-60)
Sec. 4. Terms of mayor and councilmen staggered.
The incumbents of said offices shall serve their respective elected terms and,
in addition thereto, the mayor and three (3) councilmen having terms expiring
on the first Monday of May, 1961, shall be continued in office until the first
Monday in December, 1961, and the three (3) councilmen having terms expiring on
the first Monday of May, 1962, shall be continued in office until the first
Monday of December, 1962, Anything in this chapter to the contrary
notwithstanding:
   (a)   In 1961 there shall be elected a mayor and three (3) councilmen for a
term of two (2) years, which terms shall expire at 10:00 a.m. on the first
Monday in December, 1963;
   (b)   In 1962 there shall be elected three (3) councilmen for a term of
three (3) years, which terms shall expire at 10:00 a.m. on the first Monday in
December, 1965;
   (c)   In the year 1963 when the said terms provided in (a) hereof shall
expire there shall be held elections under the provisions of this chapter at
which there shall be elected a mayor and three (3) councilmen to fill the
offices expiring on the first Monday in December, 1963; and
   (d)   In the year 1965 when the said terms provided in (b) hereof shall
expire there shall be held elections under the provisions of this chapter at
which there shall be elected three (3) councilmen to fill the offices expiring
on the first Monday in December, 1965. Thereafter there shall be held primary
and general elections quadrennially for such offices.
(Ord. No. 2080, eff. 11-10-60)
Sec. 5. Qualifications for candidates for mayor and councilmen.
Candidates for the office of mayor and councilman [councilmen] of the city
shall be duly qualified electors under the laws of the State of Arizona and
under the provisions of this Charter, and shall have resided within, and have
been a qualified elector of, the City of Tucson for not less than three (3)
years immediately prior to becoming a candidate, except that time of residence
in any area and being a qualified elector thereof shall be counted as residence
and electoral qualifications within the City of Tucson one (1) year after said
area becomes annexed to the city. Any candidate for councilman shall have
resided in his respective ward or annexed area at least one (1) year prior to
his becoming a candidate, unless such residence has been shortened by the
redistricting of the city as to wards.
(Ord. No. 1640, eff. 5-16-56)
   Cross References: Mayor and councilmen holding other offices prohibited,
ch. XVIII, § 1.
Sec. 6. General conduct and control of elections; sample ballots and
instructions authorized.
The conducting and carrying on of all city elections shall be under the control
of the mayor and council, and they shall, by ordinance, subject to the
provisions of this Charter, provide for the holding of all municipal elections.
Sample ballots and instructions to voters may be sent out to the registered
electors entitled to a vote at any municipal election, but the sending out of
said ballots and instructions shall not be necessary, and no notice of any such
election, other than the publication of the ordinance calling and providing for
the same, shall be necessary.
Sec. 7. Applicability of general laws; duties of mayor and council and clerk.
The provisions of the general laws of the State of Arizona, governing the
elections of state and county officers, not inconsistent with the provisions of
this Charter, shall govern the said elections, in matters for which no
provision is made in this Charter, or by ordinance, and the mayor and council
and clerk, respectively, shall exercise the powers and perform the duties
conferred or imposed by such laws on the board of supervisors and clerks of
counties concerning elections.
   State Law References: Elections and electors generally, A.R.S. title 16.
Sec. 8. City to be divided into wards; redistricting.
The city shall be divided into six (6) wards, each ward containing, as nearly
as possible, the same total population. Beginning with the year 2000, and
quadrennially thereafter, and, in addition, during the second year following
the year of any decennial United States census, the mayor and council may, if
necessary to equalize the total population contained in the said wards, one
with another, redistrict the said city as to the said wards, and said
redistricting shall be done between the first day of October and the thirty-
first day of December of said years.
(Ord. No. 8947, § 1, 9-2-97)
   Editors Note: Added as a result of a Charter Amendment Special Election held
November 4, 1997. This amendment became effective on December 9, 1997.
Sec. 8.1. Redistricting advisory committee.
In any year in which redistricting of the city's wards is permitted under this
Charter, or whenever redistricting is otherwise mandated by law, the mayor and
council shall establish a Redistricting Advisory Committee, which shall make
written recommendations regarding the redistricting of wards. The formation,
term and activities of the Committee shall be regulated by ordinance.
No redistricting of the city's wards shall occur prior to the consideration by
the mayor and council of the Redistricting Advisory Committee's written
recommendations.
No redistricting plan shall be drawn for the purpose of favoring or disfavoring
any political party or person, nor for the purpose of diluting the voting
strength of any racial or ethnic minority group. To the extent reasonably
practicable, wards shall be equal in population and shall be contiguous and
compact.
(Ord. No. 8118, eff. 9-7-93)
Sec. 9. Mayor nominated and elected at large; councilmen nominated from wards,
elected at large.
Beginning in the year 1930, and continuing thereafter, the mayor shall be
nominated from and elected by the voters of the city at large, and the
councilmen shall be nominated each from, and by the respective voters of, the
ward in which he resides, and shall be elected by the voters of the city at
large.
Sec. 10. Number of polling places; open hours.
There shall be at least one (1) polling place provided in each ward in the city
for the casting of votes and such polling places shall be kept open on the day
of election from 6:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. The mayor and council may increase the
number of polling places from time to time as necessity may require.
(Ord. No. 2080, eff. 11-10-60)
Sec. 11. Qualifications for electors.
The qualifications of electors shall be as required by the constitution and
laws of the state for city and county elections. They shall also be residents
of the city at least ninety (90) days previous to any primary, special, or
general election held therein, and shall have actually resided in the ward in
which they claim to vote for thirty (30) days next preceding any such primary,
special or general election.
   State Law References: Qualifications of electors generally, A.R.S. § 16-101.
Sec. 12. Ordinance to provide for absentee voting.
The mayor and council shall provide, by ordinance, prior to the primary
election of 1930, for the voting at any primary, general or special election of
electors absent, or to be absent, from the city on the day of any such
election, and the sick and disabled who cannot attend the voting places in
person at any such election.
Sec. 13. Voting machines required.
The mayor and council shall provide for voting machines to be used in all the
wards of the city at any of the elections provided for by this Charter, and
full power and authority is hereby granted the mayor and council to do and
provide anything necessary to effectuate voting by machines.
Sec. 14. Filing and disposition of returns.
The election returns from each ward, immediately upon the completion of the
count and certification of the election board, shall be filed with the clerk,
who shall immediately place them in the safe or vault in the said clerk's
office, until the same shall be canvassed by the mayor and council. After
having been canvassed, said returns shall be sealed up and kept by the said
clerk for two (2) years, and no person shall have access to them, except on the
order of a court of general jurisdiction.
Sec. 15. Canvassing returns, declaring results.
On the first Monday after the election, the mayor and council shall meet and
canvass returns and declare the result of such election.
Sec. 16. Certification and delivery of results to persons elected; oath of
office required.
Within twenty-four (24) hours after the result of the election is declared, the
clerk, under his hand and official seal, shall issue a certificate therefor,
and serve the same personally or by registered mail upon the person elected,
and said person shall, within five (5) days after having received such
certificate, take and subscribe the oath of office required of him by this
Charter, which oath must be filed with the clerk.
Sec. 17. Statutes relative to violations of election laws and publicity of
finances applicable in city elections.
The laws of the State of Arizona, relative to violations of the election laws
and the publicity of campaign contributions and expenditures of committees and
candidates, at primary, special and general elections, shall apply to city
elections under this Charter, and shall be enforced as provided in said laws.
   State Law References: Campaign expenses and contributions generally, A.R.S.
§ 16-401.
SPECIAL ELECTIONS
Sec. 18. General election provisions applicable.
All special elections herein provided for shall be conducted in the same manner
and under the same provisions as are provided for the holding of general
elections, including the qualifications of electors and the nomination of
candidates.
SUBCHAPTER A.
CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTION LIMITATIONS
Sec. 1. Applications.
The provisions of this subchapter apply only to candidates for the offices of
mayor or city council of the City of Tucson, Arizona, in any primary, general
or special elections.
(Ord. No. 6300, § 1, eff. 3-4-86)
Sec. 2. Contributions limited.
   (a)   Effective with election for city offices in 1987, no person shall make
a contribution of more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) to any candidate for
mayor or city council in any campaign. A campaign committee may contribute up
to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) to any candidate for mayor or city council,
in the name of such group; provided further that no individual member of such
committee shall contribute more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) toward the
contribution, nor an aggregate amount of more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) to any candidate whether through a committee contribution or a
personal contribution.
   (b)   No candidate for mayor or city council shall accept or receive a
campaign contribution of more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) from any
person or more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) from any campaign
committee during any campaign period.
   (1)   Contributions include monies, loans, debts incurred, property-in-kind,
or things having a monetary value incurred or received by a candidate or his
agent or other person on behalf of the candidate for use in advocating or
influencing the election of the candidate.
   (2)   The limitations imposed by this subchapter shall not apply to
contributions by a candidate's own resources to the candidate's own campaign.
   (3)   The limitations imposed by this subchapter shall not apply to
independent expenditures. "Independent or campaign committee expenditure" shall
mean an expenditure by a person for a communication expressly advocating the
support of or opposition to a clearly identified candidate which is not made
with the cooperation or with the prior consent of a candidate or his agent or a
controlled committee of a candidate.
   (4)   The limitations imposed by this section shall not apply to the value
of in-kind labor.
(Ord. No. 6300, § 1, eff. 3-4-86)
SUBCHAPTER B.
VOLUNTARY EXPENDITURE LIMITATION
Sec. 1. Campaign contract.
   (a)   Effective with elections for city offices in 1987, a candidate for
mayor or city council may sign a contract with the city agreeing to abide by
limitations on candidate's contributions, limitations on campaign expenditures,
and limitations on the use of all contributions as specified in the City
Charter in exchange for public matching funds.
   (b)   The campaign contract must be signed by the individual candidate
either within thirty (30) days after the individual becomes a candidate or at
the time of filing for said office, whichever is earlier.
(Ord. No. 6300, § 1, eff. 3-4-86)
Sec. 2. Candidates' contribution limitations.
A candidate who signs a campaign contract shall make no contributions to their
own campaign or campaign committee which in the aggregate exceeds three (3)
percent of the applicable expenditure limit in any campaign period.
(Ord. No. 6300, § 1, eff. 3-4-86)
Sec. 3. Expenditure limitations.
   (a)   A candidate who signs a campaign contract in accordance with
section 1 of the [this] subchapter shall not, during the campaign period, make
expenditures exceeding the aggregate amount of forty cents ($0.40) per City of
Tucson registered voter for the office of mayor or twenty cents ($0.20) per
City of Tucson registered voter for the office of city council.
   (b)   Independent expenditures, as defined by this chapter, shall not be
included in the computation of a candidate's expenditures.
   (c)   The expenditure amounts per City of Tucson registered voter shall be
adjusted by the percentage change in the Consumer Price Index as reported by
the U.S. Department of Commerce or its successor agency.
   (d)   No more than seventy-five (75) percent of the eligible expenditure
limitation shall be spent through the day of the primary election.
(Ord. No. 6300, § 1, eff. 3-4-86)
Sec. 4. Eligibility for public matching funds.
   (a)   To be eligible to receive public matching funds, a candidate for mayor
or city council must meet the requirements of the City Charter; and during the
campaign period:
   (1)   For the office of mayor, receive three hundred (300) contributions of
ten dollars ($10.00) or more;
   (2)   For the office of city council, receive two hundred (200)
contributions of ten dollars ($10.00) or more.
   (b)   For purposes of establishing eligibility under this section, only
those contributions received from residents of the City of Tucson shall be
counted toward the requirement.
   (c)   Candidates must submit evidence of meeting the eligibility
requirements of this section to the office of the campaign finance
administrator for verification. Upon verification of eligibility, a candidate
who has signed a campaign contract shall be eligible to receive public matching
funds; provided that no such funds shall be disbursed to any qualified
candidate prior to January 1 of the year in which the candidate's election is
to be held and, provided further, that any candidate who receives public
matching funds and later fails to file for public office or withdraws as a
candidate after filing shall, no later than ten (10) days following such event,
return to the election campaign account an amount equal to the public funds
disbursed to that candidate.
(Ord. No. 6300, § 1, eff. 3-4-86)
Sec. 5. Public matching funds.
   (a)   A candidate who has met the eligibility requirements for public
matching funds and who has signed a campaign contract shall be entitled to
receive one dollar ($1.00) in public matching funds for each dollar received
during the campaign period from any individual contribution. Neither loans nor
the transfers of anything of value other than money to the candidate or the
candidate's campaign committee shall be matched with public funds.
   (b)   If following the election wherein the candidate is elected or
defeated, the candidate has unexpended campaign contributions, any surplus
shall be returned to the election campaign account until the full amount of
public matching funds disbursed has been returned. Any remaining unexpended
campaign contributions shall be returned to the election campaign account,
contributors, or to a non-profit charitable organization. All unexpended
campaign contributions must be disbursed no later than the first Monday in
December following the election. (Ord. No. 7684, § 1, eff. 12-30-91)
   (c)   A candidate who has signed a campaign contract may void the contract
within fifteen (15) days after the close of filing, provided, an opponent of
that candidate does not enter into a campaign contract pursuant to this
subchapter; and provided further, that the candidate returns all public funds
received to the election campaign account no later than ten (10) days following
such event.
(Ord. No. 6300, § 1, eff. 3-4-86)
   Editors Note: Subsection (b) was amended by Ord. No. 7684, adopted Sept. 3,
1991; approved at referendum Nov. 5, 1991; certified by the mayor Nov. 12,
1991; and approved by the governor Dec. 30, 1991. The measure provided for
disposition of all surplus funds rather than half as before and added the third
sentence.
Sec. 6. Establishment of an election campaign account.
The mayor and council shall establish an election campaign account in the
general fund into which shall be deposited such sums as may be appropriated
from time to time in the annual budget, gifts and donations made to the city
for the support of public election campaign financing, and such sums as may
otherwise be appropriated to said account. Money in said account shall be
expended from time to time for the purpose of assisting the financing of public
election campaigns.
(Ord. No. 6300, § 1, eff. 3-4-86)
Sec. 7. Permitted use of public matching funds.
   (a)   Public matching funds may be expended only for the receiving
candidate's direct campaign purposes such as, but not limited to, purchasing
campaign literature or media space or time, mailings, renting campaign
headquarters, or paying for campaign headquarter telephones. A candidate who
signs a campaign contract may use neither contributions nor public matching
funds for indirect campaign purposes such as, but not limited to, providing a
candidate's personal support, or for donation to another's campaign.
Permissibility of an expenditure of public matching funds shall be determined
by the campaign finance administrator.
   (b)   Goods with a value in excess of two hundred dollars ($200.00) any part
of which have been purchased with public matching funds and having a useful
life extending beyond the end of the campaign period shall revert to the city.
(Ord. No. 6300, § 1, eff. 3-4-86)
Sec. 8. Campaign finance administrator; duties thereof.
   (a)   The city clerk or other officer appointed by the mayor and council
shall be the campaign finance administrator. The office of the campaign finance
administrator shall not be included in the classified civil service.
   (b)   The campaign finance administrator shall be responsible for the
management of said office, shall administer the provisions of the subchapter
and is authorized to adopt, promulgate, amend and rescind suitable
administrative rules and regulations to carry out the policies and purposes of
this subchapter. Prior to becoming effective, such rules and regulations shall
be approved by the mayor and council.
(Ord. No. 6300, § 1, eff. 3-4-86)
Sec. 9. Penalties.
   (a)   A candidate or person who knowingly or intentionally refuses or fails
to comply with the requirements of
subchapters A and
B of chapter XVI of the Tucson Charter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and any such
candidate's name shall not appear upon the ballot. If the ballot is printed
before conviction, the candidate shall be denied the right to hold office if
elected.
   (b)   In addition to other penalties provided for by law, any candidate who
fails to comply with the requirements of
subchapters A and
B of chapter XVI of the Tucson Charter or conditions of a properly executed
campaign contract shall be ineligible to receive further funds until in
compliance. Any candidate who exceeds the contract expenditure limitation shall
immediately return to the appropriate city account three dollars ($3.00) for
each dollar overspent in that election.
(Ord. No. 6300, § 1, eff. 3-4-86)
Sec. 10. Additional powers of mayor and council.
The mayor and council may enact ordinances as may be necessary or desirable to
carry out the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 6300, § 1, eff. 3-4-86)
CHAPTER XVII.
FRANCHISES AND PUBLIC UTILITIES
Sec. 1. Election required on franchises.
No franchise shall be granted, extended or renewed by the city without the
approval of a majority of the qualified electors residing within its corporate
limits voting thereon at a primary, general or special election; and the mayor
and council shall submit any matter for approval or disapproved to such
election at any primary or general municipal election, or call a special
election for such purpose at any time upon thirty (30) days' notice; and the
mayor and council shall require, before calling any such election, that the
estimated expense thereof (to be determined by the mayor and council) shall be
first deposited by the applicant for such franchise with the clerk.
   Cross References: Elections generally,
ch. XVI.
Sec. 2. Franchises to clearly identify affected public property.
All franchises or privileges hereafter granted shall plainly specify on what
particular streets, alleys, avenues or other public property the same shall
apply, and no franchise or privilege shall hereafter be granted by the city in
general terms, or to apply to the city generally.
Sec. 3. Authority to regulate public utility rates and services.
Limited only by the Constitution and the laws of the State of Arizona, the
power to regulate the rates, fares and charges for public utility corporations
is hereby reserved to the people, to be exercised by them in ordinance of the
mayor and council, or in the manner herein provided for initiating and
referring an ordinance.
Any right or regulation shall further include the right to require the uniform,
convenient and adequate service to the public, and reasonable extensions of
such service and of such public utility works.
Sec. 4. Terms of franchises, rights privileges to be unambiguous; construction
of ambiguities.
No franchise, right or privilege or license shall be considered as granted by
any ordinance except when granted therein in plain and unambiguous terms, and
any and every ambiguity shall be construed in favor of the city and against the
claimant under such ordinance.
Sec. 5. Franchise ordinances to prohibit issuing stock on account thereof.
Every ordinance granting any franchise shall prohibit the issuing of any stock
on account thereof by any corporation holding, or doing any business under,
said franchise. Any violation of the terms of this section shall, at the option
of the city, operate as a forfeiture of said franchise.
Sec. 6. Utility license and tax authorized.
The city shall have the right to license or tax streetcars, telephones, gas
meters, electric meters, water meters, or any other similar device for
measuring services; also telephone, telegraph, electric light and power poles,
subways and wires. The said license or tax shall be exclusive of and in
addition to all other taxes upon the property of the holder thereof.
Sec. 7. Franchised public carriers not to charge mail carriers, policemen,
firemen.
The grant of every franchise for a street, suburban or interurban railroad, or
any public carrier of passengers, shall provide that all United States mail
carriers and all policemen and firemen of the city in uniform shall, at all
times, while in the actual discharge of their duties, be allowed to ride on the
passenger vehicles of any such aforementioned carrier within the boundaries of
the city, without paying therefor, and with all rights of other passengers.
Sec. 8. Authority to require raising or lowering of railroad tracks.
The mayor and council shall by ordinance require, under proper penalties, any
railroad company, whether steam or electric, to elevate or lower any of its
tracks running over, along or across any of the streets, avenues or alleys of
the city, whenever in the opinion of the mayor and council the public safety or
convenience requires.
Sec. 9. Franchises subject to certain rights of city.
The grant of every franchise or privilege shall be subject to the right of the
city, whether in terms reserved or not, to make all regulations which shall be
necessary to secure, in the most ample manner, the safety, welfare and
accommodation of the public, including, among other things, the right to pass
and enforce ordinances to require proper and adequate extensions of the service
of such grant, and to protect the public from danger or inconvenience in the
operation of any work or business authorized by the grant of the franchise, and
the right to make and enforce all such regulations as shall be reasonably
necessary to secure adequate, sufficient and proper service, extensions and
accommodations for the people, and insure their comfort and convenience.
Sec. 10. Exclusive franchises prohibited; renewal of franchises before
expiration.
No exclusive franchise shall ever be granted, and no franchise shall be renewed
before three (3) years prior to its expiration.
Sec. 11. Consent required to lease or assign franchises.
No franchise granted by the city shall ever be leased, assigned or otherwise
alienated without the express consent of the city, and no dealing with the
lessee or his assigns, on the part of the city, to require the performance of
any act, or payment of any compensation, by the lessee or his assigns shall be
deemed to operate as such consent.
Sec. 12. Provisions applicable to changes in existing franchises; exemptions
from franchise provisions.
No extension or enlargement of any franchise, or grant, or rights, or powers,
previously granted to any corporation, person or association of persons, shall
be made except in the manner, and subject to all the conditions herein provided
in this chapter for the making of original grants and franchises; provided,
however, that the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the granting by
ordinance of revocable licenses or privileges for side track or switch
privileges, to railway companies, for the purpose of reaching and affording
railway connection and switch privileges to the owners or users of any
industrial plant, warehouse or mercantile establishment, it being the intention
to permit the city to grant such revocable license or privilege to railway
companies whenever, in its judgment, the same is expedient, necessary or
advisable, and application for such a privilege is accompanied by the assent,
in writing, of the owners of the major part of the frontage of the lots or
tracts of land of the blocks fronting on each side of any street, or parts of a
street, over or on which it is desired to lay or construct such side tracks or
switches.
Sec. 13. Manager to keep franchise record.
The manager shall provide and cause to be kept in the office of the clerk a
franchise record, indexed and of proper form, in which shall be transcribed
accurate and correct copies of all franchises and grants by the city to any
person, persons or corporation, owning or operating any public utility. The
index of said record shall give the name of the grantee, and thereafter the
name of any assignee thereof.
Sec. 14. Temporary permits for franchise holders to use streets, public places.
The manager, by and with the approval of the mayor and council, shall have the
right and power to issue revocable temporary permits and licenses to any
person, association or corporation, operating under a franchise or grant from
the city, for the purpose of temporarily making use of a part of the streets,
avenues, alleys or other public places in the city, for the better carrying out
of the object of the said franchise or grant, and as an aid for rendering
better or more convenient service to the people of the city, or such of them to
whom such service is, or might be, rendered within the contemplation of such
franchise or grant; such license or permit to be subject to revocation or
discontinuance at any time, in the discretion of the mayor and council, and
shall be subject to such restrictions, limitations, burdens and regulations as
the mayor and council may impose. The licensee or permittee of such license or
permit, upon receiving notice from the manager of the revocation of such
license or permit, shall forthwith remove any property or obstruction on, in,
or under any street, alley, public place or building described in such notice;
and upon failure to remove said property or obstruction immediately upon the
receipt of such notice, the licensee or permittee of such license or permit
revoked, and all other persons acting for or in behalf of such licensee or
permittee, operating upon or using any street, avenue, alley or public place or
building, for the operation or use of which the license or permit therefor is
revoked, shall be considered and treated as trespassers, be removed therefrom,
and shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
Sec. 15. Maximum period of twenty-five years for granting, extending, renewing
franchises.
No franchise shall be granted, extended or renewed by the city for a period
longer than twenty-five (25) years from the date of granting such franchise.
Sec. 16. A tax on gross income or gross value or gross proceeds of sales and
services of public utilities.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of the Charter of the City of Tucson, and
notwithstanding the limitation of the transaction privilege tax to one (1)
percent in
chapter IV, section 2 of said Charter,* the city may impose, levy and collect a
tax in excess of one (1) percent of the gross income or gross value or gross
proceeds of sales or the provision of services, to consumers or subscribers,
for consumption or use within the corporate limits of the City of Tucson, by
public utilities whether or not such public utilities are doing business under
a franchise. Any franchise payments made by such a public utility to the city
shall be credited toward the payment of any tax enacted hereunder.
(Ord. No. 3027, eff. 10-14-67)
__________
*   Editors Note:
Ch. 4, 2, was amended by Ord. No. 3346, 1. eff. 12-29-69, to increase the
allowable tax from 1% to 2%.
__________
CHAPTER XVIII.
PROVISIONS RELATING TO OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES*
__________
*   Cross References: Powers of mayor and council,
ch. VII; vacancies in office,
ch. VIII; powers and duties of officers other than mayor and members of the
council,
ch. X; official bonds,
ch. XIV; elections,
ch. XVI; civil service,
ch. XXII; additional compensation of officers prohibited, exception for police,
ch. XXV, § 1; political activities by employee prohibited,
ch. XXV, § 8.
__________
Sec. 1. Mayor and councilmen holding other offices prohibited.
No member of the council or the mayor shall hold any other public office, or
have other employment in the municipal government, or any subdivision thereof,
the compensation for which is paid out of the municipal moneys; or be elected
or appointed to any office created, or the compensation of which is increased
by the mayor and council, while he is such mayor or member of said council,
until one (1) year after the expiration of the term for which he was elected.
Sec. 2. Conflict of interest of officers and employees.
No officer or employee shall be, directly or indirectly, interested in any
contract, work or business of the city, or in the sale of any article, the
expense, price or consideration of which is paid for from the treasury, or by
assessment levied by any act or ordinance; nor in the purchase or lease of any
real estate or other property belonging to the city, or which shall be sold for
taxes or assessments, or by virtue of legal process at the suit of the city. No
officer shall be, directly or indirectly, in the employ of any public service
corporation operating under franchise from the city, or of any person having
any contract with the city, or any grantee of a franchise granted by the city.
Any contract or agreement in contravention of this section shall be void.
Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be deemed a misdemeanor.
The mayor and council shall enforce the provisions of this section by
appropriate legislation.
Sec. 3. Political or religious discrimination prohibited.
No appointment to position under the city government shall be made or withheld
by reason of any religious or political opinions or affiliations or political
services, and no appointment to or selection for, or removal from, any office
or employment, and no transfer, promotion, reduction, reward or punishment
shall be in any manner affected by such opinions, affiliations or service.
   Cross References: Removal, suspension or demotion for religious or political
purposes prohibited,
ch. XXII, § 3.
Sec. 4. Strikes or work interruptions.
Upon a finding and declaration by the mayor and council that a strike, work
stoppage or slowdown, or other form of concerted work interruption constitutes
a peril to the public safety, health and welfare, any employee who participates
in the organization, leadership or execution of any strike, work stoppage or
slowdown, or other form of concerted work interruption shall be immediately
terminated by his appointing officer. Notice of such termination shall be given
by posting at the employee's assigned work reporting location and in at least
three (3) public places within the city, and by certified mail to the
employee's mailing address then currently on file with the city.
An employee terminated under this section may, within ten (10) days of the
effective date thereof, appeal in writing to the city manager for a review of
his termination, which review shall be limited strictly to a factual inquiry as
to whether the employee was or was not engaged in the activities covered by
this section. If the manager determines that the employee was not so engaged,
then the employee shall be immediately reinstated with back pay.
The provisions of
chapter XXII, section 3(c) of this Charter shall be inapplicable to a
termination under this section.
An employee who is terminated under this section shall be ineligible for
reemployment in the city service for a period of five (5) years, except as
otherwise provided in this section.
(Ord. No. 4439, eff. 4-20-76)
CHAPTER XIX.
THE INITIATIVE*
__________
*   Cross References: Legislation generally,
ch. IX.
__________
Sec. 1. Petition authorized; number of signatures.
Any proposed ordinance may be submitted to the mayor and council, by a petition
signed by fifteen (15) percent of the qualified electors of the city, computed
on the vote for the candidates for mayor at the last preceding general
municipal election at which a mayor was elected.
Sec. 2. Form of initiative petition.
Any proposed ordinance, desired to be submitted to the mayor and council, shall
be presented upon a petition substantially in the following form:
   "Tucson, Arizona ....
   To the Clerk of the City of Tucson:
   We, the undersigned, residents of the City of Tucson, Arizona, and duly
qualified electors therein, do hereby submit and propose to you, for adoption,
the following ordinance, and request that action be taken by you relative to
the adoption or rejection of such proposed ordinance, at the earliest possible
moment, and that the same be forthwith submitted to a vote of the people, to-
wit:
   (Here insert the proposed ordinance in full.)
   Name of signer ____ Ward No. ________
   Address ____ Date ________
   STATE OF ARIZONA,
   )
   ) ss.
   COUNTY OF PIMA,
   )
   ________, being first duly sworn, on oath deposes and says that ________ is
a resident and duly qualified elector of the City of Tucson, Arizona; that the
signatures appearing hereinabove are the genuine signatures of the persons
whose names they bear, and that each and all of them are residents and duly
qualified electors of the City of Tucson; that the names of the persons
procuring the said petition and who should be notified of all proceedings and
action taken in reference to such petition, are (here insert the names of three
(3) persons, and their addresses).
Subscribed and sworn to before me this ________ day of ________, 19 ________.
   Notary Public, Pima County, Arizona
   ____
   My Commission expires:
   ____
   State Law References: See additional restrictions, Arizona Constitution,
article 4, part 1, § 1(9), regarding requirement that electors must sign in the
presence of circulator of petition.
Sec. 3. Provisions relative to recall applicable to initiative.
The provisions of
chapter XXI of this Charter, insofar as they relate to the method of filing
with, examination and certification by, the clerk, reference of petition to the
mayor and council, and notification of presenters of said petition by the
clerk, as therein set out, relative to petitions for the recall of officers,
shall apply to petitions for initiative and the submission of any proposed
ordinance.
Sec. 4. Mayor and council to either adopt ordinance or call election.
If the petition accompanying the proposed ordinance be signed by electors equal
in number to fifteen (15) percent of the entire vote cast for all candidates
for mayor at the last preceding general municipal election at which a mayor was
elected, and contains a request that said ordinance be forthwith submitted to
the vote of the people at the special election, then the mayor and council
shall either:
   (a)   Pass said ordinance, without alteration, within twenty (20) days after
the attachment of the clerk's certificate to the sufficiency of the
accompanying petition, (subject to a referendary vote, under the provisions of
chapter XX of this Charter); or
   (b)   Within twenty-five (25) days after the clerk shall have attached to
the petition accompanying such ordinance his certificate of sufficiency, the
mayor and council shall proceed to call a special election, at which said
ordinance without alteration shall be submitted to the vote of the people.
Sec. 5. Printing and publication of propositions required to be submitted to
voters.
Whenever any ordinance or proposition is required by this Charter to be
submitted to the voters of the city at any election, the mayor and council
shall order such ordinance or proposition to be printed in the official
newspaper of the city, and published in like manner as ordinances adopted by
the mayor and council are required to be published.
   Cross References: Publication of ordinances,
ch. IX, § 8.
Sec. 6. Form of ballots; proclamation of results of election.
The ballots used in voting upon such proposed ordinance, shall contain a
complete copy of such proposed ordinance, together with the words "yes" or
"no," in such manner that the electors may express at the polls their approval
or disapproval of the measure, substantially as follows:
(Insert the ordinance or other questions to be voted upon:
(________) Yes (________) No
If, upon the completion of the canvass of the vote cast, it shall be found in
favor of the ordinance, the mayor shall forthwith issue a proclamation, giving
the whole number of votes cast for or against the ordinance, and declare such
ordinance, as approved by a majority of those voting thereon, to be effective
and operative.
Sec. 7. Number of proposed ordinances to be voted on not limited.
Any number of proposed ordinances may be voted upon at the same election, in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
Sec. 8. Limit on number of special initiative elections.
There shall not be held under this chapter more than one (1) special election
in any period of twelve (12) months.
Sec. 9. Repeal or amendment of initiated ordinances.
The mayor and council may submit a proposition for the repeal of any such
ordinance, or for amendments thereto, to be voted upon at any succeeding
general municipal election, and should such proposition, so submitted, receive
a majority of the votes cast thereon at such election, such ordinance shall be
repealed or amended accordingly; an ordinance proposed by petition, and adopted
by a vote of the people, cannot be repealed or amended except by a vote of the
people.
Sec. 10. Additional powers of mayor and council.
The mayor and council may, by ordinance, make such further regulations as may
be necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter.
CHAPTER XX.
THE REFERENDUM*
__________
*   Cross References: Legislation generally, ch. IX.
__________
Sec. 1. Limitation of effective date of ordinances; petition referendum;
reconsideration of ordinances; election required; applicability of recall
provisions.
No ordinance passed by the mayor and council shall go into effect before thirty
(30) days from the time of its final passage, except as otherwise provided in
this chapter.
If, during the said thirty (30) days, a petition by qualified electors of the
city, equal in number to at least ten (10) percent of the entire vote cast for
all candidates for mayor at the last preceding general municipal election at
which a mayor was elected, protesting against the passage of such ordinance, or
any item, section, or part thereof, be presented to the mayor and council, such
ordinance or item, section, or part thereof protested, shall be suspended from
going into operation, and it shall be the duty of the mayor and council to
reconsider such ordinance, and if the same, or item, section or part thereof
protested be not repealed, the mayor and council shall submit the ordinance or
item, section or part thereof protested, as is provided in
chapter XXI of this Charter, to the electors of the city, either at the next
general election or at a special election to be called for that purpose; and
such protested ordinance or protested item, section or part thereof shall not
go into effect or become operative unless a majority of the qualified electors,
voting on the same, shall vote in favor thereof, and until the proclamation of
the mayor is made, as provided in
section 6, chapter XIX, of this Charter.
The provisions of
chapter XXI of this Charter, respecting the form, filing, certification,
rejection and action on recall petitions, shall apply to petitions of the kind
referred to in this chapter, with such modification as the nature of the case
may require; but nothing in said
chapter XXI shall be construed to extend the time for completing and filing a
good and sufficient petition for referendum beyond the said period of thirty
(30) days.
   Cross References: Effective date of ordinances and exceptions for emergency
measures,
ch. IX, §§ 8,
10.
Sec. 2. Submission of ordinances to electors upon motion of mayor and council;
submission of additional questions at special elections; conflicting measures
adopted by electors.
Any ordinance or measure that the mayor and council, or the qualified electors
of the city, shall have the authority to enact, the mayor and council may, of
their own motion, submit to the electors for adoption or rejection, at a
general or special municipal election, in the same manner, and with the same
force and effect, as is provided in this chapter for ordinances or measures
submitted on petition. At any special election called under the provisions of
this Charter, there shall be no bar to the submission of other questions to a
vote of the electors in addition to the ordinances or measures herein provided
for, if said other questions are such as may legally be submitted at such
election. If the provisions of two (2) or more measures approved or adopted at
the same election conflict, then the measure receiving the highest affirmative
vote shall control.
Sec. 3. Additional powers of mayor and council.
The mayor and council may, by ordinance, make such further regulations as may
be necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter.
CHAPTER XXI.
RECALL
Sec. 1. Officers subject to recall.
Every public officer holding an elective office, either by election or
appointment, is subject to recall.
   Cross References: Elective officers specified,
ch. V, § 1.
Sec. 2. Procedure for initiating recall; petitions required.
Any qualified elector of the city may make and file with the clerk an
affidavit, containing the name of the officer to be removed, and a general
statement, not to exceed two hundred (200) words, stating the grounds of
removal. The clerk shall thereupon deliver, to the elector making such
affidavit, a sufficient number of copies of petitions for such recall and
removal, printed forms of which he shall keep on hand. Such petitions shall be
issued by the clerk, with his signature and official seal thereto attached;
they shall be dated and addressed to the mayor and council, shall contain the
name of the person to whom issued, the number of forms so issued, the name of
the person sought to be removed, the office from which such removal is sought,
the grounds of such removal, as stated in said affidavit, a copy of which
petition shall be entered in a record book, to be kept for that purpose, in the
office of the clerk. Any defect in said form or record shall not invalidate the
petition.
Sec. 3. Form, number of signatures on petitions; oath; filing, endorsement of
petitions.
Said petitions, before being returned and filed, shall be signed by qualified
electors equal to twenty-five (25) percent of the number of votes cast, at the
last preceding general election, for all of the candidates for the office held
by such officer sought to be removed, and to each signature shall be attached
his or her place of residence, giving street and ward number and date of
signature. Such signatures need not all be on one (1) paper.
One (1) of the signers of each sheet of such petition, or the person
circulating such sheet, must make and subscribe an oath on said sheet, that the
signatures thereon are genuine.
All such papers for the recall of any one (1) officer shall be fastened
together, and filed as one (1) instrument, with the endorsement thereon of the
names and addresses of three (3) persons designated as filing the same.
Sec. 4. Adding or removing signatures prohibited after petition filed.
Whenever a recall petition has been filed with the clerk, and while said
petition remains in his possession, or has been certified and submitted by him
to the mayor and council, no signatures shall be added thereto or taken
therefrom.
Sec. 5. Clerk to examine, certify petitions.
Within ten (10) days from the filing of such recall petition, the clerk shall
ascertain, by examination thereof and of the registration books and election
returns, whether the petition is signed by he requisite number of qualified
electors, and shall attach thereto his certificate, showing the result of such
examination.
Sec. 6. Notice of insufficiency of petitions; filing additional signatures
authorized.
If his certificate shows the petition to be insufficient, he shall at once
notify in writing one (1) or more of the persons designated on the petition as
filing the same; additional signatures, properly verified, may be filed at any
time within ten (10) days from the filing of the certificate. The clerk shall,
immediately after such refiling, make like examination of the additional
signatures, and attach thereto his certificate of the result. If still
insufficient, or if no additional signatures are so filed, he shall return the
petition to one of the persons designated as filing it, without prejudice,
however, to the filing of a new petition for the same purpose.
   Editors Note: On March 14, 2007, in Fleischman v. Protect Our City, 214
Ariz. 406, 153 P.3d 1035 (2007), the Arizona Supreme Court held that A.R.S. §
19-121(B) preempts Chapter XXI, § 6 and Tucson Code section 12-59. A.R.S. § 19-
121(B) provides that once petition signature sheets are filed in support of a
ballot measure, "no additional petition sheet may be accepted for filing", and
thus does not allow the filing of additional signatures within the ten days
after the city clerk certifies a city initiative petition insufficient.
Sec. 7. Clerk to certify sufficient petitions to mayor and council; notice to
officer; calling elections.
When the petition shall be found by the clerk to be sufficient, he shall submit
the same, with his certificate, to the mayor and council without delay, and the
mayor and council shall immediately notify the officer sought to be removed,
and if the said officer does not resign within five (5) days after said
notification, the mayor and council shall forthwith, after said five-day
period, order and fix a date for holding the said election, not less than
twenty (20) days nor more than thirty (30) days from the date of the clerk's
certificate that a sufficient petition is filed.
Sec. 8. Arrangement for and conduct of election.
The mayor and council shall make, or cause to be made, publication of notice,
and all arrangements for holding such election; and the same shall be
conducted, returned and result thereof declared, in all respects as are other
city elections. If any vacancy occurs in said office after a recall election
has been so ordered, the election shall nevertheless proceed as herein
provided.
   Cross References: Elections generally,
ch. XVI.
Sec. 9. Candidacy of officer sought to be removed.
An officer sought to be removed may be a candidate to succeed himself, and
unless he requests otherwise in writing, the clerk shall place his name on the
official ballot without nomination.
Sec. 10. Nominations, notice, conduct of recall elections to conform to
election provisions.
The nomination of other candidates, the publication of notice of such recall
election, and the conduct of the same, shall be in accord with the provisions
of this Charter relating to elections.
   Cross References: Elections generally,
ch. XVI.
Sec. 11. Incumbent continued in office until election; persons declared
elected; vacancy for failure of successor to qualify.
The incumbent shall continue to perform the duties of his office until the
result of said election shall have been officially declared. The candidate who
shall receive the highest number of votes shall be declared elected for the
remainder of the term; but if the officer sought to be recalled is elected,
then no further recall petition shall be filed against the same officer, during
the term for which he was elected, unless petitioners signing shall first pay
into the public treasury, which has paid such election expenses of the
preceding election, all expenses of the preceding election. If not then
elected, he shall be deemed removed from office upon the qualification of his
successor.
If the successor fails to qualify within five (5) days after the result of said
election shall have been declared, the said office shall be vacant.
Sec. 12. Recall prohibited until officer serves six months.
No recall petition shall be filed against any officer until he has actually
held his office for at least six (6) months.
Sec. 13. Appointing recalled officers to public office.
No person who has been removed from an office by recall, or who resigned from
such office while recall proceedings were pending against him, shall be
appointed to any office within one (1) year after such removal or resignation.
Sec. 14. Additional powers of mayor and council.
The mayor and council shall, by ordinance, make all necessary provisions to
facilitate the operation of this chapter.
CHAPTER XXII.
CIVIL SERVICE*
__________
*   Cross References: Authority to provide for civil service commission,
ch. IV, § 1(28); officers and employees, generally,
ch. XVIII; pension fund,
ch. XXIII; political activities by employees prohibited,
ch. XXV, § 8; applicability of civil service to director of finance,
ch. XXIX, § 4; department of human resources,
ch. XXX; applicability of civil service to director of parks and recreation,
ch. XXXI, § 3.
__________
Sec. 1. Appointment, terms, qualifications of commissioners; political
affiliation.
The mayor and council, at their first regular meeting in January of 1968 or
within ten (10) days thereafter, shall appoint five (5) electors of the city as
civil service commissioners, who shall have been bona fide residents and
qualified electors of the city for at least five (5) years next preceding such
appointment, but said appointments shall include the three (3) commissioners
presently holding office for the balance of their present respective terms. The
remaining two (2) electors shall be appointed to serve terms expiring on the
date of the first regular mayor and council meeting in January, 1970, and in
January, 1972, respectively. Thereafter the term of office of each commissioner
shall be six (6) years, and upon the expiration of the term of any
commissioner, the said mayor and council shall appoint commissioners to succeed
those whose term of office has expired. Said civil service commissioners shall
not hold any other public office. Not more than three (3) members of the
commission shall be of the same political affiliation, and any appointment that
would result in more than three (3) members of said board being of the same
political affiliation shall be void.
(Ord. No. 3040, eff. 12-1-67)
   Editors Note: Chapter XXII, § 1, was amended by a referendum election held
Nov. 7, 1967, approved by the governor Dec. 1, 1967, establishing five
commissioners. A proposed amendment increasing the number of commissioners to
seven was defeated at an election held Nov. 6, 1979.
Sec. 2. Organization of commission; removal of commissioners; vacancies; mayor
and council to provide equipment.
The civil service commission shall elect a chairman and vice-chairman. The
mayor and council may remove any of said civil service commissioners, during
their term of office, for cause, by a vote of four (4) members of the mayor and
council voting in favor of such removal, and shall fill any vacancy that may
occur in said civil service commission for the unexpired term. The mayor and
council shall provide suitable accommodations and equipment to enable the civil
service commission to properly attend to its business.
(Mo. of 1-20-41, eff. 5-16-41; Ord. No. 7274, § 1, eff. 12-11-89; Prop. 403,
eff. 2-2-2016)
   Editors Note: Proposition 105 of an election called by Ord. No. 7274 on Nov.
7, 1989, approved by the governor Dec. 11, 1989, removed reference of the civil
service commission regarding the department of personnel. See
ch. XXX.
Sec. 3. Persons in classified service; status of covered persons; removal,
demotion, suspension procedure; taxpayer's right of action for violating
provisions.
   (a)   All officers, deputies, clerks, and employees subject to the civil
service provisions of this Charter shall be in the classified service of the
city, and all persons in the classified service shall be under and subject to
the rules and regulations of the civil service commission.
   (b)   Any person holding a position in the classified service prior to this
amendment becoming effective shall retain such position, subject to the same
rights and conditions applicable to the status which he or she held as of such
date under the provisions of this Charter, the civil service ordinance and the
rules and regulations of the civil service commission then in effect.
   (c)    Persons who have served through their probationary period and who
have received permanent appointment in the classified service shall not be
removed, suspended without pay, discharged, or reduced in pay or position,
except for just cause, which shall not be religious or political. Whenever an
appointing or employing officer removes, demotes or suspends (except where such
suspension is made pending filing of charges of dismissal) without pay for a
single period exceeding ten (10) days or for periods totaling more than ten
(10) days in any one (1) year from the time the first suspension goes into
effect, or for disciplinary reasons reduces in pay or position an employee in
the classified service who has received permanent appointment, he shall at the
time of such action furnish written notice and reasons therefor to the employee
and to the civil service commission before the effective date thereof. The
civil service commission shall by rules and regulations provide for an appeal
by the employee, a fair and impartial hearing of said appeal, and the rendering
of a decision thereon within forty-five (45) days after receipt of such notice
and reasons from the employing officers when an appeal is heard. When an appeal
is taken by the chief of police or the fire chief, the decision thereon shall
be advisory only; in all other cases the decision of the civil service
commission shall be binding and final. Both the employee and appointing officer
may have representation of their own choosing, and all hearings shall be public
unless the employee requests otherwise in writing. Except in cases of discharge
for just cause, the pension or seniority rights of any employee shall not be
affected through any disciplinary action.
   (d)    Any taxpayer in the city may maintain an action to recover for the
city any sum of money paid, or to enjoin the human resources director from
attaching his certificate to a payroll or account for services rendered, in
violation of the civil service provisions of the Charter or the ordinances and
rules made thereunder; and the rules made under the foregoing provisions shall
for this and all other purposes have the force of law.
(Prop. 404, eff. 2-2-2016)
   Editors Note: Proposition 105 of an election called by Ord. No. 7274 on Nov.
7, 1959, approved by the governor Dec. 11, 1989, added reference to the human
resources director in subsection (c) and changed reference in subsection (d)
from the directory personnel to the human resources director.
   Cross References: Political or religious discrimination prohibited,
ch. XVIII, § 3.
Sec. 4. General duties of commission.
The mayor and council shall by ordinance determine the powers and duties of the
civil service commission except that in any event it shall be the duty of the
said commission with reference to the classified service:
   (a)   At a public hearing and after affording a reasonable opportunity to
the city officers and employees for consultation with the commission, and after
due notice to the public by posting notice in three (3) public places, to adopt
and from time to time amend rules and regulations for the administration of the
provisions of this Charter and the ordinances of the mayor and council
governing the classified service.
   (b)   To establish, according to merit and fitness determined insofar as
practicable by competitive test, lists of eligibles from which all appointments
shall be made.
   (c)   To establish procedures regulating entrance into retentions,
promotions, transfers, and layoffs of employees in the classified service.
   (d)   To certify payrolls to the end that no person shall receive
compensation for services rendered in any position who has not been appointed
in accordance with the provisions of this Charter, the ordinances of the mayor
and council, and the rules and regulations of the civil service commission.
(Mo. of 4-1-41, eff. 5-16-41; Ord. No. 3706, eff. 1126-71; Ord. No. 7274, § 1,
eff. 12-11-89)
   Editors Note: Ord. No. 3706, § 1, adopted by the mayor and council Aug. 25,
1971, approved by a referendum election Nov. 2, 1971, certified by the mayor
Nov. 17, 1971, and approved by the governor Nov. 26, 1971, amended
ch. XXII of the Charter by revising § 4 in its entirety pertaining to the same
subject matter to read as hereinabove set out.
Proposition 105 of an election called by Ord. No. 7274 on Nov. 7, 1989,
approved by the governor Dec. 11, 1989, amended the section in its entirety to
remove references to personnel matters now under the jurisdiction of the human
resources director in
ch. XXX.
Sec. 5. Administrative support to commission.
The director of the human resources department shall act as secretary to the
commission and shall keep its minutes and make a record of all its work. Such
minutes, eligible registers and employee roster cards shall be open at all
times to the public during office hours, subject to the rules and regulations
of the civil service commission; the examination materials and other
confidential records and reports shall in like manner be open to the public
only if and as provided for by the rules and regulations of the civil service
commission. The commission shall never delegate its duty of hearing the appeal
of anyone holding a position in the classified service, under the provisions of
this Charter.
(Ord. No. 7274, § 1, eff. 12-11-89)
   Editors Note: Proposition 105 of an election called by Ord. No. 7274 for
Nov. 7, 1989, approved by the governor Dec. 11, 1989, added a new § 5. Former §
5 is now
§ 6.
Sec. 6. Compensation of commission; appropriation to carry out civil service
provisions.
The salaries of the civil service commission shall be determined by the mayor
and council, and a sufficient sum shall be annually appropriated to carry out
the civil service provisions of this Charter.
(Ord. No. 7274, § 1, eff. 12-11-89)
   Note: See the editor's note to
§ 5.
Sec. 7. Layoffs.
Whenever a reduction of employees is required because of a shortage of funds or
work or material changes in duties or organization, employees shall be laid off
within specific job classifications in inverse order to total length of
continuous service with the city. Any permanent employee laid off from a
position shall be permitted to take employment in a lower class in the same
class series, or in some other lower class in which the employee has completed
probation, each of which must be, or have been under the same appointing
officer under which the layoff occurred, provided that the employee is
physically fit to perform the duties of the position and the action does not
cause the layoff of another employee with greater total length of continuous
service with the city.
(Ord. No. 7274, § 1, eff. 12-11-89)
   Editors Note: Section 7 was added by Proposition 105 of an election called
for Nov. 7, 1989, by Ord. No. 7274, approved by the governor Dec. 11, 1989.
CHAPTER XXIII.
PENSION FUND
Sec. 1. Established; authority of mayor and council.
The mayor and council shall, within one (1) year after the creation of the
civil service commission, establish a fund or funds for the pensioning of
persons in the classified service of the city; may retain a reasonable amount
from the monthly salary of, and may make necessary regulations for
contributions to the pension fund by, such persons; may receive gifts, devises,
bequests of money or property for the benefit of such fund or funds, may make
contribution of public moneys thereto on such terms and conditions as it may
see fit; and shall make rules and regulations for the management, investment
and administration of such fund or funds.
   Cross References: Civil service,
ch. XXII.
CHAPTER XXIV.
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, COMMITTEES, ETC.*
__________
*   Editors Note: Ord. No. 4394, approved by a majority of the qualified
electors on Nov. 4, 1975, and subsequently approved by the governor on Jan. 9,
1976, repealed former ch. XXIV, which had pertained to boards, and added a new
ch. XXIV as hereinabove set out. Former ch. XXIV had been derived from Ord. No.
2080, effective Nov. 10, 1960.
__________
Sec. 1. Authority to establish, prescribe Powers and duties.
The mayor and council shall establish the library board and such boards,
committees, commissions, authorities and other bodies as required by law or as
they deem necessary or advisable. The number of members, their powers, duties,
qualifications, method of appointment and removal, terms of office and
compensation shall be as established by law or ordinance.
(Ord. No. 4394, eff. 1-9-76)
CHAPTER XXV.
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Sec. 1. Additional compensation of officers prohibited; rewards for police
excepted.
No officer shall be allowed any emoluments or compensation, aside from his
salary as fixed by this Charter, or by ordinance, and all fees received by him
in connection with his official duties shall be paid by him into the city
treasury. Provided, that any rewards received by any member of the police or
other departments, for the apprehension or conviction of persons charged with
crime, may be retained, except as to any part of such reward as may be provided
by ordinance to accrue to the benefit of, and be paid into, the pension fund or
funds.
Sec. 2. Existing offices and employees continued in office; effective date of
salaries of mayor and councilmen.
The terms of all other officers in office at the time this Charter takes
effect, in addition to the mayor and council, and that of all employees of the
city at the time this Charter shall take effect, may continue for the term for
which said officers are elected or appointed, and for the period for which said
employees are employed. Provided: that the provisions of this Charter as to
salaries of mayor and councilmen shall not take effect until the first Monday
in January, 1931.
Sec. 3. Original employment of city manager.
The mayor and council shall, not later than the first Monday in January, 1930,
employ the city manager, whose duties and powers outlined in this Charter shall
be subject to the provisions of the foregoing section.
Sec. 4. Existing ordinances, resolutions, regulations continued in effect.
All ordinances, resolutions and regulations of the City of Tucson, in force at
the time this Charter takes effect, and not inconsistent with the provisions
thereof, are hereby continued in force until the same shall be duly amended or
repealed.
Sec. 5. Violations of Charter and ordinances.
The violation of any provisions of this Charter, or of any ordinance of the
city, shall be deemed a misdemeanor, and may be prosecuted by the authorities
of the city in the name of the State of Arizona, or may be redressed by civil
action, at the option of the mayor and council. Any person sentenced to
imprisonment for violation of a provision of this Charter, or of an ordinance,
may be imprisoned in the city jail, or, if the mayor and council, by ordinance,
shall so prescribe, in the county jail of Pima County, in which case the
expense of such imprisonment shall be a charge in favor of said county against
the city.
   Code references--General penalty for Code violations, §
1-8; imprisonment in city or county jail, §
1-9.
Sec. 6. Authority to annex territory.
The city, by and through its mayor and council, may by ordinance enlarge and
add to and incorporate within the present city, such adjacent land, and
incorporate into the city such additional area and territory, as the said mayor
and council shall deem proper and wise. The procedure for making such
enlargement, extension and addition shall be such as is now, or may hereafter
be prescribed by statute, or by ordinance passed and adopted by the said mayor
and council.
   Cross References: Powers of city,
ch. IV; powers of mayor and council generally,
ch. VII.
   Annotation--When city has authority to annex property and county board of
supervisors has authority to create new municipalities, the first to obtain
jurisdiction of proceedings for either purpose is entitled to retain it without
interference from the other until the first proceedings are finally determined.
Colquhoun v. City of Tucson, 88 Ariz. 320, 356 P. 2d 413.
   State Law References: Annexation generally, A.R.S. § 9-471 et seq.
Sec. 7. Plenary powers of mayor and council.
The mayor and council shall have plenary power to enact and make all proper and
necessary ordinances, resolutions and orders to carry out and give effect to
the express as well as the implied powers granted in this Charter, to the end
that a complete, harmonious and effective municipal government may be
initiated, installed, operated and maintained in the city, and thereby protect
and safeguard the rights, interests, safety, morality, health and welfare of
the city and its inhabitants.
Sec. 8. Political activities by employees prohibited.
Neither the manager nor any person in the employ of the city under appointment
by, or employment of, said manager, mayor and council, or any other person
authorized on behalf of said city to employ persons, shall take any active part
in securing, or contributing any money toward, the nomination or election of
any candidate or candidates for the office of mayor or members of the council,
nor during the hours of service or duty to said city shall any such appointee
or employee promote the candidacy or campaign of any person seeking office,
elective or appointive, of the city, all under the penalty of dismissal from
the service of the city.
Sec. 9. Continuation of previously commenced prosecutions.
All prosecutions to enforce penalties for the violation of any of the
ordinances of the city, heretofore begun, shall be continued and concluded to
judgment and execution before the city recorder, or the magistrate, in like
manner, and to the same effect as if this Charter had not been adopted.
Sec. 10. Previously employed policemen and firemen declared under civil
service.
Any member of the police department or of the fire department in the employ of
the city, in either of such departments at the time of taking effect of the
civil service rules and regulations, and who has been so continuously employed
at least ninety (90) days immediately prior thereto, shall be deemed qualified
and shall be retained in his department until such employment is terminated
under the provisions of the civil service rules and regulations.
   Cross References: Policemen declared under civil service,
ch. X, § 7; firemen declared under civil service,
ch. X, § 9; civil service generally,
ch. XXII.
Sec. 11. Effect of civil service on police and fire chiefs.
The chief of the police department and the chief of the fire department, in
office at the time of taking effect of the civil service rules and regulations,
are hereby declared qualified, and shall be retained in his respective
department as any other employee of said departments, but this section shall
not be construed to provide for the continuance in office of the said chiefs,
or either of them, unless appointed to such offices under the provisions of
this Charter; and in case said chiefs, or either of them, is not so appointed,
he may, if he so desire, remain as a qualified employee in his respective
department, under and subject to the civil service rules and regulations, and
provided, further, that nothing in this section shall be construed to shorten
the present term of either one of said chiefs.
   Cross References: Police chief declared under civil service,
ch. X, § 7; fire chief declared under civil service,
ch. X, § 9; civil service generally,
ch. XXII.
Sec. 12. Limitations on claims for damages.
All claims for damages against the city must be presented in writing to the
city clerk within sixty (60) days after the occurrence from which it is claimed
the damages have arisen. Such claims must be verified under oath by the
claimant and shall state the name and address of the claimant, and shall
further contain, insofar as it is then practicable, the date, time and place of
the occurrence or injury for which damages are claimed, the nature and amount
of said injuries or damages, and the items making up said amount. The omission
to present such claim to the city clerk within sixty (60) days shall bar
recovery on any such claim or by reason of the said occurrence for which
damages are claimed.
(Ord. No. 2080, eff. 11-10-60)
Sec. 13. Neighborhood protection; voter approval of freeways, parkways,
controlled-access highways and grade-separated interchanges.
   (a)   The purpose of this section is to allow maximum citizen participation
with respect to controlled access highway design, placement and construction in
order to protect existing neighborhoods as desired by the electorate.
   (b)   The City of Tucson shall not participate, as described herein, in the
construction of any freeway, parkway or other controlled-access highway as
defined by Arizona Revised Statutes section 28-602, or grade-separated
interchange before the qualified electors of Tucson first vote to approve the
location and preliminary design of such proposed project. Any freeway, parkway
or other controlled-access highway or grade-separated interchange will be
referred to as "project" throughout this section.
   (c)   For purposes of this section, participation by the City of Tucson in
any project shall include approval or authorization of expenditure of funds for
condemnation, right-of-way acquisition or construction of any project, or
approval or concurrence in any approval of such project, or cooperation with
any other governmental authority thereon, except as provided in paragraph (g)
of this section.
   (d)   Voter approval for participation by the City of Tucson in any project
shall be obtained by the mayor and city council at any regular election or
special election called for that purpose. The design and proposed route of the
project shall be described in such detail on the ballot that a reasonable
person could understand the specific location, estimated cost and design of the
proposed project, including whether the proposed project could reasonably be
described as either a freeway, parkway or other controlled-access highway or a
grade-separated interchange. The voters shall be asked on the ballot to
"approve" or "reject" the proposed project.
   (e)   If the voters reject the proposed project, the mayor and council shall
request that the state department of transportation not include the proposed
project in the state highway system.
   (f)   Approvals of any project granted pursuant to this section shall be
effective for five (5) years and, if no actual construction has commenced
within that period, shall lapse, subject to new voter approval pursuant to this
section.
   (g)   This section shall not apply to improvements to the existing federal
Interstate system, nor to cooperation with other governmental authorities in
purely planning and research activities, nor to obtaining sufficient
information required to comply with paragraph (d) of this section. This section
shall not apply to projects for which construction contracts have been let as
of the effective date of this section, except for any proposed grade-separated
interchanges connected with those projects, in which event this section shall
apply.
(Ord. No. 6299, eff. 2-21-86)
CHAPTER XXVI.
AMENDMENTS
Sec. 1. Authorized; procedure.
This Charter, or any part or subdivision thereof, may be amended in the manner
provided in the Constitution of the State of Arizona.
   State Law References: Method of amending home rule charter, art. 13, § 2,
Constitution of Arizona.
CHAPTER XXVII.
RESERVED*
__________
*   Editors Note: Chapter XXVII, §§ 1--6, relating to the department of
purchases, added by Ord. No. 1287 and amended by Ord. No. 7274, was repealed by
Ord. No. 7684, adopted Sept. 3, 1991; approved at referendum Nov. 5, 1991;
certified by the mayor Nov. 12, 1991; and approved by the governor Dec. 30,
1991.
__________
CHAPTER XXVIII.
RESERVED*
__________
*   Editors Note: Proposition 107 of an election called for Nov. 7, 1989, by
Ord. No. 7274, approved by the governor Dec. 11, 1989, repealed ch. XXVIII, §§
1-3, relating to the department of public works.
__________
CHAPTER XXIX.
DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE*
__________
*   Cross References: Finance and taxation generally,
ch. XIII.
__________
Sec. 1. Established; qualifications of director.
There shall be established a department of finance, the head of which shall be
the director of finance, who shall have knowledge of municipal accounting and
taxation, and shall have had no less than five (5) years of extensive
experience in municipal accounting and auditing, including supervisory
experience, shall have been graduated from an accredited four-year college or
university and having specialized thereat in accounting and/or public finance
administration or equivalent specialization, or shall have had not less than
ten (10) years' practical experience in the field of accountancy and auditing
if he had not graduated from such college or university.
(Ord. No. 2080, eff. 11-10-60)
Sec. 2. Director to be bonded.
The director of finance shall provide a bond with such surety and in such
amount as the mayor and council may require by ordinance or resolution.
(Ord. No. 2080, eff. 11-10-60)
   Cross References: Approval of bonds by city attorney,
ch. X, § 4; official bonds generally,
ch. XIV.
Sec. 3. Powers, duties of director.
Subject to the direction of the city manager, the director of finance shall
have charge of the administration of the financial affairs of the city and to
that end he shall have authority to and be required to:
   (1)   Supervise and be responsible for the disbursement of all moneys and
have control over all expenditures to ensure that budget appropriations are not
exceeded;
   (2)   Maintain a general accounting system for the city in each of its
offices, departments and agencies; keep books for and exercise financial
budgetary control over each office, department or agency; keep separate
accounts for the items of appropriation contained in the city budget, each of
which shall show the amount of the appropriation, the amounts paid therefrom,
the unpaid obligations against it, and the unencumbered balance; and require
reports of receipts and disbursements from each receiving and spending agency
of the city government to be made daily, or at such intervals as he may deem
expedient;
   (3)   Maintain a general accounting system for the city and, in connection
therewith, have power and be required to:
   (a)   Prescribe a uniform system of accounting, the forms of receipts,
vouchers, bills or claims to be used by all the offices, departments and
agencies of the city;
   (b)   Assure the availability of sufficient funds for discharge of every
valid financial obligation of the city when it becomes due and payable;
   (c)   Audit and approve before payment, all bills, invoices, payrolls, and
other evidences of claims, demands, or charges against the city and, with the
advice of the city attorney, determine the regularity, legality and correctness
of such claims, demands, charges, contracts, orders and other documents;
   (d)   Inspect and audit any accounts or records of financial transactions
which may be maintained in any office, department or agency of the city apart
from or subsidiary to the accounts kept in his office.
   (4)   Submit to the mayor and council, through the city manager, a monthly
statement of all receipts and disbursements in sufficient detail to show the
exact financial condition of the city;
   (5)   Prepare, as of the end of each fiscal year, a complete financial
statement and report;
   (6)   Collect all taxes, license fees, and other revenues of the city, or
for whose collection the city is responsible, and receive all moneys receivable
by the city from any source;
   (7)   Have custody of all public funds belonging to or under control of the
city or any office, department or agency of the city, and deposit all funds
coming into his hands in such depositories as may be designated by the mayor
and council, subject to the requirements of law as to surety and payment of
interest on deposits;
   (8)   Have custody of all investments and invested funds of the city, or in
possession of such government in a fiduciary capacity, and have the safe
keeping of all bonds, notes, and insurance policies of the city, and the
receipt and delivery of city bonds and notes for transfer, registration or
exchange, and perform all the duties assigned to the treasurer in
chapter XIII of the Charter; and
   (9)   Maintain a continuous inventory of all real property owned, leased or
occupied by the city or any of its agencies.
(Ord. No. 2080, eff. 11-10-60; Ord. No. 7274, § 1, eff. 12-11-89)
Sec. 4. Appointment of director; term; removal; applicability of civil service;
salary.
The director of finance shall be appointed by the city manager, subject to the
approval of the mayor and council, and shall hold office until removed by the
city manager, and none of the civil service provisions of the Charter,
ordinances or regulations shall apply to the director of finance. The salary of
the director of finance shall be such as shall from time to time be fixed by
the manager, and may be changed, increased or modified by the manager;
provided, however, that such salary and all changes therein shall be in
accordance with the compensation plan adopted by the mayor and council.
(Ord. No. 2080, eff. 11-10-60; Prop. 404, eff. 2-2-2016)
   Cross References: Civil service, ch. XXII.
CHAPTER XXX.
DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN RESOURCES*
__________
*   Editors Note: Pursuant to an election called on Nov. 6, 1979, by § 1 of
Ord. No. 5036, approved by' the governor Nov. 10, 1980, ch. XXX, §§ 1, 2,
relating to the office of post auditor, was repealed.
   Subsequently, a new ch. XXX was added by Proposition 105 of an election
called by Ord. No. 7274 for Nov. 7, 1989, approved by the governor Dec. 11,
1989.
__________
Sec. 1. Established; qualifications of director.
There shall be established a department of human resources, the head of which
shall be the director of human resources, who shall have had at least five (5)
years experience in the human resources field.
(Ord. No. 7274, § 1, eff. 12-11-89)
Sec. 2. Duties of director.
Under the direction of the city manager the director of human resources shall
exercise supervision over human resources in the city and to that end shall
have authority to and be required to:
   (1)   Formulate and adopt a position classification plan for employees in
the classified service;
   (2)   Formulate and recommend to the mayor and council, on an annual basis,
a position compensation plan for employees in the classified service;
   (3)   Administer both the position classification plan and the position
compensation plan;
   (4)   Establish rules and procedures regulating employee leaves, both with
and without pay;
   (5)   Establish standards of efficient service, develop appropriate service
ratings and prescribe for their use;
   (6)   Establish employee training programs;
   (7)   Provide administrative support to the civil service commission;
   (8)   Perform all other duties assigned by the city manager or mayor and
council.
(Ord. No. 7274, § 1, eff. 12-11-89)
Sec. 3. Appointment of director; term; removal; applicability of civil service;
salary.
The director of human resources shall be appointed by the city manager, with
the consent and approval of the mayor and council, and shall hold office until
removed by the city manager. None of the civil service provisions of the
Charter, ordinances or regulations shall apply to the director of human
resources. The salary of the director of human resources shall from time to
time be as fixed by the manager, and may be changed, increased or modified by
the manager; provided, however, that such salary and all changes therein shall
be in accordance with the compensation plan adopted by the mayor and council.
(Ord. No. 7274, § 1, eff. 12-11-89; Prop. 404, eff. 2-2-2016)
CHAPTER XXXI.
DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION
Sec. 1. Established; qualifications for director.
There shall be established a department of parks and recreation, the head of
which shall be the director of parks and recreation, who shall have had at
least five (5) years' experience in park or recreation work, including three
(3) years' experience in the administration and direction of a park or
recreation program.
(Ord. No. 2080, eff. 11-10-60)
Sec. 2. Duties of director.
Under the direction of the city manager, the director of parks and recreation
shall exercise supervision over the park and recreation programs of the city,
including the planning, construction and maintenance of park and recreational
facilities. He shall supervise the direction and planning of all recreational
programs sponsored by the city. He shall be responsible for the installation
and maintenance of cost and performance records pertaining to each major
program, or activity, under his supervision and shall compile such
administrative data as may be required by the manager from time to time.
(Ord. No. 2080, eff. 11-10-60)
Sec. 3. Appointment of director; term; removal; applicability of civil service;
salary.
The director of parks and recreation shall be appointed by the city manager,
subject to the approval of the mayor and council, and shall hold office until
removed by the city manager; and none of the civil service provisions of the
Charter, ordinances or regulations shall apply to the director of parks and
recreation. The salary of the director of parks and recreation shall from time
to time be as fixed by the manager, and may be changed, increased or modified
by the manager; provided, however, that such salary and all changes therein
shall be in accordance with the compensation plan adopted by the mayor and
council.
(Ord. No. 2080, eff. 11-10-60; Prop. 404, eff. 2-2-2016)
   Cross References: Civil service,
ch. XXII.
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE
Amendments and repeals arranged according to effective date.
Ordinance Effective Section This Charter
Number    Date      Chapter Section
Ordinance        Effective Section This Charter
Number           Date      Chapter            Section
(Motion 1-20-41) 5-16-41   XXII               2
                                              6,
(Motion 4-1-41)  5-16-41   V                  10,
                                              11,
                                              13
                         XXII               3,
                                              4
1142             6-23-48   IV                 1(15), (27)
                         IV                 1(17) (Rpld)
                         V                  8,
                                              9
                         XVI                2
1287             9-4-52    X                  1
                         XV                 3 (Rpld)
                         XXVII              1--7
                         XXXVIII            1--3
1640             5-16-56   XVI                5
1642             5-16-56   V                  8
                                              2,
2080             11-10-60  V                  4.1,
                                              5
                         X                  6
                         (Sec. 1 repealed X 2, 3)
                         XI                 1
                         XV                 2
                                              2--
                         XVI                4,
                                              10
                         XXIV               1--3
                                           4 (Rpld)
                         XXV                1,
                                              2
                         XXIX               1--
                                              4
                         XXX                1,
                                              2
                         XXXI               1--
                                              3
2297             7-1-62    IV                 1(17a), 2
                                           (Former 1835
                                           repealed)
3027             10-14-67  XVII               16
3040             12-1-67   XXII               1
3346             12-29-69  IV                 2
3466             2-5-71    V                  8,
                                              9
3706             11-26-71  VII                2
                         XXII               4
4086             11-28-73  XIII               12
4394             1-9-76    XII                5
                         V                  13
                         XXIV               1--3 (Rpld
                         XXIV               1 (Added)
4439             4-20-76   XVIII              4
4704             11-28-77  IV                 1(16a)
4816             10-16-78  V                  4,
                                              4.1
                         XXX                1,
                                              2
5130             10-1-80   IV                 1(16) (Rpld)
                                              2,
5036             11-10-80  V                  4,
                                              8,
                                              9
                         XXII               1
                         XXX                1,
                                              2 (Rpld)
5860             11-23-83  V                  8,
                                              9
5861             11-22-83  IV                 1(23)
                         XXII               4(e)
6299             2-21-86   XXV                13
6300             3-4-86    XV                 4
                         XVI                Subch. A, §§ 1,
                                              2
                                           Subch. B, §§ 1--
                                              10
7274             12-11-89  IV                 1(25)
                         V                  13 as
                                              13(a)
                                           (Rnbd)
                         V                  13(b) (Added)
                         VII                2
                         XV                 2
                         XV                 5, 6 (Rpld)
                                              2,
                         XXII               3(c), (d),
                                              4-
                                              7
                         XXVII              3 (Rpld)
                         XXVII              4 as 3 (Rnbd)
                         XXVIII             1--3 (Rpld)
                         XXIX               3(3)(b)
                         XXX                1--
                                              3
7684             9-3-91    XIII               12
                         XV                 1--8 (Rpld)
                         XV                 1--
                                              6 (Added)
                         XVI                Subch. B, § 5(b)
                         XXVII              1--6 (Rpld)
8118             9-7-93    1                  Art. V, 9.1
                                           Art. XVI, 8.1
8573             9-5-95    V                  8,
                                              9
8947             9-2-97    XVI                8
8951             9-2-97    VIII               2
                         VIII               3, 4 (Rpld)
                                              5--7 as
                         VIII               3--
                                              5 (Rnbd)
8953             9-2-97    VII                1(27)
9270             12-2-99   V                  8,
                                              9
9271             12-2-99   IX                 2
                                              3,
(Prop. 403)      2-2-16    V                  4,
                                              4.1
                         IX                 5,
                                              8
                         XXII               2
                                              2.1 (Added),
                                              6,
(Prop. 404)      2-2-16    V                  7,
                                              11,
                                              13
                         X                  7,
                                              9
                         XXII               3
                         XXIX               4
                         XXX                3
                         XXXI               3
11421            5-16-17   IV                 3 (Added)
11485            11-7-17   IV                 5 (Added)
(Prop. 411)      5-17-22   IV                 3
(Prop. 413)      12-4-23   V                  8,
                                              9
                                            
 
PART II
TUCSON CODE
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec.
1-1.   How Code designated and cited.
Sec.
1-2.   Definitions and rules of construction.
Sec.
1-3.   Catchlines of sections.
Sec.
1-4.   Effect of repealing ordinances.
Sec.
1-5.   Severability of parts of Code.
Sec.
1-6.   Provisions declared continuation of existing ordinances.
Sec.
1-7.   Jurisdiction over areas owned or leased by city.
Sec.
1-8.   General penalty; misdemeanors; civil infractions; continuing violations.
Sec.
1-9.   Imprisonment to be in city or county jail.
Sec.
1-10.   Labor required of prisoners; classification as regular or trusties.
Sec.
1-11.   Persons deemed trusties.
Sec.
1-12.   Designation of trusties; supervision of working prisoners.
Sec.
1-13.   Credit on sentence for trusties.
Sec.
1-14.   City not liable for acts of trusties.
Sec.
1-15.   Escape of prisoners.
Sec.
1-16.   Treatment of prisoners.
Sec.
1-17.   Duty of chief of police to assure security of prisoners.
Sec.
1-18.   Chief of police to prescribe additional prisoner regulations.
Sec.
1-19.   Wards described.
Sec.
1-20.   Additions to wards upon annexation.
Sec.
1-21.   Vice mayor.
Sec. 1-1. How Code designated and cited.
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute
and be designated as the "Tucson Code" and may be so cited, or may be cited
"T.C."
(1953 Code, ch. 1, § 1)
Sec. 1-2. Definitions and rules of construction.
The following definitions and rules of construction shall be applied in
constructing the provisions of this Code.
   Sec. 1-2(1). And, or. "And" may be read "or," and "or" may be read "and" if
the sense requires it.
   Sec. 1-2(2). Bond. When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall
be sufficient.
   Sec. 1-2(3). City means the City of Tucson, in the County of Pima and State
of Arizona, except as otherwise provided.
   Sec. 1-2(4). Code means the Tucson Code.
   Sec. 1-2(5). Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done
shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day; and if the
last day be Sunday or a legal holiday, that shall be excluded.
   Sec. 1-2(6). County means Pima County, Arizona.
   Sec. 1-2(7). Gender. Words importing the masculine gender include the
feminine and neuter.
   Sec. 1-2(8). Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three
(3) or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to
a majority of such persons or officers.
   Sec. 1-2(9). Keeper and proprietor includes persons, firms, associations,
corporations, clubs and copartnerships, whether acting by themselves or through
a servant, agent or employee.
   Sec. 1-2(10). Mayor and council means the mayor and members of the city
council of the city.
   Sec. 1-2(11). Month means a calendar month.
   Sec. 1-2(12). Number. Words used in the singular include the plural and the
plural includes the singular number.
   Sec. 1-2(13). Oath. The word "oath" includes an affirmation or declaration
in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath;
and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the
words "affirm" and "affirmed."
   Sec. 1-2(14). Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or" if
the sense requires it.
   Sec. 1-2(15). Owner, applied to a building or land, includes any part owner,
joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the
whole or a part of such building or land.
   Sec. 1-2(16). Person includes a corporation, company, partnership,
association or society as well as a natural person.
   Sec. 1-2(17). Personal property includes money, goods, chattels, things in
action and evidences of debt.
   Sec. 1-2(18). Preceding, following mean next before and next after,
respectively.
   Sec. 1-2(19). Property includes real and personal property.
   Sec. 1-2(20). Public place includes any park, cemetery, schoolyard or open
space adjacent thereto and any lake or stream.
   Sec. 1-2(21). Real property includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
   Sec. 1-2(22). Sidewalk means any portion of a street between the curbline
and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians.
   Sec. 1-2(23). Signature or subscription includes a mark when the person
cannot write, his name being written near it, and witnessed by a person who
writes his own name as witness.
   Sec. 1-2(24). State means the State of Arizona.
   Sec. 1-2(25). Street means and includes any public way, road, highway,
street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley, lane, viaduct, bridge and the
approaches thereto within the city.
   Sec. 1-2(26). Tenant, occupant, applied to a building or land, includes any
person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone
or with others.
   Sec. 1-2(27). Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the
future as well as the past and present.
   Sec. 1-2(28). Writing includes printing.
   Sec. 1-2(29). Year means a calendar year.
(1953 Code, ch. 1, § 2)
   State Law References: Definitions and construction of statutes generally,
A.R.S. § 1-211 et seq.
Sec. 1-3. Catchlines of sections.
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type
are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and
shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of
such sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when
any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.
(1953 Code, ch. 1, § 3)
Sec. 1-4. Effect of repealing ordinances.
The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or
at the time the ordinance repealed took effect.
The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred
before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending
at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance
repealed.
(1953 Code, ch. 1, § 4)
Sec. 1-5. Severability of parts of Code.
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the mayor and council that the
sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and words of this Code are severable;
and if any word, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be
declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of
competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the
remaining words, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code,
since the same would have been enacted by the mayor and council without the
incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional word, clause, sentence,
paragraph or section.
(1953 Code, ch. 1, § 6)
Sec. 1-6. Provisions declared continuation of existing ordinances.
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those of
ordinances existing at the effective date of this Code, shall be considered as
continuations thereof and not as new enactments.
(1953 Code, ch. 1, § 7)
Sec. 1-7. Jurisdiction over areas owned or leased by city.
All ordinances of the city shall apply within land lying outside of the city
limits that is owned or leased by the city, and any violation of an ordinance
of the city occurring within the territorial limits of such land may be
punished by the city to the same extent and with like effect as if the
violation occurred within the corporate limits; however, this section shall not
apply unless the mayor and council of the city authorize or ratify by motion
the erection, at any point at which a public road enters such land, of a sign,
not less than eighteen (18) inches by three (3) feet in size, containing a
warning notice in bold letters that the area being entered is subject to the
jurisdiction of the city.
(1953 Code, ch. 1, § 8)
   Cross References: Jurisdiction of city court over areas owned or leased
outside city, §
8-1.
Sec. 1-8. General penalty; misdemeanors; civil infractions; continuing
violations.
   Sec. 1-8(1). Except for those acts declared to be civil infractions,
whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or
is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever
in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do
any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided
therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any ordinance
shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding twenty-five hundred dollars
($2,500.00) or by imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, or by a
maximum of thirty-six (36) months probation or by such fine, imprisonment, and
probation or combination thereof, in the discretion of the city magistrate.
(Ord. No. 5716, § 2, 2-28-83; Ord. No. 7627, § 1, 5-6-91)
   Sec. 1-8(2). Except for provisions relating to civil traffic violations,
whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is made or
declared to be a civil infraction, where no specific penalty is provided
therefor, the violation of any such provision or ordinance shall be as set out
in chapter
8 of this Code. (Ord. No. 5716, § 2, 2-28-83; Ord. No. 5929, § 1, 12-19-83;
Ord. No. 8154, § 1, 11-8-93)
   Sec. 1-8(3). Each day any violation of any provision of this Code or of any
ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. No. 5716, §
2, 2-28-83; Ord. No. 5929, §§ 2, d, 12-19-83)
   Sec. 1-8(4). In this Code, when a fine is imposed or required, it is within
the discretion of the judge or hearing officer to substitute community service
in lieu of any fine. Except where a different rate is expressly provided in the
Code section that has been violated, the rate at which community service shall
be valued as a setoff against the fine shall be ten dollars ($10.00) for each
hour of community service work performed. Participation in the City of Tucson's
Work Alternative Program shall qualify as community service for purposes of
this section. (Ord. No. 7781, § 1, 3-16-92; Ord. No. 10378, § 1, 3-6-07)
   Sec. 1-8(5). Where, pursuant to the provisions of chapter
8 of this Code, the city court orders the reimbursement of incarceration costs
to the city, or imposes administrative fees, such reimbursement or fees are
hereby declared to be cost recovery measures, administrative in nature, and
shall not be construed as imposing a fine under subsection 1-8(1) above. (Ord.
No. 8557, § 2, 8-7-95)
   Editors Note: Section 1 of Ord. No. 5716, adopted Feb. 28. 1983, effective
July 1, 1983. repealed former §§
1-8, 1-8.1, relating to penalties for Code violations, derived from 1953 Code,
ch. 1, § 5; Ord. No. 4923, § 1, adopted Jan. 2, 1979; and Ord. No. 5391, §§ 1,
2, adopted Aug. 3, 1981. Section 2 of Ord. No. 5716 added a new §
1-8.
   Charter References: Violations of Charter and ordinances,
ch. XXV, § 5.
   Cross References: Administrative hearing office to hear and decide
violations deemed to be civil infractions, §
28-2(2).
Sec. 1-9. Imprisonment to be in city or county jail.
All persons sentenced to imprisonment or detained by the chief of police for
the violation of any provision of the Charter, this Code or any other ordinance
of the city, shall be imprisoned of. detained in the county jail, city jail or
other appropriate detention facility in the discretion of' the city magistrate
or the chief of police.
(1953 Code, ch. 1, § 10; Ord. No. 5897, § 1, 11-7-83)
   Charter References: Violations of Charter and ordinances,
ch. XXV, § 5.
Sec. 1-10. Labor required of prisoners; classification as regular or trusties.
Not less than seventy-five (75) percent of all persons confined in the city
jail annex or county jail for the violation of any provision of the Charter,
this Code, or any ordinance of the city shall, upon demand by the chief of
police, the city magistrate, or their duly authorized representatives, perform
labor on the public works of the city. Such persons shall perform such regular
prisoners.
(1953 Code, ch. 1, § 11; Ord. No. 4151, § 1, 3-18-74)
Sec. 1-11. Persons deemed trusties.
Persons working on public streets, highways or doing any other work or service
outside the city jail, city jail annex or county jail and without requiring
armed guards, or who hold any other similar position of confidence and trust
either within or without the city jail, city jail annex or county jail, shall
be deemed trusties.
(1953 Code, ch. 1, § 11)
Sec. 1-12. Designation of trusties; supervision of working prisoners.
Persons to perform work or services as trusties shall be designated by the
chief of police, the city magistrate, or their duly authorized representatives.
Trusties who shall perform work or service upon public works shall be deemed to
be under the direction and supervision of the director of public works, or his
duly authorized representatives.
(1953 Code, ch. 1, § 11)
Sec. 1-13. Credit on sentence for trusties.
Any person who is a trusty shall be allowed double time while so employed and
each day so employed shall be counted as two (2) days in computing time on his
sentence. However, in case of a breach of trust, the chief of police or the
city magistrate may declare all or part of the double time forfeited.
(1953 Code, ch. 1, § 11)
Sec. 1-14. City not liable for acts of trusties.
Neither the city, its officers, agents or employees, shall be liable in any way
to the trusties, or otherwise, for any damages whatsoever which may, directly
or indirectly, arise out of work or service which may be performed by trusties;
in consideration of the advantages and privileges to be obtained by being a
trusty, all trusties shall be required to sign a complete waiver and release,
setting forth the nonliability of the city, or have their duties, rights and
privileges as a trusty revoked.
(1953 Code, ch. 1, § 11)
Sec. 1-15. Escape of prisoners.
Any person sentenced to imprisonment or detained by the chief of police,
pursuant to lawful arrest, who escapes, or attempts to escape, while in the
custody of the chief of police, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(1953 Code, ch. 1, § 12; Ord. No. 2478, §§ 1, 2, 7-1-63)
   State Law References: Assisting escape prohibited, A.R.S. § 13-2510.
Sec. 1-16. Treatment of prisoners.
All prisoners confined in the city jail or county jail shall be treated with
the utmost kindness compatible with the enforcement of the rules and
regulations necessary to compel discipline and obedience to the officer in
charge.
(1953 Code, ch. 1, § 13)
   State Law References: Abuse of prisoner prohibited, A.R.S. § 31-127.
Sec. 1-17. Duty of chief of police to assure security of prisoners.
The chief of police shall procure and use such means as he shall deem necessary
for the security of all prisoners under his charge.
(1953 Code, ch. 1, § 14)
Sec. 1-18. Chief of police to prescribe additional prisoner regulations.
The chief of police shall prescribe such further rules and regulations as shall
be necessary for carrying into effect the provisions of sections
1-9 through
1-17.
(1953 Code, ch. 1, § 15)
   Cross References: Filing regulations, §
2-9.
Sec. 1-19. Wards described.
   Pursuant to
section 8 of chapter XVI of the Tucson Charter, the six (6) wards of the city
are redistricted. Each ward shall consist of all that part within the corporate
limits of the city lying within the voting precincts established by the county
board of supervisors, and effective on September 29, 2023, as set forth below.
The city clerk shall prepare a map entitled "City of Tucson Ward Map" depicting
the ward boundaries and the precincts therein, three (3) copies of which map
shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk.
   Sec. 1-19(1). Ward No. 1:
      Precinct numbers 016, 017, 018, 020, 022, 025, 026, 028, 033, 037, 045
(split with Ward 6), 047, 052, 059, 097, 143, 144, 153 (split with Ward 3),
157, 190, 244, 245, 247, 248.
(Ord. No. 5312, § 1, 2-17-81; Ord. No. 5635, § 1, 9-7-82; Ord. No. 6103, § 1,
10-22-84; Ord. No. 7056, § 1, 10-3-88; Ord. No. 7397, § 1, 4-16-90; Ord. No.
7940, § 1, 12-14-92; Ord. No. 9785, § 1, 10-21-02; Ord. No. 11033, § 1, 11-20-
12; Ord. No. 11209, § 1, 11-5-14; Ord. No. 11810, § 1, 12-8-20)
   Sec. 1-19(2). Ward No. 2:
      Precinct numbers 009, 061, 069, 099, 106, 107, 116, 117, 118, 119, 120,
121, 126, 128, 129, 130, 131, 174, 178, 180, 181, 183, 192, 199, 214, 243, 262
(split with Ward 4).
(Ord. No. 5312, § 1, 2-17-81; Ord. No. 5635, § 1, 9-7-82; Ord. No. 6103, § 1,
10-22-84; Ord. No. 7056, § 1, 10-3-88; Ord. No. 7397, § 1, 4-16-90; Ord. No.
7940, § 1, 12-14-92; Ord. No. 9785, § 1, 10-21-02; Ord. No. 11033, § 1, 11-20-
12; Ord. No. 11209, § 1, 11-5-14; Ord. No. 11810, § 1, 12-8-20)
   Sec. 1-19(3). Ward No. 3:
      Precinct numbers 032, 034, 036, 038, 042 (split with Ward 6), 043, 055,
056, 057, 058, 067, 068, 072 (split with Ward 6), 085, 087, 089, 092, 153
(split with Ward 1), 154, 164, 166, 167, 170, 186, 210, 225, 230, 254, 260.
(Ord. No. 5312, § 1, 2-17-81; Ord. No. 5635, § 1, 9-7-82; Ord. No. 6103, § 1,
1022-84; Ord. No. 7056, § 1, 10-3-88; Ord. No. 7397, § 1, 4-16-90; Ord. No.
7940, § 1, 12-14-92; Ord. No. 9785, § 1, 10-21-02; Ord. No. 11033, § 1, 11-20-
12; Ord. No. 11209, § 1, 11-5-14; Ord. No. 11810, § 1, 12-8-20)
   Sec. 1-19(4). Ward No. 4:
      Precinct numbers 039, 049, 090, 095, 105, 109, 113 (split with Ward 6),
114, 122, 123, 124, 132, 133, 156, 176, 177, 182, 195, 197, 217, 218, 221, 224,
262 (split with Ward 2), 264, 265, 275 (split with Ward 5).
(Ord. No. 5312, § 1, 2-17-81; Ord. No. 5635, § 1, 9-7-82; Ord. No. 6103, § 1,
10-22-84; Ord. No. 7056, § 1, 103-88; Ord. No. 7397, § 1, 4-16-90; Ord. No.
7940, § 1, 12-14-92; Ord. No. 9785, § 1, 10-21-02; Ord. No. 11033, § 1, 11-20-
12; Ord. No. 11209, § 1, 11-5-14; Ord. No. 11810, § 1, 12-8-20)
   Sec. 1-19(5). Ward No. 5:
      Precinct numbers 011, 019, 048, 050, 051, 053, 054, 064, 066, 082 (split
with Ward 6), 086, 155, 159, 160, 231, 232, 246, 275 (split with Ward 4).
(Ord. No. 5312, § 1, 2-17-81; Ord. No. 5635, § 1, 9-7-82; Ord. No. 6103, § 1,
10-22-84; Ord. No. 7056, § 1, 10-3-88; Ord. No. 7397, § 1, 4-16-90; Ord. No.
7940, § 1, 12-14-92; Ord. No. 9785, § 1, 10-21-02; Ord. No. 11033, § 1, 11-20-
12; Ord. No. 11209, § 1, 11-5-14; Ord. No. 11810, § 1, 12-8-20)
   Sec. 1-19(6). Ward No. 6:
      Precinct numbers 042 (split with Ward 3), 044, 045 (split with Ward 1),
062, 063, 072 (split with Ward 3), 073, 075, 078, 080, 082 (split with Ward 5),
091, 093, 094, 096, 098, 100, 103, 108, 111, 113 (split with Ward 4), 189.
(Ord. No. 5312, § 1, 2-17-81; Ord. No. 5635, § 1, 9-7-82; Ord. No. 6103, § 1,
10-22-84; Ord. No. 7056, § 1, 10-3-88; Ord. No. 7397, § 1, 4-16-90; Ord. No.
7940, § 1, 12-14-92; Ord. No. 9785, § 1, 10-21-02; Ord. No. 11033, § 1, 11-20-
12; Ord. No. 11209, § 1, 11-5-14; Ord. No. 11810, § 1, 12-8-20)
(Ord. No. 2712, § 2, 12-12-64; Ord. No. 3200, § 1, 12-20-68; Ord. No. 4042, §
1, 6-25-73; Ord. No. 4579, § 1, 10-4-76; Ord. No. 5011, § 1, 8-6-79; Ord. No.
5312, § 1, 2-17-81; Ord. No. 5635, § 1, 9-7-82; Ord. No. 6103, § 1, 10-22-84;
Ord. No. 7397, § 1, 4-16-90; Ord. No. 7875, § 1, 8-3-92; Ord. No. 7940, § 1,
12-14-92; Ord. No. 9785, § 1, 10-21-02; Ord. No. 11033, § 1, 11-20-12; Ord. No.
11209, § 1, 11-5-14; Ord. No. 11810, § 1, 12-8-20; Ord. No. 11925, § 1, 5-3-22;
Ord. No. 11979, § 1, 12-20-22; Ord. No. 12081, § 1, 5-7-24)
   Charter References: City to be divided into wards,
ch. XVI, § 8.
   Cross References: Elections generally,
ch. 12.
Sec. 1-20. Additions to wards upon annexation.
Upon annexation of new areas to the city, the annexed area shall, unless
otherwise specified, be added to the ward formed by the projection of the
following boundary lines:
   Sec. 1-20(1). Ward No. 1.
   Projection of Silverbell Road to the north and Tucson Nogales Highway to the
south.
   Sec. 1-20(2). Ward No. 2.
   Projection of Country Club Road to the north and 22nd Street to the east.
   Sec. 1-20(3). Ward No. 3.
   Projection of Silverbell Road to the north and Country Club Road to the
north.
   Sec. 1-20(4). Ward No. 4.
   Projection of Wilmot Road to the south and 22nd Street to the east.
   Sec. 1-20(5). Ward No. 5.
   Projection of Tucson Nogales Highway to the south and Wilmot Road to the
south.
   Sec. 1-20(6). Ward No. 6.
   No projection.
(Ord. No. 2712, § 2, 12-21-64; Ord. No. 3200, § 1, 12-20-68; Ord. No. 4042, §
2, 6-25-78; Ord. No. 4579, § 2, 10-4-76; Ord. No. 7940, § 2, 12-14-92; Ord. No.
9785, § 2, 10-21-02; Ord. No. 11033, § 2, 11-20-12)
   Cross References: Elections generally, ch.
12.
Sec. 1-21.   Vice mayor.
As provided in
Chapter IX., § 2 of the Charter, the mayor and council will annually elect one
of the councilmembers to serve as vice mayor. The following provisions apply to
the election and the duties of the vice mayor.
   (a)   Letter of Interest. Any councilmember interested in being elected as
vice mayor shall submit a letter of interest to the city clerk no later than
the third Monday in November, which will be shared with the mayor and council.
The letter should describe the councilmember's goals and objectives during the
term.
   (b)   Election. The mayor and council shall meet in the first week in
December each year to elect a vice mayor. In years involving a general
municipal election, that meeting shall be on the first Monday in December. In
electing the vice mayor, they will choose from interested councilmembers who
have submitted a letter of interest. If none have submitted a letter of
interest, they will choose from any of the then-current councilmembers.
   (c)   Voting. Election of the vice mayor will be determined by simple
majority vote of the mayor and council.
   (d)   Term. The term of the vice mayor is one year, as specified in the
Charter,
Chapter IX, § 2.
   (e)   Vacancy. If the office of the vice mayor becomes vacant, the mayor and
council shall meet within a reasonable time to elect a new vice mayor to serve
the remainder of the existing term.
   (f)   Duties. The vice mayor will:
   (1)   Work to develop a positive working relationship with and among the
mayor and council.
   (2)   Oversee specific priority projects and policies as determined by the
mayor and council.
   (3)   During the absence or disability of the Mayor, act as mayor pro
tempore, consistent with
Chapter VIII, § 1 of the Charter. During such absence or disability, the powers
and duties of the office of mayor devolve upon the vice mayor.
   (4)   In case of a vacancy in the office of the mayor, act as mayor until
such vacancy is filled, consistent with
Chapter VIII, § 1 of the Charter. During such vacancy, the powers and duties of
the office of mayor devolve upon the vice mayor.
   (5)   Sign approved ordinances and resolutions during the absence,
disability, or vacancy of the mayor.
   (6)   Serve as the city's liaison to membership organizations or
associations of governmental entities (e.g., the League of Arizona Cities and
Towns), as the mayor may designate from time to time. As the city's liaison,
the vice mayor will build relationships and advocate for the city's interests.
The vice mayor will keep the mayor and council informed about developments
related to these organizations or associations.
   (7)   Serve as the city's intergovernmental liaison to the Arizona
legislature and legislative committees, regional governmental committees,
elected and appointed officials, and other Arizona local governments, as the
mayor may designate from time to time. As the intergovernmental liaison, the
vice mayor will build relationships and advocate for the city's interests. The
vice mayor will keep the mayor and council informed about developments related
to these intergovernmental entities.
   (g)   Limitations. The vice mayor does not have the authority to obligate
the city or the mayor and council in any way without prior authorization of the
mayor and council; but may make recommendations to the mayor and council on
matters relating to the duties of the vice mayor.
(Ord. No. 12058, § 1, 11-14-23)
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION*
__________
*   Cross References: Community affairs, ch.
10A; housing and community development, § 10B-1 et seq.; permit appeal board
for transportation of hazardous materials, §
13-11; administrative hearing office, ch.
28.
__________
Art. I.   In General, §§ 2-1--2-25.1
Art. II.   Mayor and Council, §§ 2-26--2-44
Art. III.   Public Communication, Community Engagement, and Integrated
Planning, §§ 2-45--2-80
Art. IV.   Reserved, §§ 2-81--2-87
Art. V.   Bonds of Officers and Employees, §§ 2-88--2-100
Art. VI.   City Clerk Records Management, §§ 2-101--2-119
Art. VII.   Reserve Police Officer Program, §§ 2-120--2-129
Art. VIII.   Special Duty Police Services Program, §§ 2-130--2-139
Art. IX.   Disposition of Property and Money by the Police Department, §§ 2-140
– 2-141
Article I. In General
Sec.
2-1.   City office hours.
Sec.
2-2.   Absences of appointive officers and heads of office and vacancies in
appointive officers and heads of office positions.
Sec.
2-3.   Compensation of senior officers acting as department heads.
Sec.
2-4.   Residency requirement for specified city officers and employees.
Sec.
2-5.   Building safety division; chief inspector.
Sec.
2-6.   Sale of property for nonpayment of district assessments.
Sec.
2-7.   Statute of limitations on unpaid warrants.
Sec.
2-8.   Mayor's expense account.
Sec.
2-9.   Reserved.
Sec.
2-9.1.   Reserved.
Sec.
2-10.   Civil liability of city; notice of defective condition required.
Sec.
2-11.   Reserved.
Sec.
2-12.   Reserved.
Sec.
2-13.   Salary of employee during injury or sickness; salary paid to supplement
workers' compensation; lien.
Sec.
2-14.   Reserved.
Sec.
2-15.   County health officer to enforce health, sanitation, food regulations;
obstructing, resisting health officer.
Sec.
2-16.   Authority of city manager to execute certain utility rights-of-way.
Sec.
2-16.1.   Authority of city manager to administer the city real estate program.
Sec.
2-17.   Acceptance of dedications.
Sec.
2-18.   City fixed route, regularly scheduled bus system called Sun Tran and
modern streetcar system called Sun Link; fares; eligibility and prohibited
activity.
Sec.
2-19.   City curb-to-curb barrier-free transportation service called Sun Van,
the complementary paratransit service; fares; eligibility and prohibited
activity.
Sec.
2-20.   Transit system rules and regulations.
Sec.
2-21.   Promotional discount fare program for the Sun Tran fixed route bus and
Sun Link modern streetcar systems.
Sec.
2-22.   City Sun Tran, Sun Link and paratransit service systems fare subsidy
program for low-income individuals; fare subsidies; eligibility and prohibited
activity.
Sec.
2-22.1.   False information or refusal to provide information to obtain or
retain low income assistance.
Sec.
2-23.   Permits for use of community center.
Sec.
2-24.   Fees chargeable for background check before transfer of handguns.
Sec.
2-25.   Authorization.
Sec.
2-25.1.   Fingerprint clearance and criminal history check.
Sec.
2-25.2.   Parks and recreation department.
Sec.
2-25.3.   Housing and community development department.
Sec.
2-25.4.   Public safety communications and fire department.
Sec.
2-25.5.   Information technology.
Sec.
2-25.6.   Public resources and emergency management.
Article II. Mayor and Council
Sec.
2-26.   Date, time, and place of meetings; to be public.
Secs.
2-27--2-29. Reserved.
Sec.
2-30.   City officers and employees to attend meetings.
Secs.
2-31--2-44. Reserved.
Article III. Public Communication, Community Engagement, and Integrated
Planning
Sec.
2-45.   Policy.
Sec.
2-46.   Implementation and administration of Plan Tucson.
Sec.
2-47.   Designated planning agency.
Secs.
2-48--2-80. Reserved.
Article IV. Reserved
Secs.
2-81--2-87. Reserved.
Article V. Bonds of Officers and Employees
Sec.
2-88.   Required; amounts.
Sec.
2-89.   Bonding of new employees.
Sec.
2-90.   Conditions, signing, approval.
Sec.
2-91.   City to pay premiums.
Secs.
2-92--2-100. Reserved.
Article VI. City Clerk Records Management
Sec.
2-101.   Preservation of records in compliance with state law.
Sec.
2-102.   Reproductions from public records; certified copies.
Sec.
2-103.   Preservation of essential records.
Secs.
2-104--2-119. Reserved.
Article VII. Reserve Police Officer Program
Sec.
2-120.   Appointment of reserve police officers.
Sec.
2-121.   Purpose and functions of reserve police officers.
Sec.
2-122.   Status of reserve police officers; compensation.
Sec.
2-123.   Qualifications for appointment; applications.
Sec.
2-124.   Oath of office.
Sec.
2-125.   Preassignment training.
Sec.
2-126.   Dismissal.
Sec.
2-127.   Relation to other police officers.
Secs.
2-128, 2-129. Reserved.
Article VIII. Special Duty Police Services Program
Sec.
2-130.   Definitions.
Sec.
2-131.   Special duty police services; authorizing police chief to execute
agreements with employers that set forth the wages and conditions for special
duty police services; authorizing use of city resources for billing,
accounting, and payment; authorizing police chief to charge an administrative
fee; and permitting use of city vehicles.
Secs.
2-132--2-139. Reserved.
Article IX. Disposition of Property and Money by the Police Department
Sec.
2-140.   Disposition of property obtained by the police department.
Sec.
2-141.   Disposition of unclaimed money by the police department.
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL
Sec. 2-1. City office hours.
   (a)   Except on holidays and other days specifically designated by the mayor
and council, and except on days or during hours as provided in subsection (b)
below, the city manager and the various city departments shall keep their
offices open for the transaction of business from 8:00 a.m. until 5:00 p.m.
each day on Monday through Friday.
   (b)   The city manager may, by administrative order, require or authorize
any of the offices of the city to be open or closed at a different or for an
additional time than provided in subsection (a) above.
   (c)   Except where otherwise specifically provided in this Code, when a
holiday that is enumerated as a fixed date in Tucson Code Section
22-91(a)(6):
      (1)   falls on a Sunday, the following Monday shall be observed as a
holiday;
      (2)   falls on a Saturday, the previous Friday shall be observed as a
holiday.
(1953 Code, ch. 2, § 9; Ord. No. 3280, § 1, 6-23-69; Ord. No. 10691, § 1, 7-7-
09, eff. 8-9-09; Ord. No. 10758, § 1, 2-9-10; Ord. No. 11598, § 1, 11-14-18)
   Charter References: Authority to fix office hours, see
ch. VII, § 1(35).
Sec. 2-2. Absences of appointive officers and heads of office and vacancies in
appointive officers and heads of office positions.
   Sec. 2-2(1). During the absence of an appointive officer or head of an
office, with or without leave, or for any cause whatsoever, the senior officer
or employee of the department or office, unless another officer or employee is
specifically designated to so act by the appointive officer, shall immediately
assume charge and direct the functioning of the office or department. The duty
to act includes the necessary signature authority to carry on and perform the
duties of the position until the appointive officer's return.
   Sec. 2-2(2). Pending the filling of a vacancy of an appointive officer or
head of an office position, the senior officer or employee of the department or
office, unless another officer or employee is specifically designated to so act
by the appointing officer, shall immediately assume charge and direct the
functioning of the office or department. The duty to act includes the necessary
signature authority to carry on and perform the duties of the position until
the vacancy is filled.
(1953 Code, ch. 2, § 12; Ord. No. 9811, § 1, 2-10-03)
Sec. 2-3. Compensation of senior officers acting as department heads.
During the period in which any senior officer or employee of any department
performs the duties of the head or chief thereof as provided in section
2-2 such officer or employee shall be paid during such period, in the
discretion of the city manager, the same rate of pay as is regularly paid to
the department head or chief for performing such duties.
(1953 Code, ch. 2, § 13)
Sec. 2-4. Residency requirement for specified city officers and employees.
   (a)   Except as provided in subsection (c), any person hired or appointed on
or after May 13, 2008 as an officer or employee specified in subsection (b)
shall, as a condition of employment, establish residency in the city limits
within six (6) months of appointment to that position, and shall maintain
residency in the city limits while serving in that position. All notices of
recruitment for the hiring of any of the officers or employees specified in
subsection (b) shall include notice of this requirement.
   (b)   Except as provided in subsection (c), the officers and employees
subject to the requirements of subsection (a) are: city manager, deputy and
assistant city manager, city attorney, city clerk, chief of the Tucson police
department, chief of the Tucson fire department, presiding city magistrate,
public defender, and the directors of the following departments: housing and
community development, planning and development services, environmental
services, finance, general services, human resources, information technology,
parks and recreation, procurement, transportation, Tucson convention center,
and water; and any director whose position is hereafter created by ordinance of
the mayor and council pursuant to
chapter V, section 2(14) of the Charter.
   (c)   The residency requirements of this section shall not apply to any
persons who were employed by the city, either in the positions listed in
subsection (b) or in another position, on May 13, 2008, even in the event that
such persons subsequently become employed in a position listed in subsection
(b).
(Ord. No. 10536, § 1, 5-20-08, eff. 6-28-08; Ord. No. 10757, § 1, 2-9-10; Ord.
No. 10874, § 1, 1-25-11)
Sec. 2-5. Building safety division; chief inspector.
There shall be a building safety division. There shall be chief inspector who
shall have supervisory administrative control over the building safety division
and all the functions thereof, and over the inspectors and other personnel
therein.
(1953 Code, ch. 2, §§ 17a, 17c; Ord. No. 4871, § 1, 9-5-78)
   Cross References: Building, electricity, plumbing, gas, and mechanical
regulations, ch.
6.
Sec. 2-6. Sale of property for nonpayment of district assessments.
Whenever the superintendent of streets of the city shall hold a sale of
property for nonpayment of assessments under the provisions of A.R.S. section
9-700, as amended, and there is no purchaser other than the municipality who
will pay the entire amount of the assessment, penalty and costs, including
fifty cents ($0.50) to the superintendent of streets for a certificate of sale,
the superintendent of streets shall sell the lot or portion thereof to the
person who will take the least quantity of land and then and there pay the
amount of the assessment then delinquent including interest, penalty and costs
due, and fifty cents ($0.50) to the superintendent of streets for a certificate
of sale, and deed shall issue to such purchaser subject to redemption as
provided in A.R.S. section 48-605, as amended.
The lien on the entire lot, piece or parcel of land assessed, provided for in
A.R.S. chapter 4, article 2, title 48, as amended, shall continue to be in
effect for the amount of the assessment or portion thereof, including interest,
penalties and costs thereafter to become due, and the land may again be sold
should the assessment again become delinquent.
(1953 Code, ch. 2, § 17d)
   State Law References: Authority, A.R.S. § 9-700.B.
Sec. 2-7. Statute of limitations on unpaid warrants.
No warrant to the director of finance for payment shall be paid from any fund,
deposit or account, nor shall any legal action be brought on said warrant,
unless it has been presented to said director of finance for payment before the
close of the second fiscal year next after the fiscal year in which it shall
have been issued.
(1953 Code, ch. 2, § 17e)
Sec. 2-8. Mayor's expense account.
Beginning July 1, 1955, and each year thereafter, the mayor of the city shall
have an annual two thousand dollar ($2,000.00) expense account which may be
drawn upon and spent for any public purpose; a public purpose shall include
entertainment of public guests, commemorating events of a public interest and
advertising the advantages and resources of the city. All demands from this
fund shall be accompanied by a statement from the mayor of the purpose for
which the money has been or is to be used and that the expenditure was or is
for a public purpose.
(1953 Code, ch. 2, § 17f; Ord. No. 3759, § 1, 12-13-71)
   Editors Note: Ord. No. 3759, § 1, reenacted the provisions codified as §
2-8. The title of the ordinance provided for the elimination of provisions for
entrance passes to Tucson Community Center events for present and former mayors
and city councilmen.
Sec. 2-9. Reserved.
   Editors Note: Section
2-9, requiring the filing of rules and regulations of commissions, boards and
departments, derived from 1953 Code, ch. 2, § 17g, was repealed by § 1 of Ord.
No. 7018, adopted Sept. 6, 1988. See §
10A-136 et seq.
Sec. 2-9.1. Reserved.
   Editors Note: Section
2-9.1, specifying that nonattendance by numbers of governmental bodies be
grounds for removal, derived from Ord. No. 3570, § 1, adopted Dec. 14, 1970,
was repealed by § 1 of Ord. No. 7018, adopted Sept. 6, 1988. See §
10A-134 et seq.
Sec. 2-10. Civil liability of city; notice of defective condition required.
No civil action shall be maintained against the city for damages or injuries to
person or property sustained in consequence of any street, highway, bridge,
culvert, sidewalk, crosswalk, grading, opening, drain, or other public facility
or building being defective, out of repair, unsafe, dangerous or obstructed,
unless at least seventy-two (72) hours prior to the occurrence resulting in
such damage or injuries, written notice of such defective, unsafe, dangerous,
obstructed condition of such street, highway, bridge, culvert, sidewalk,
crosswalk, grading, opening, drain, sewer, or other public facility such as
parks and playgrounds, public buildings or any other city- owned property
whatsoever, specifying the particular place and condition existing, shall have
been filed in the office of the city clerk and there was a failure or neglect
to repair, remedy or remove the defect, danger, or obstruction within a
reasonable time after the filing of such notice.
(1953 Code, ch. 24, § 39)
Sec. 2-11. Reserved.
   Editor's note – Ord. No. 4825, § 1, adopted June 5, 1978, specifically
amended the Code by repealing §
2-11, which had pertained to written notice of claims. Said section had been
derived from the 1953 Code, ch. 24, § 40.
Sec. 2-12. Reserved.
   Editor's note – Ord. No. 10904, § 3, adopted June 28, 2011, renumbered this
section as §
18-11.
Sec. 2-13. Salary of employee during injury or sickness; salary paid to
supplement workers' compensation; lien.
Sec. 2-13(1). Any employee of the city, other than non-permanent employees, who
either becomes injured or develops an occupational disease in the scope of
employment with the city prior to July 1, 2009, shall be paid unearned salary
or wages to supplement the compensation payments to which such employee becomes
entitled under the state workers' compensation laws, A.R.S. title 23. Such
unearned salary or wages shall:
   (1)   Be paid for a period of up to one hundred eighty (180) calendar days
of disability for each injury or sickness. Upon written application by the
department head, the city manager may approve an extension of payments in sixty
(60) day segments, not to exceed three hundred sixty (360) calendar days of
disability for each injury or sickness;
   (2)   Be in an amount equal to thirty-three and one-third (33 1/3) percent
of such employee's gross salary or wages (excluding overtime) at the base
hourly wage rate or salary of commissioned employees of the rank of sergeant
and below in an amount, which when added to the employee's workers'
compensation payment will equal the employee's base hourly wage rate or salary,
including assignment pay;
   (3)   Be subject to payroll deductions normally withheld and deductions, not
to exceed the employee's supplemental pay, for furlough hours in any fiscal
year in which mayor and council require employees to take a specified number of
days or hours of furlough; however, in the event disability is of insufficient
length to qualify the employee for workers' compensation, such employee shall
be paid one hundred (100) percent of gross salary or wages, less deductions
normally withheld, including furlough, for that period;
   (4)   Discontinue at the effective date of employment termination with the
city. The termination date shall not include additional pay for any accumulated
vacation leave.
Sec. 2-13(2). Any employee of the city, other than non-permanent employees, who
either becomes injured or develops an occupational disease in the scope of
employment with the city on or after July 1, 2009, shall be paid unearned
salary or wages to supplement the compensation payments to which such employee
becomes entitled under the state workers' compensation laws, A.R.S. title 23.
Such unearned salary or wages shall:
   (1)   Be paid for a period of up to the equivalent of six (6) months for a
permanent full-time employees, not to exceed one thousand forty hours (1,040)
(or one thousand four hundred fifty-six (1,456) hours for commissioned fire
personnel assigned to suppression) of disability for each injury or sickness,
with such payments to be prorated to the maximum hourly equivalent of six (6)
months for any part-time employees;

   (2)   Shall supplement the employee's base hourly wage rate or salary in an
amount, which when added to the employee's workers' compensation payment will
equal the employee's base hourly wage rate or salary, including assignment pay;
   (3)   Be subject to payroll deductions normally withheld and deductions, not
to exceed the employee's supplemental pay, for furlough hours in any fiscal
year in which mayor and council require employees to take a specified number of
days or hours of furlough; however, in the event disability is of insufficient
length to qualify the employee for worker's compensation, such employee shall
be paid one hundred (100) percent of gross salary or wages, less deductions
normally withheld, including furlough, for that period;
   (4)   Discontinue at the effective date of employment termination with the
city. The termination date shall not include additional pay for any accumulated
vacation leave.
Sec. 2-13(3). If a remedy is pursued as allowed by A.R.S. section 23-1023, the
city shall have a lien on the amount actually collectible therefrom, to the
extent of the moneys paid by the city pursuant to this section. The amount
actually collectible shall be the total recovery less the reasonable and
necessary expenses, including attorney fees, actually expended in securing such
recovery and less the amount to be paid to the city's workers' compensation
fund.
(Ord. No. 4204, § 1, 7-1-74; Ord. No. 4829, § 1, 6-12-78; Ord. No. 5799, § 1,
7-5-83; Ord. No. 8753, § 1, 8-5-96; Ord. No. 10679, § 1, 6-9-09, eff. 7-1-09;
Ord. No. 10807, § 1, 6-22-10, eff. 7-1-10)
   State law references – Workmen's compensation law, A.R.S. 23-901 et seq.;
city employees declared subject to workmen's compensation, A R.S. § 23-901(5)
(a).
Sec. 2-14. Reserved.
   Editor's note – Section
2-14, relating to compensation of unclassified appointive officers, added as
1953 Code, ch. 2, §§ 69, 70, by Ord. No. 2005, § 1, adopted Feb. 3, 1960, was
repealed by § 1 of Ord. No. 7383, adopted Mar. 19, 1990. The plan had been
amended by the following ordinances:
   Ord. No. 2137, § 2, 2-6-61
   Ord. No. 2182, §§ 1, 2, 6-5-61
   Ord. No. 2190, § 1, 6-19-61
   Ord. No. 2212, § 2, 9-18-61
   Ord. No. 2288, § 1, 4-16-62
   Ord. No. 2293, § 1, 5-7-62
   Ord. No. 2583, § 1, 2-17-64
   Ord. No. 2754, §§ 2, 3, 4-5-65
   Ord. No. 2845, § 1, 2-7-66
   Ord. No. 2940, §§ 1, 2, 11-28-66
   Ord. No. 2982, § 1, 2-20-67
   Ord. No. 2986, § 1, 3-20-67
   Ord. No. 3032, §§ 1, 2, 8-14-67
   Ord. No. 3126, § 1, 5-27-68
   Ord. No. 3150, §§ 1--3, 7-22-67
   Ord. No. 3344, § 1, 10-16-69
   Ord. No. 3406, § 1, 2-2-70
   Ord. No. 3646, §§ 3, 4, 5-10-71
   Ord. No. 3786, § 1, 1-24-72
   Ord. No. 3814, §§ 1, 2, 3-27-72
   Ord. No. 3844, § 1, 5-15-72
   Ord. No. 3878, § 1, 7-3-72
   Ord. No. 3965, § 2, 12-8-72
   Ord. No. 3994, §§ 1, 2, 2-26-73
   Ord. No. 4038, § 1, 6-25-73
   Ord. No. 4119, § 1, 12-17-73
   Ord. No. 4198, § 1, 6-17-74
   Ord. No. 4203, § 1, 7-1-74
   Ord. No. 4288, §§ 1, 2, 11-25-74
   Ord. No. 4425, § 1, 12-30-75
   Ord. No. 4435, § 1, 1-26-76
   Ord. No. 4523, § 1, 6-21-76
   Ord. No. 4682, § 1, 7-5-77
   Ord. No. 4735, § 1, 12-19-77
   Ord. No. 4849, § 1, 7-3-78
   Ord. No. 4984, § 1, 6-4-79
   Ord. No. 5164, § 1, 5-27-80
   Ord. No. 5399, § 1, 6-29-81
   Ord. No. 5599, § 1, 6-28-82
   Ord. No. 5724, §§ 1, 2, 2-28-83
   Ord. No. 5798, § 2, 7-5-83
   Ord. No. 6040, § 2, 6-25-85
   Ord. No. 6264, § 2, 6-24-85
   Ord. No. 6452, § 2, 6-16-86
   Ord. No. 6735, § 4, 7-6-87
   Ord. No. 7004, §§ 2, 8, 7-5-88
   Ord. No. 7243, § 6, 7-3-89
   Ord. No. 7275, §§ 5, 6, 9-11-89
   See now §
10-31.
Sec. 2-15. County health officer to enforce health, sanitation, food
regulations; obstructing, resisting health officer.
The county health officer and his deputies shall have authority to enforce any
provisions of this Code pertaining to health, sanitation, food and food
establishments. Any person who shall obstruct or resist the health officer or
his deputies in the legal exercise of his duties shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(1953 Code, ch. 15, § 4; Ord. No. 2077, § 3, 8-1-60)
Sec. 2-16. Authority of city manager to execute certain utility rights-of-way.
The city manager may execute licenses or easements to utility companies under,
on or over city-owned property for utility rights-of-way when it is a condition
to providing utility services to installations on city owned properties; such
licenses or easements shall be coterminous with the need of utility services
and shall be approved as to form by the city attorney.
(Ord. No. 3000, § 1, 5-8-67)
Sec. 2-16.1. Authority of city manager to administer the city real estate
program.
Subject to the control of the mayor and council, the city manager shall have
authority to administer the real estate program including the assignment of
functions and duties related to real estate and processing leases and property
acquisition agreements in accordance with Arizona law and the Tucson Code.
(Ord. No. 10578, § 1, 9-23-08, eff. 7-1-08)
Sec. 2-17. Acceptance of dedications.
The recording in the office of the proper county recorder in the state by the
city clerk of any instrument accepted by the city manager, which is a
dedication of any type of a right-of-way, such as a street, alley, easement,
drainageway, or of a park or other area shall be presumed to be an acceptance
thereof by the mayor and council of the city and the city. The city manager is
hereby authorized to execute an acceptance on such instruments.
(Ord. No. 3419, § 1, 3-1-70)
   Cross References: Parks and recreation, ch.
21; streets and sidewalks, ch.
25.
Sec. 2-18. City fixed route, regularly scheduled bus system called Sun Tran and
modern streetcar system called Sun Link; fares; eligibility and prohibited
activity.
   (a)   Sun Tran system: The city provides a fixed route, regularly scheduled
mass transportation bus system called Sun Tran.
   (b)   Sun Link system: The city provides a fixed rail, regularly scheduled
mass transportation system called Sun Link.
   (c)   Fares: The fares for the Sun Tran and Sun Link systems shall be as
follows:
   (1)   Full fare (cash):
 
                                                 FY 2017 FY 2018
Per Ride, $0.25 surcharge over stored value fare $1.75   $1.75
 
   (2)   Full fare (stored value):
 
                     FY 2017 FY 2018
Per Ride (Base Fare) $1.50   $1.60
Per Day              $3.75   $4.00
30 Day Pass          $45.00  $45.00
Annual Pass          $450.00 $480.00
 
   (3)   Economy fare (cash):
 
                                                 FY 2017 FY 2018
Per Ride, $0.15 surcharge over stored value fare $0.75   $0.75
 
   (4)   Economy fare (stored value):
 
            FY 2017 FY2018
Per Ride    $0.60   $0.75
30 Day Pass $18.00  $22.50
 
   (5)   Express fare:
 
            FY 2017 FY2018
Per Ride    $2.25   $2.35
30 Day Pass $60.00  $64.00
 
   (6)   Transfers to regular routes and streetcar: Free for passengers paying
appropriate fare and accompanied by appropriately issued transfer medium as
determined by the director of transportation.
   (7)   Transfers to express routes: Passengers must pay a surcharge equal to
the difference between the one-way base fare in the appropriate fare category
and the one-way express fare.
   (8)   Children: Free for persons five (5) years of age or under when
accompanied by paying adult.
   (9)   Ridership incentive programs: To encourage ridership among specific
groups of persons shall be as follows:
      a.   University of Arizona pass: For employees and students of the
University of Arizona, as follows:
 
                                                                FY2017  FY2018
Fall Semester Pass, effective August 1 through December 31 of   $180.00 $192.00
each calendar year
Fall Semester Express Pass, effective August 1 through December $240.00 $256.00
31 of each calendar year
Spring Semester Pass, effective January 1 through May 31 of     $180.00 $192.00
each calendar year
Spring Semester Express Pass, effective January 1 through May   $240.00 $256.00
31 of each calendar year
Annual Pass, effective August 1 through July 31                 $450.00 $480.00
Annual Express Pass, effective August 1 through July 31         $570.00 $608.00
 
      b.   Semester pass: For students of all other local public and private
educational institutions registered with Sun Tran as a bulk sales organization,
as follows:
 
                                                                FY2017  FY2018
Fall Semester Pass, effective August 1 through December 31 of   $180.00 $192.00
each calendar year
Fall Semester Express Pass, effective August 1 through December $240.00 $256.00
31 of each calendar year
Spring Semester Pass, effective January 1 through May 31 of     $180.00 $192.00
each calendar year
Spring Semester Express Pass, effective January 1 through May   $240.00 $256.00
31 of each calendar year
 
      c.   Shuttle service: To decrease traffic congestion and parking problems
at specific community events. All event shuttles must be self-supporting with
the cost off-set by bus advertising and fare revenues. Fares charged are not to
exceed the base fare with no premium fares. All event shuttles must be
publicized, open to the general public and within the Tucson service area.
      d.   SummerGO Youth Pass: For youth ages six (6) to eighteen (18) years
old, pass valid for seventy-six (76) days between the end of May and beginning
of August each year, based on the local K-12 academic calendars, as follows:
 
                     FY 2017       FY 2018
                     (eff. 5-1-17) (eff. 1-1-18)
SummerGO Youth Pass* $45.00**      $45.00**
 
   *Not tied to the base fare
   **Includes $15 fee for Parks & Recreation
      e.   3-day Pass: For unlimited rides for three (3) consecutive days
(seventy-two (72) hours) after it is activated on a transit vehicle.
 
            FY 2019 (eff. 8-9-18)
3-day Pass* $10.00
 
   *Not tied to the base fare
      f.    $25 Stored Value for $20 Purchase ($25 for $20) Program: Allows
SunGO Card holders to load $25 in value for a $20 purchase price
 
                                                         FY 2019 (eff. 8-9-18)
$25 Stored Value for $20 Purchase ($25 for $20) Program* $20.00*
 
   *Full fare only
   (10)   Administrative processing fee: An administrative processing fee, to
be determined by the city manager in conjunction with the director of the
department of transportation, may be added to the cost of each pass type.
   (11)   Product fee: A product fee, to be determined by the city manager in
conjunction with the director of the department of transportation, may be added
to the cost of each card or ticket to recover the cost of the fare media.
   (d)   Seniors, persons with disabilities, Medicare cardholders, and low-
income program fare eligibility and prohibited activity: A special class of
riders, referred to as “seniors, persons with disabilities, Medicare
cardholders, and qualified low-income individuals” may qualify for the economy
fare subject to the following provisions:
   (1)   Eligibility criteria determined by the mayor and council: Only those
individuals who qualify under the mayor and council’s definition of eligibility
shall be eligible for this special fare; eligibility for the fare shall be
demonstrated by an identification card, the form and substance of the card to
be determined by the city manager.
   (2)   Seniors: Persons sixty-five (65) years of age or over shall be
eligible for the economy fare on the Sun Tran and Sun Link systems.
   (3)   Persons with disabilities: Persons with disabilities shall be eligible
for the economy fare on the Sun Tran and Sun Link systems.
   (4)   Medicare cardholders: Medicare cardholders shall be eligible for the
economy fare on the Sun Tran and Sun Link systems.
   (5)   Low-income individuals: Persons qualified through the City of Tucson’s
low-income program shall be eligible for the economy fare on the Sun Tran and
Sun Link systems.
   (6)   Nonprofit program: Organizations in the nonprofit program shall be
eligible to purchase economy fares on behalf of an organization’s qualified
clients on the Sun Tran and Sun Link systems. The nonprofit program shall be
defined and facilitated as determined by the director of transportation.
      a.   Discount one (1) day pass:  Organizations in the nonprofit program
shall be eligible to purchase for clients not yet qualified for the economy
program as follows:
 
                    FY 2017 FY 2018
Discounted Day Pass $2.00   $2.05
 
      b.   Economy thirty (30) day ticket: Organizations in the nonprofit
program shall be eligible to purchase an economy thirty (30) day ticket for
those clients who have obtained the appropriate ID required for purchase of
economy fares as follows:
 
                       FY 2017 FY 2018
Discounted 30 Day Pass $18.00  $22.50
 
   (7)   Proof of eligibility: The mayor and council hereby authorize the city
manager, in conjunction with the director of the department of transportation,
to promulgate appropriate forms for application for reduced fares on the Sun
Tran and Sun Link systems, and to establish reasonable standards of proof for
eligibility for seniors, persons with disabilities, Medicare cardholders, and
low-income individual. Such standards shall be in writing, made available to
all applicants, and on file with the city clerk.
   (8)   Revocation of eligibility, appeal to the city manager: When, in the
opinion of the city, a person is continuing to utilize benefits of the economy
fare program of the Sun Tran and Sun Link systems and that person no longer
meets the eligibility standards set forth herein, the city shall have the
authority to revoke that person’s eligibility and require that person to
surrender his or her identification card to the city. Such notice of revocation
shall be in writing, sent to that person by certified mail, registered return
receipt, and shall set forth with specificity the reasons for terminating that
person’s eligibility for the city’s economy fare program. Any person whose
eligibility is revoked by the city shall have the right to appeal the
revocation to the city manager within ten (10) days of the date of notice of
the revocation.
   (9)   Misdemeanor for using false information in application for
eligibility: It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to knowingly use false
information when applying for eligibility for the city economy fare program.
(Ord. No. 4525, § 1, 6-28-76; Ord. No. 4535, § 1, 7-6-76; Ord. No. 4536, § 1,
7-6-76; Ord. No. 4669, § 1, 6-20-77; Ord. No. 5145, § 2, 5-5-80; Ord. No. 5916,
§ 1, 12-12-83; Ord. No. 6210, § 1, 4-8-85; Ord. No. 6233, § 1, 5-13-85; Ord.
No. 6436, § 1, 5-27-86; Ord. No. 7173, § 1, 4-17-89; Ord. No. 7824, § 1 6-1-92;
Ord. No. 8284, § 1, 5-23-94; Ord. No. 8778, § 1, 11-25-96; Ord. No. 8781, § 1,
11-25-96; Ord. No. 9404, § 1, 6-19-00; Ord. No. 10672, § 1, 6-2-09, eff. 8-1-
09; Ord. No. 10887, § 1, 4-12-11, eff. 7-1-11; Ord. No. 11082, § 1, 5-29-13;
Ord. No. 11182, § 1, 6-17-14, eff. 7-17-14; Ord. No. 11401, § 1, 9-20-16; Ord.
No. 11454, § 1, 4-19-17; Ord. No. 11576, § 1, 8-8-18)
Sec. 2-19. City curb-to-curb barrier-free transportation service called Sun
Van, the complementary paratransit service; fares; eligibility and prohibited
activity.
   (a)   Paratransit service: The city provides curb-to-curb transportation
services to individuals, whose disability prevents them from riding the Sun
Tran system. The service is provided by contract providers of the city.
   (b)   Fares: The fares for paratransit service provided by contractors for
the city shall be as follows:
 
                                                             FY 2017 FY 2018
Full Fare, per ride                                          $3.00   $3.20
Low-income Fare, per ride                                    $1.50   $1.60
Children, five (5) years of age when accompanied by a paying Free    Free
adult
Optional ADA*, Full Fare (per ride)                          $5.00   $6.00
Optional ADA*, Low Income (per ride)                         $3.50   $4.00
 
*Optional ADA rides are rides provided outside of ¾ miles of fixed route
service; same day service; and will-call service
   (c)   Eligibility for low-income fare: Rider eligibility for the paratransit
service low- income fare shall be established under the city paratransit
service system fare subsidy program for low-income individuals.
   (d)   Paratransit service eligibility and prohibited activity: Individuals
may qualify for the paratransit service subject to the following provisions:
   (1)   Eligibility: Eligibility shall be demonstrated by an identification
card, the form and substance of the card to be determined by the city manager.
The mayor and council hereby authorize the city manager, in conjunction with
the director of the department of transportation, to promulgate appropriate
forms for application for the paratransit service, and to establish reasonable
standards of proof for eligibility. Such standards shall be in writing, made
available to all applicants, and on file with the city clerk.
   (2)   Revocation of eligibility: When, in the opinion of the city, a person
is continuing to utilize the paratransit service and that person no longer
meets the eligibility standards set forth herein, the city shall have the
authority to revoke that person’s eligibility and require that person to
surrender his or her identification card to the city. Such notice of revocation
shall be in writing, sent to that person by certified mail, registered return
receipt, and shall set forth with specificity the reasons for terminating that
person’s eligibility for the city’s paratransit service. Any person whose
eligibility is revoked by the city shall have the right to appeal the
revocation to the city manager within ten (10) days of the date of notice of
the revocation.
   (3)   Misdemeanor for using false information in application for
eligibility: It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to knowingly use false
information when applying for eligibility for the city paratransit service.
(Ord. No. 4535, § 2, 7-6-76; Ord. No. 4669, § 2, 6-20-77; Ord. No. 5145, § 3,
5-5-80; Ord. No. 5916, § 2, 12-12-83; Ord. No. 6233, § 2, 5-13-85; Ord. No.
6436, § 2, 5-27-86; Ord. No. 8284, § 2, 5-23-94; Ord. No. 8778, § 2, 11-25-96;
Ord. No. 8781, § 2, 11-25-96; Ord. No. 9404, § 2, 6-19-00; Ord. No. 10672, § 1,
6-2-09, eff. 8-1-09; Ord. No. 10887, § 1, 4-12-11, eff. 7-1-11; Ord. No. 11082,
§ 2, 5-29-13; Ord. No. 11401, § 1, 9-20-16)
Sec. 2-20. Transit system rules and regulations.
The city manager, in conjunction with the department of transportation, is
hereby authorized by the mayor and council to promulgate rules and regulations
for operation of the city transit system, such rules and regulations to be in
writing and subject to review by the mayor and council. Rules and regulations
promulgated by the city manager shall be for the purpose of safe and efficient
operation of the city transit system only.
(Ord. No. 4535, § 3, 7-6-76)
Sec. 2-21. Promotional discount fare program for the Sun Tran fixed route bus
and Sun Link modern streetcar systems.
   Sec. 2-21(1). A promotional discount fare program, aimed at increasing
ridership on the Sun Tran fixed route bus and Sun Link modern streetcar
systems, is authorized. This experimental program may consist of, but not be
limited to, promotional projects implementing a weekend pass, a free fare day,
a discounted fare day and a free ride coupon.
   Sec. 2-21(2). The city manager shall have the authority to establish and
implement reasonable discount fare projects under the program and shall
promulgate reasonable rules and regulations, in writing and on file with the
city clerk, for each project implemented. The rules and regulations shall be
consistent with state and local law, federal law and specifically the statutes
and regulations of the Federal Transit Administration, and the goal of
increasing Sun Tran and Sun Link ridership.
(Ord. No. 5247, § 1, 11-3-80; Ord. No. 8284, § 3, 5-23-94; Ord. No. 11182, § 2,
6-17-14, eff. 7-17-14)
Sec. 2-22. City Sun Tran, Sun Link and paratransit service systems fare subsidy
program for low-income individuals; fare subsidies; eligibility and prohibited
activity.
   (a)   Program establishment: The city manager shall have the authority to
establish and implement a city Sun Tran and Sun Link fare subsidy program for
low-income individuals, nonprofit program clients that qualify for low-income,
and paratransit services for individuals, such program to be administered
within the department of transportation and funded exclusively from local city
revenues. The city manager shall have further authority to promulgate
reasonable rules and regulations, in writing and on file with the city clerk,
for the implementation of the fare subsidy program.
   (b)   Sun Tran and Sun Link system fare subsidy: The Sun Tran and Sun Link
system fare subsidy for qualified low-income individuals shall be as follows:
   (1)   Economy fare subsidy: For riders who qualify for the Sun Tran and Sun
Link system economy fare, the subsidies shall be:
 
                                                         FY 2017 FY 2018
Full Fare (cash) per ride                                $1.00   $1.00
Full Fare (stored value)                                 $0.90   $0.85
Full Fare 30 Day Pass                                    $27.00  $25.50
Discounted Day Pass, purchased through nonprofit program $1.75   $1.95
 
   (c)   Sun Van fare subsidy: The Sun Van service fare subsidy for qualified
low-income individuals shall be as follows:
 
                    FY 2017 FY 2018
Full Fare, per ride $1.50   $2.00
 
   (d)   Eligibility and prohibited activity: Low-income individuals and
nonprofit program clients may qualify for the fare subsidy program subject to
the following provisions:
   (1)   Eligibility for Sun Tran, Sun Link and paratransit service low-income
fares: Applicants for eligibility to qualify for the Sun Tran, Sun Link and Sun
Van systems low-income fare must demonstrate an income that meets the most
recent income guidelines per the Lower Living Standard Income Level (LLSIL)
(100%) as established by the United States Department of Labor, published
annually, in the Federal Register.
   (2)   Definition of "income": Income shall include any money received by all
members of the household. Any form of support or payment in the form of rent,
food, automobile or any other assistance shall be counted as income. Wages,
public assistance, retirement, disability, pension, veteran's compensation,
worker's or unemployment compensation, senior benefits, survivor's benefits,
strike benefits, support payments, alimony, scholarships, educational grants,
fellowships, veteran's educational benefits, dividends, interest and any other
form of income shall be counted to determine eligibility.
   (3)   Eligibility requirements for persons under eighteen (18) years of age:
Persons seeking to qualify for the fare subsidy program of the city who are
under the age of eighteen (18) must have a parent or guardian signature on the
application, or show good cause why such signature is not obtainable. Good
cause shall be within the discretion of the city to determine. If the applicant
is not living at home and receives more than half of his or her support from
his or her family, the applicant must declare all family income. If the
applicant is not living at home and is not receiving more than half of his or
her support from his or her family, then only the actual support from the
family need be declared.
   (4)   Unemployed persons: Unemployed persons applying for the fare subsidy
program must have a current registration card from the state employment office.
Such applicant must report an estimated probable income that falls within the
income guidelines set forth by the U.S. Department of Labor when added to all
other family income. Persons unemployed due to strikes, lockouts and labor
disputes must count as probable income their wages and wage level as such
existed prior to the strike, lockout or other labor dispute that resulted in
their being unemployed.
   (5)   Students: Students not living at home, but who receive more than half
of their support from their family must declare all family income. Students not
living at home who do not receive more than half their support from their
family need only declare the actual amount of support received. Students living
at home must declare all family income.
   (6)   Residency requirement: Applicants for the fare subsidy program for
low-income individuals must be residents of the region, an area described in
the U.S. Census Bureau's Geographic Base File on file with the city clerk.
   (7)   Proof of eligibility: The mayor and council hereby authorize the city
manager, in conjunction with the director of the department of transportation,
to promulgate appropriate forms for application to the program and to establish
reasonable standards of proof for eligibility. Such standards shall be in
writing, made available to all applicants, and on file with the city clerk. For
nonprofit agency clients that qualify, the proof of eligibility requirements
stipulating an ID are effective when smart card technology is implemented.
   (8)   Term of eligibility: Persons eligible for the fare subsidy program
shall be deemed eligible from the date of issue of the eligibility
identification card for a period of twelve (12) months, unless otherwise found
ineligible by the city.
   (9)   Revocation of eligibility, appeal to the city manager: When, in the
opinion of the city, a person is continuing to utilize the benefits of the
program and that person no longer meets the eligibility standards set forth
herein, the city shall have the authority to revoke that person's eligibility
and require that person to surrender his or her identification card to the
city. Such notice of revocation shall be in writing, sent to that person by
certified mail, registered return receipt, and shall set forth with specificity
the reasons for terminating that person's eligibility for the city's fare
subsidy program. Any person whose eligibility is revoked by the city shall have
the right to appeal the revocation to the city manager within ten (10) days of
the date of notice of the revocation.
   (10)   Misdemeanor for using false information in application for
eligibility: It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to knowingly use false
information when applying for eligibility for the fare subsidy program.
(Ord. No. 6210, § 2, 4-8-85; Ord. No. 6233, § 3, 5-13-85; Ord. No. 7824, § 2,
6-1-92; Ord. No. 8284, § 4, 5-23-94; Ord. No. 8778, § 3, 11-25-96; Ord. No.
8781, § 3, 11-25-96; Ord. No. 9404, § 3, 6-19-00; Ord. No. 10672, § 1, 6-2-09,
eff. 8-1-09; Ord. No. 10887, § 1, 4-12-11, eff. 7-1-11; Ord. No. 11082, § 3, 5-
29-13; Ord. No. 11182, § 3, 6-17-14, eff. 7-17-14; Ord. No. 11401, § 1, 9-20-
16)
Sec. 2-22.1. False information or refusal to provide information to obtain or
retain low income assistance.
   (a)   Any person who uses false information, or who refuses to provide
information upon request, in order to obtain or retain low income assistance
from the City of Tucson is responsible for a civil infraction and shall be
fined five hundred dollars ($500.00).
   (b)   Any person found responsible of a civil infraction as described in
paragraph (a) may be deemed ineligible for low income assistance from the City
of Tucson for a period up to five (5) years.
   (c)   City of Tucson low income assistance programs for purposes of this
section include, but are not limited to, programs to provide assistance for
environmental services fees, Tucson water fees, Sun Tran, Sun Link and Sun Van
fares, and parks and recreation fees, and any other discount or assistance
provided by the City of Tucson.
(Ord. No. 10288, § 1, 6-13-06; Ord. No. 10672, § 1, 6-2-09, eff. 8-1-09; Ord.
No. 11182, § 4, 6-17-14, eff. 7-17-14)
Sec. 2-23. Permits for use of community center.
   (a)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, permits for use or
occupancy of any of the community center facilities may, upon written
application therefor, be issued by the community center director if the permits
are for less than thirty (30) days; or subject to the approval by resolution of
the mayor and council if for thirty (30) days or more.
   (b)   Competitive bidding is not required for issuance of permits. If two
(2) or more persons apply for community center facilities for the same type of
use or event or series of uses or events which is considered by the community
center director to be mutually exclusive, then the selection shall be made by
the governing body, by motion, based upon which application it determines will
be most beneficial to the public and will be in the best interest of the city.
   (c)   The city may use its various box office outlets for sale of tickets to
qualified events not held at the community center. Ticket sale agreements for
such purpose may be executed in the same manner as permits for use of the
community center.
(Ord. No. 4377, § 2, 7-7-75; Ord. No. 4598, § 1, 12-6-76; Ord. No. 7973, § 2,
1-25-93)
Sec. 2-24. Fees chargeable for background check before transfer of handguns.
The police department shall charge a fee, in addition to any other fees
prescribed by law, in the amount of ten dollars ($10.00) to recover the costs
of criminal history background information checks which the police department
is required to conduct before a handgun is transferred from a federal firearms
licensee to an individual who is not a federal firearms licensee. The fee shall
be charged for each such check performed.
(Ord. No. 8218, § 1, 2-28-94)
Sec. 2-25. Authorization.
   (a)   Pursuant to A.R.S. § 41-1750, the City of Tucson's human resources
director is hereby authorized to mandate fingerprint clearances and receive
criminal history record information for the purpose of evaluating the fitness
and suitability of employees, contract employees, volunteers, and interns
filling sensitive positions.    
   (b)   Pursuant to A.R.S. § 41-1750 and Public Law 92-544, the chief of
police shall submit fingerprints accompanied by the appropriate fees, which
will be paid by the human resources department, to the Arizona Department of
Public Safety and the Federal Bureau of Investigation for the purpose of
obtaining criminal history record information on individuals filling sensitive
positions.
(Ord. No. 11756, § 1, 6-9-20)
   Editor’s note – Ord. No. 11756, § 1, adopted June 9, 2020, repealed § 2-25,
pertaining to the fingerprinting and criminal history record check of parks and
recreation department personnel and volunteers, and derived from Ord. No. 8491,
§ 1, adopted April 17, 1995, and Ord. No. 8511, § 1, adopted June 5, 1995.
Sec. 2-25.1. Fingerprint clearance and criminal history check.
   (a)   The human resources director is hereby directed to identify and
maintain a record of classified sensitive positions for the purposes of
evaluating the fitness and suitability of prospective and current employees,
contract employees, volunteers, and interns filling sensitive positions.
   (b)   The human resource director shall be responsible for maintaining and
disposing of such records in accordance with applicable laws.
   (c)   The city shall comply with any relevant state and federal rules and
regulations related to the dissemination of such criminal history record
information.
   (d)   For the purpose of this section, "vulnerable adult" has the same
meaning prescribed in A.R.S. Title 13.
   (e)   "Prospective" includes any individual who has been given a conditional
offer to fill a sensitive position, regardless of status.
   (f)   The city may conduct periodic fingerprint background checks to ensure
continued qualification of employees, contractors, volunteers, and interns.
(Ord. No. 11756, § 1, 6-9-20)
   Editor’s note – Ord. No. 11756, § 1, adopted June 9, 2020, repealed § 2-
25.1, pertaining to the fingerprinting and criminal history record check of
intermittent program instructors, and derived from Ord. No. 8762, § 1, adopted
October 14, 1996.
Sec. 2-25.2. Parks and recreation department.
   (a)   Parks and recreation department positions requiring contact with or
access to children or vulnerable adults, as a condition of employment, shall be
classified as sensitive positions. Prospective and current employees,
contractors, volunteers, and interns who fill these positions must submit a
full set of fingerprints to the city to conduct a criminal history records
check for purpose of determining whether the person has been convicted of a
crime that bears upon the person's fitness and suitability to fill the
position.
(Ord. No. 11756, § 1, 6-9-20)
Sec. 2-25.3. Housing and community development department.  
   (a)   Housing and community development department prospective and current
employees, contract employees, volunteers, and interns in sensitive positions
shall submit a full set of fingerprints to the city to conduct a criminal
history check for purpose of determining whether the person has been convicted
of a crime that bears upon the person's fitness and suitability. Housing and
community development department positions shall be classified as sensitive if
the position's duties and responsibilities include:
      (1)   Contact with or access to children and vulnerable adults.
      (2)   Access to confidential financial information.
(Ord. No. 11756, § 1, 6-9-20)
Sec. 2-25.4. Public safety communications and fire department.
   (a)   Public safety communications and fire department positions with access
to criminal justice systems and motor vehicle or driver's license records will
be classified as sensitive positions. Prospective and current employees,
contract employees, volunteers, and interns filling these positions shall
submit a full set of fingerprints to the city to conduct a criminal history
check for purpose of determining whether the person has been convicted of a
crime that bears upon the person's fitness and suitability.
   (b)   Public safety communications and fire department positions requiring
contact with children or vulnerable adults or emergency management
responsibilities will be classified as sensitive positions. Prospective and
current employees, contract employees, volunteers, and interns filling these
positions shall submit a full set of fingerprints to the city to conduct a
criminal history check for purpose of determining whether the person has been
convicted of a crime that bears upon the person's fitness and suitability.
(Ord. No. 11756, § 1, 6-9-20)
Sec. 2-25.5. Information technology.
   (a)   Prospective and current employees, contract employees, volunteers, and
interns who have access to: criminal justice programs, systems, and records
including the Arizona Criminal Justice Information System (ACJIS), secured
areas, facilities, or equipment that processes highly sensitive information and
data, or systems or equipment used for the purpose of managing public resources
and emergency management shall submit a full set of fingerprints to the city to
conduct a criminal history check for purpose of determining whether the person
has been convicted of a crime that bears upon the person's fitness and
suitability.
(Ord. No. 11756, § 1, 6-9-20)
Sec. 2-25.6. Public resources and emergency management.
   (a)   Positions in the city's water department, department of transportation
& mobility, environmental and general services department with essential
functions related to public health and welfare or critical to emergency
management shall be classified as sensitive positions. Prospective and current
employees, contract employees, volunteers, and interns filling these positions
shall submit a full set of fingerprints to the city to conduct a criminal
history check for purpose of determining whether the person has been convicted
of a crime that bears upon the person's fitness and suitability. Positions
shall be classified sensitive if essential functions require:
   (1)   Access secured areas, internet, equipment, or systems that processes,
stores or manages highly sensitive information or data; or, systems or
equipment used for the purpose of managing public resources and emergency
management.
   (2)   Contact with or access to children or vulnerable adults.
(Ord. No. 11756, § 1, 6-9-20)
ARTICLE II.
MAYOR AND COUNCIL
Sec. 2-26. Date, time, and place of meetings; to be public.
   Sec. 2-26(1). Except as otherwise specified by mayor and council in an
ordinance enacted pursuant to subsection 2-26(2) below, the first, second,
third and fourth Tuesdays of each calendar month are established as the meeting
dates of the mayor and council. The meetings shall be held in the City Hall, or
in such other public place within the corporate limits of the city as the mayor
and council shall designate.
   Sec. 2-26(2). On or before December 31 of each year, the mayor and council
may, by ordinance, approve a schedule of meeting dates for the next calendar
year. The ordinance shall schedule a regular meeting during the first full week
of each month, as required by Tucson Charter
Chapter IX, Section 2, and such additional regular meetings during any month as
the Mayor and Council deem necessary or desirable. As used in this section and
Tucson Charter
Chapter IX, Section 2, the "first full week of each month" begins on Sunday,
ends on Saturday, and has all seven days within that month.
   Sec. 2-26(3). The meetings shall be held at 5:30 p.m. unless otherwise
specified in the notice of the meeting.
   Sec. 2-26(4). If any meeting date in the first week of a calendar month, or
its preceding Monday, falls on a legal holiday, that week's meeting shall be
held on Wednesday at the same time and place.
   Sec. 2-26(5). All meetings shall be open to the public except as otherwise
provided by law.
(1953 Code, ch. 2, § 1: Ord. No. 2277, § 1, 3-12-62; Ord. No. 2848, § 1, 2-7-
66; Ord. No. 3071, § 1, 1-2-68; Ord. No. 5076, § 1, 12-3-79; Ord. No. 5540, §
1, 4-5-82; Ord. No. 6532, § 1, 9-15-86; Ord. No. 9922, § 1, 1-5-04; Ord. No.
9953, § 1, 4-19-04; Ord. No. 10072, § 1, 10-25-04; Ord. No. 10232, § 1, 12-20-
05; Ord. No. 10352, § 1, 12-5-06)
   Charter References: Authority to establish times and places for council
meetings,
ch. IX, § 2.
Secs. 2-27--2-29. Reserved.
   Editors Note: Ord. No. 3119, § 1, adopted Apr. 22, 1968, repealed §§
2-27--2-29, pertaining to the rules for the meetings of the mayor and council,
and derived from the 1953 Code, ch. 2, §§ 2--4, and Ord. No. 2277, § 2, adopted
Mar. 12, 1962.
Sec. 2-30. City officers and employees to attend meetings.
Any officer or employee of the city, when requested by the mayor and council,
shall attend any meeting of the mayor and council.
(1953 Code, ch. 2, § 5)
Secs. 2-31--2-44. Reserved.
   Editors Note: Ord. No. 3119, § 1, enacted Apr. 22, 1968, repealed §§ 2-31
and 2-32, pertaining to the reading and passage of ordinances and resolutions,
and derived from the 1953 Code, ch. 2, §§ 6, 7; Ord. No. 2317, §§ 1, 2, enacted
July 2, 1962; and Ord. No. 2321, § 2, enacted July 16, 1962.
ARTICLE III.
PUBLIC COMMUNICATION, COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT, AND INTEGRATED PLANNING*
__________
*   Editors Note: Ord. No. 7973, section 1, adopted January 25, 1993, repealed
article III, pertaining to purchases. Questions referring to purchases may now
be found in chapter
28, Tucson Procurement Code. Current article III added by Ord. No. 11228, § 1,
adopted December 9, 2014.
__________
Sec. 2-45. Policy.
   It is the policy of the city to preserve, protect and promote effective
community building through open internal and external communication, active
community participation, and integrated planning to achieve successful delivery
of projects and services that enhance the city's social, economic, natural, and
built environments.
(Ord. No. 11228, § 1, 12-9-14)
Sec. 2-46. Implementation and administration of Plan Tucson.
   (a)   The city manager is responsible for implementation and administration
of Plan Tucson.
   (b)   The city manager's office will implement and sustain:
   (1)   Viable methods of regular communication between and among the various
segments of city government, including staff and elected officials, and the
city's residents, neighborhoods, businesses and community organizations.
   (2)   An inclusive environment in which residents are provided an
opportunity for meaningful participation throughout city planning and decision-
making processes.
   (3)   An approach to planning that reflects the integrated nature of
community systems and recognizes the range of stakeholders in the pursuit of
successful project and service delivery.
(Ord. No. 11228, § 1, 12-9-14)
Sec. 2-47. Designated planning agency.
   The city manager shall designate the planning agency in accordance with
A.R.S Title 9, Chapter 4, Article 6.
(Ord. No. 11228, § 1, 12-9-14)
Secs. 2-48--2-80. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV.
RESERVED*
__________
*   Editors Note: Ord. No. 7973, section 1, adopted January 25, 1993, repealed
article IV, pertaining to city improvements in its entirety.
__________
Secs. 2-81--2-87. Reserved.
ARTICLE V.
BONDS OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES*
__________
*   Charter References: Authority to require official bond,
ch. XIV.
__________
Sec. 2-88. Required; amounts.
Indemnity bonds covering dishonesty and assuring faithful performance of duty
shall be obtained on the officers, clerks, deputies and employees of the city,
and in the amounts as follows:
   (1)   Director of finance, one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00).
   (2)   Public employees faithful performance blanket position bond to cover
all other city officers and employees in the amount of ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) each, with additional excess coverage on positions or departments
as shall from time to time be required and ordered by the city manager.
(1953 Code, ch. 2, § 57)
Sec. 2-89. Bonding of new employees.
The city manager shall recommend to the mayor and council, from time to time,
in writing, the names of any recently employed officers, clerks, deputies or
employees of the city whose duties require or result in the handling of moneys,
funds, securities, property or material, or who, for any other reason, the
manager deems should be bonded for the best interest of the city. The city
manager shall also advise the purchasing agent of the names of such recently
employed officers, clerks, deputies or employees who shall see that such
recently employed officers, clerks, deputies or employees are forthwith bonded
in compliance with this article.
(1953 Code, ch. 2, § 58)
Sec. 2-90. Conditions, signing, approval.
All bonds required by this article shall be payable to the city. The condition
shall be that the principal or principals, will well, truly and faithfully
perform all official duties then required, or which may thereafter be imposed
on him or them by any law of the state, or the Charter, ordinances, resolutions
and regulations of the city. The bonds, except for the positions covered by the
blanket position bond, shall be signed by the officers and employees listed in
section
2-88, as principal and by a surety company qualified under the laws of the
state. All such bonds, including the blanket position bond, shall be approved
by the mayor and council, after approval as to form by the city attorney.
(1953 Code, ch. 2, § 59)
Sec. 2-91. City to pay premiums.
All premiums for bonds required by this article shall be paid by the city.
(1953 Code, ch. 2, § 60)
Secs. 2-92--2-100. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI.
CITY CLERK RECORDS MANAGEMENT*
__________
*   Editors Note: Ord. No. 10615, § 1, adopted Dec. 16, 2008, repealed the
former Art. VI, §§
2-101--2-108, and § 2 of said ordinance enacted a new Art. VI as set out
herein. The former Art. VI pertained to similar subject matter and derived from
Ord. No. 3033, § 1, adopted August 14, 1967.
__________
Sec. 2-101. Preservation of records in compliance with state law.
The city clerk shall preserve and maintain the city's public records through a
program that complies with relevant state law, including but not necessarily
limited to Arizona Revised Statutes Title 41, Chapter 8, Article 3.
(Ord. No. 10615, § 2, 12-16-08)
Sec. 2-102. Reproductions from public records; certified copies.
Reproductions made from public records preserved and maintained as required in
section
2-101 of this Code are deemed originals, and the city clerk may make certified
true copies from them.
(Ord. No. 10615, § 2, 12-16-08)
Sec. 2-103. Preservation of essential records.
To preserve essential records against disaster, the city clerk shall duplicate
ordinances, resolutions, and minutes of mayor and council meetings, and shall
store the duplicates in such manner and place as to reasonably assure their
preservation indefinitely against loss, theft, defacement, deterioration or
destruction.
(Ord. No. 10615, § 2, 12-16-08)
Secs. 2-104--2-119. Reserved.
ARTICLE VII.
RESERVE POLICE OFFICER PROGRAM
Sec. 2-120. Appointment of reserve police officers.
The chief of police is hereby authorized to establish a reserve police officer
program within the structure of the police department. The chief of police is
further authorized to appoint as a reserve police officer any person twenty-one
(21) years of age or over. Such officers shall serve under such rules and
regulations and conditions as are promulgated by the chief of police.
(Ord. No. 4454, § 1, 3-1-76)
Sec. 2-121. Purpose and functions of reserve police officers.
The purpose of appointment of reserve police officers is to preserve the public
peace and promote the general welfare of the city by giving authority to
certain persons to enforce city ordinances, state statutes and federal laws, as
well as perform other duties as may from time to time be assigned by the chief
of police.
(Ord. No. 4454, § 1, 3-1-76)
Sec. 2-122. Status of reserve police officers; compensation.
   (a)   Reserve police officers, only while on duty in such capacity under the
supervision of the chief of police or his designates, shall have police powers
equivalent to those of regular police officers, subject to such limitations as
the chief of police may direct. Reserve police officers shall not be subject to
or acquire any rights under the civil service rules of the city or public
safety personnel retirement system of the state.
   (b)   Reserve police officers shall receive no salary from the city or the
police department.
(Ord. No. 4454, § 1, 3-1-76)
   Cross References: Civil service generally, ch.
10.
Sec. 2-123. Qualifications for appointment; applications.
The chief of police shall determine the qualifications necessary for
appointment as a reserve police officer, and shall approve all applications
prior to appointment.
(Ord. No. 4454, § 1, 3-1-76)
Sec. 2-124. Oath of office.
Every person appointed by the chief of police as a reserve police officer shall
be sworn to faithful performance of his required duties as established by the
chief of police.
(Ord. No. 4454, § 1, 3-1-76)
Sec. 2-125. Preassignment training.
The chief of police shall conduct a period of preassignment training for
reserve police officers sufficient to enable such officers to properly and
adequately perform their required duties. The chief of police may also require
such additional continuing training as he may find necessary.
(Ord. No. 4454, § 1, 3-1-76)
Sec. 2-126. Dismissal.
The chief of police shall have the authority to dismiss reserve police officers
when he finds such dismissal to be in the best interests of the city, or when
such officer fails to maintain active reserve police officer status.
(Ord. No. 4454, § 1, 3-1-76)
Sec. 2-127. Relation to other police officers.
The provisions of this article shall not be construed as altering, limiting or
expanding the powers, duties and authority of either regular police officers or
special police officers of the city.
(Ord. No. 4454, § 1, 3-1-76)
Secs. 2-128, 2-129. Reserved.
ARTICLE VIII.
SPECIAL DUTY POLICE SERVICES PROGRAM
Sec. 2-130. Definitions.
In this chapter unless the context otherwise requires:
   Chief or police chief means the chief of police of the Tucson Police
Department, or the police chief's authorized designee(s).
   Officer means a police officer, police detective, police sergeant, or police
lieutenant employed by the City of Tucson, and a volunteer reserve police
officer appointed pursuant to Tucson Code section
2-120.
   Special duty police services means law enforcement or related activities
voluntarily performed at the option of Tucson police department officers to
employers other than the City of Tucson. Such services may be provided only
outside of an officer's regular duty hours.
(Ord. No. 9118, § 1, 11-16-98)
Sec. 2-131. Special duty police services; authorizing police chief to execute
agreements with employers that set forth the wages and conditions for special
duty police services; authorizing use of city resources for billing,
accounting, and payment; authorizing police chief to charge an administrative
fee; and permitting use of city vehicles.
   (a)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, the police chief is
authorized to prepare, enter into, implement and administer special duty police
services agreements with such non-city employers as may be deemed appropriate
when employing special duty police services.
   (b)   The police chief is authorized to use city resources to accomplish
billing, accounting, collection, and payment to officers participating in the
special duty police services program.
   (c)   The police chief is authorized to establish a minimum rate of pay for
police officers providing special duty police services, and to recover all or
part of the administrative costs associated with administering the special duty
police services program.
   (d)   The police chief is authorized to permit the use of city vehicles and
other specialized equipment for special duty police services provided that such
use does not conflict with the needs of regular duty police services and
provided that the use meets the criteria established by police department for
use of city vehicles.
(Ord. No. 9118, § 1, 11-16-98)
Secs. 2-132--2-139. Reserved.
ARTICLE IX.
DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY AND MONEY BY THE POLICE DEPARTMENT
Sec. 2-140. Disposition of property obtained by the police department.
   (a)   Property received and taken into the custody of the police
department's property and evidence unit, excluding property held as evidence or
contraband, shall be retained for a minimum of thirty (30) calendar days from
the date of receipt in an attempt to identify the owner of such property and
notify the owner that such property is in the custody of the police department.
The notice shall advise the owner that the property must be claimed by a
specified date, which shall be no sooner than thirty (30) calendar days after
the date of mailing. The notification to the owner shall be by regular mail to
the last known address, as listed by either the Motor Vehicle Division of the
Arizona Department of Transportation or police department records.
   (b)   Property with an estimated market value of over one hundred fifty
dollars ($150.00) that is uniquely identifiable by means of serial numbers or
markings, for which the name and the address of the owner are not known, shall
have a notice of disposition posted in a publication of general circulation by
the police department. Claimants shall have thirty (30) calendar days to
respond to this notice with proof of ownership.
   (c)   In the event a response is not received from the owner, or if the
owner disclaims interest in or ownership of the property, or if the property
has an estimated market value of under one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) and
the owner is unknown, the property shall be offered to the finder who delivered
the property to the police department. The finder shall be notified by regular
mail at the address provided by the finder. It shall be the responsibility of
the owner or finder of the property to notify the police department of any
address changes associated with the return of property.
   (d)   If there is no finder and no one has come forward with a claim after
thirty (30) calendar days, or if the finder fails to respond to the
notification within thirty (30) calendar days from the date the notification is
mailed, the property shall be considered forfeited and shall be disposed of as
provided by Subsection (f).
   (e)   The police department shall maintain appropriate property invoice
records concerning all property received. The police department shall list all
items of property indicating descriptive nomenclature, make or manufacturer,
and serial number. In the absence of identifying criteria, an adequate
description of the property shall suffice.
   (f)   Property with an estimated value of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or
less shall be donated to a local charitable organization or disposed of.
Property with a value of more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be
delivered to the director of procurement for disposition in accordance with
Tucson Code sections
28-70 and
28-71. The chief of police shall issue regulations implementing the disposition
of property required by this article. Such regulation shall include the method
of value appraisal, choice of charitable organizations, maintenance of property
invoice records, and any other regulation that insures the integrity of
property in the custody of the police department. Property delivered to the
director of procurement shall be accompanied by a list of the items
transferred, to include the corresponding invoice record number as indicated in
subsection (e).
(Ord. No. 10146, § 1, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 10934, § 1, 10-12-11)
Sec. 2-141. Disposition of unclaimed money by the police department.
   (a)   Following the completion of notification as specified in section
2-140, any money or currency remaining in the custody of the police department,
except rare coins or currency of numismatic value covered in subsection (b) or
otherwise needed for evidentiary purposes, shall be deposited with the city
finance director. The deposit of such monies or currency with the city finance
director shall pass the title of the monies or currency to the city.
   (b)   Disposition of rare coins or currency of numismatic value shall be in
accordance with section
2-140.
(Ord. No. 10146, § 1, 4-19-05)
Chapter 3
RESERVED*
__________
*   Editor’s note – Ord. No. 10481, § 1, adopted Nov. 27, 2007, effective Jan.
14, 2008, repealed the former Ch. 3, Arts. I – XV, §§ 3-1 – 3-10, 3-14, 3-15,
3-19 – 3-27, 3-31 – 3-43, 3-47 – 3-69, 3-73, 3-77 – 3-80, 3-84 – 3-86, 3-90, 3-
91, 3-95, 3-99 – 3-105, 3-109, 3-110, 3-114 – 3-125, 3-130 – 3-136. Section 2
of said ordinance enacted a new Ch. 3 pertaining to signs. The former Ch. 3
pertained to advertising and outdoor signs and derived from Ord. No. 6737, § 2,
adopted July 6, 1987; Ord. No. 6867, § 1, adopted Feb. 22, 1988; Ord. No. 7277,
§ 1, adopted Sept. 11, 1989; Ord. No. 7455, §§ 1 – 8, adopted August 6, 1990;
Ord. No. 7768, §§ 1 – 26, adopted April 6, 1992; Ord. No. 8281, § 1, adopted
June 6, 1994; Ord. No. 8634, § 1, adopted Jan. 8, 1996; Ord. No. 8635, § 1,
adopted Jan. 8, 1996; Ord. No. 8986, § 1, adopted Nov. 10, 1997; Ord. No. 8983,
§§ 1 – 3, adopted Nov. 10, 1997; Ord. No. 9123, §§ 1, 2, adopted Sept. 14,
1998; Ord. No. 9128, §§ 1 – 5, adopted Sept. 14, 1998; Ord. No. 9470, §§ 1, 2,
adopted Oct. 9, 2000; Ord. No. 9537, §§ 1 – 12, adopted May 14, 2001; Ord. No.
9782, § 1, adopted Oct. 14, 2002; Ord. No. 9805, § 1, adopted Jan. 13, 2003;
Ord. No. 9808, § 1, adopted Jan. 13, 2003; Ord. No. 9859, §§ 1, 2, adopted June
23, 2003; Ord. No. 10173, § 1, adopted June 28, 2005; Ord. No. 10376, § 1,
adopted Feb. 21, 2007. Ord. No. 11508, § 2, adopted Dec. 5, 2017, effective
Feb. 1, 2018, repealed Ch. 3.
Chapter 4
ANIMALS AND FOWL*
__________
*   Charter References: Authority to regulate keeping animals, fowl in city,
ch. IV, § 1(18); authority to license, regulate animals and fowl,
ch. VII, § 1 (7), (8).
   Cross References: County health officer to enforce health regulations, §
2-15; regulation of bee keeping, §
11-3; license fee for livery stables, §
19-28(90); applicability of traffic regulations to animals and animal-drawn
vehicles, §
20-5.
__________
Art. I.   In General, §§ 4-1--4-20
Art. II.   Livestock, Large and Dangerous Animals, §§ 4-21--4-39
Art. III.   Diseased Animals, §§ 4-40--4-54
Art. IV.   Fowl, §§ 4-55--4-70
Art. V.   Dogs, §§ 4-71--4-103
Article I. In General
Sec.
4-1.   Enforcement.
Sec.
4-2.   Interfering with enforcement officers; releasing impounded animals.
Sec.
4-3.   Cruelty and neglect.
Sec.
4-4.   Animal or fowl fights prohibited.
Sec.
4-5.   Failure to render aid to animals struck by vehicles.
Sec.
4-6.   Harboring lost animals.
Sec.
4-7.   Vicious or destructive animals.
Sec.
4-8.   Sale of animals at swap meets and public property prohibited; sale of
baby chickens, ducklings or young rabbits forbidden; exceptions; penalties.
Sec.
4-9.   Definitions.
Sec.
4-10.   Authority to remove and impound animals.
Sec.
4-11.   Procedure to remove and forfeit animals; notice; order to show cause
hearing; disclosure; appeal.
Sec.
4-12.   Disposition of animals.
Sec.
4-13.   Dangerous animals.
Sec.
4-14.   Duty to produce; penalties.
Secs.
4-15--4-20.   Reserved.
Article II. Livestock, Large and Dangerous Animals
Sec.
4-21.   Running at large prohibited.
Sec.
4-22.   Grazing or pasturing in city.
Sec.
4-23.   Impounding, disposal of animals running at large or grazing.
Sec.
4-24.   Open range exception.
Sec.
4-25.   Keeping wild animals.
Sec.
4-26.   Keeping pigs and hogs prohibited; exception: maximum of three (3)
miniature pigs allowed per household.
Sec.
4-27.   Proximity of corrals, barns, etc., to dwellings.
Sec.
4-28.   Disposal and accumulation of manure, animal bedding and body waste of
domestic animals and pets.
Sec.
4-29.   Animals attached to vehicles to be hitched.
Sec.
4-30.   Penalties.
Secs.
4-31--4-39.   Reserved.
Article III. Diseased Animals
Sec.
4-40.   Keeping diseased animals prohibited; destruction authorized.
Sec.
4-41.   Diseased animals running at large prohibited; impounding or confinement
enforced.
Sec.
4-42.   Animals suspected of rabies--Report required.
Sec.
4-43.   Same--Refusal to deliver to enforcement officer.
Sec.
4-44.   Same--Impounding biting animals; disposition.
Sec.
4-45.   Violations; penalties.
Secs.
4-46--4-54.   Reserved.
Article IV. Fowl
Sec.
4-55.   Running at large prohibited.
Sec.
4-56.   Limit on number kept.
Sec.
4-57.   Proximity of coop or place kept to dwellings.
Sec.
4-58.   Coop or place kept to be clean, sanitary.
Sec.
4-59.   Keeping male fowl or guinea fowl prohibited.
Sec.
4-60.   Keeping pigeons.
Sec.
4-61.   Penalties.
Secs.
4-62--4-70.   Reserved.
Article V. Dogs
Sec.
4-71.   Definitions.
Sec.
4-72.   Authority of city manager.
Sec.
4-73.   Violations; penalties.
Sec.
4-74.   Issuance of citations for violations.
Sec.
4-75.   Reserved.
Sec.
4-76.   Vaccination required.
Sec.
4-77.   Vaccination certificate prerequisite to license.
Sec.
4-78.   Regulations governing vaccinations.
Sec.
4-79.   Certificate of vaccination required; contents.
Sec.
4-80.   Vaccination other than in Pima County.
Sec.
4-81.   License required.
Sec.
4-82.   License fee.
Sec.
4-82.1.   Altered dogs; animal age and health.
Sec.
4-82.2.   Senior citizen fees.
Sec.
4-82.3.   Rebate.
Sec.
4-82.4.   Licensed breeder fee.
Sec.
4-83.   Certain dogs exempt from fee.
Sec.
4-84.   Reserved.
Sec.
4-85.   Application for license.
Sec.
4-86.   Enforcement officer to keep records.
Sec.
4-87.   When fees delinquent; delinquency penalty.
Sec.
4-88.   Issuance, contents of tags.
Sec.
4-89.   Tag to be worn.
Sec.
4-90.   Duplicate license tags.
Sec.
4-91.   Transfer of licenses.
Sec.
4-92.   Tags not transferable to other dogs.
Sec.
4-93.   Counterfeiting or transferring tags prohibited.
Sec.
4-94.   When tag need not be worn.
Sec.
4-95.   Impounding, vaccination of unvaccinated dogs.
Sec.
4-96.   Reserved.
Sec.
4-97.   Being at large prohibited; exceptions; impoundment; penalties.
Sec.
4-98.   Impounding unlicensed dogs.
Sec.
4-99.   Impoundment time, notice and costs.
Sec.
4-100.   Reserved.
Sec.
4-101.   Reserved.
Sec.
4-102.   Dog waste removal; exceptions.
Sec.
4-103.   Dogs prohibited on school grounds; exceptions.
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL
Sec. 4-1. Enforcement.
Any peace officer, or any county animal control officer, is hereby authorized
and empowered to enforce the provisions of this chapter and to issue citations
for violations thereof.
(1953 Code, ch. 4, § 10; Ord. No. 6043, § 1, 6-25-84)
Sec. 4-2. Interfering with enforcement officers; releasing impounded animals.
It shall be unlawful for any persons to interfere with any officer authorized
to enforce this chapter in the performance of his duties, or to release any
animal duly impounded, and any person guilty of such act shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(1953 Code, ch. 4, § 24)
Sec. 4-3. Cruelty and neglect.
   Sec. 4-3(1). Cruelty. Whoever overdrives, overloads, overworks, tortures,
torments, cruelly beats, mutilates or unlawfully kills an animal, or causes or
procures an animal to be so overdriven, overloaded, driven when overloaded,
overworked, tortured, tormented, cruelly beaten, mutilated or killed, and
whoever, having charge or custody of an animal, either as owner or otherwise,
inflicts unnecessary cruelty upon it, cruelly drives or works it when unfit for
labor, or cruelly abandons it, or carries it or causes it to be carried in or
upon a vehicle or otherwise, in an unnecessarily cruel or inhumane manner or
knowingly and willfully authorizes or permits it to be subjected to
unreasonable or unnecessary torture, suffering or cruelty of any kind, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.
   Sec. 4-3(2). Neglect. The purpose of this subsection is to guarantee that
animals under human custody or control are housed in healthy environments and
are provided with proper food, water, shelter, medical care, exercise space and
ventilation. Any person owning or having care, control or custody of any animal
shall provide:
   (a)   That the animal receives daily, food that is free from contamination
and is of sufficient quantity and nutritive value to maintain the animal in
good health.
   (b)   That potable water is accessible to the animal at all times, either
free-flowing or in a clean receptacle.
   (c)   That, except for livestock, all animals have convenient access to
natural or artificial shelter throughout the year. Any such artificial shelter
shall be structurally sound and maintained in good repair to protect the animal
from injury and from the elements, and of sufficient size to permit the animal
to enter, stand, turn around and lie down in a natural manner. Any shelter
which does not protect the animal from temperature extremes or precipitation,
or which does not provide adequate ventilation or drainage, shall not comply
with this section. Any shelter, all bedding and any spaces accessible to the
animal shall be maintained in a manner which minimizes the risk of the animal
contracting disease, being injured, or becoming infested with parasites.
   (d)   That the animal receives care and medical treatment for debilitating
injuries, parasites and diseases, sufficient to maintain the animal in good
health and minimize suffering.
   (e)   That the animal is given adequate exercise space as follows:
   (1)   Within an enclosure that shall be constructed of material, and in a
manner, to minimize the risk of injury to the animal, and shall encompass
sufficient usable space to keep the animal in good condition;
   (2)   Tieouts are prohibited.
   (3)   Temporary tethering for horses is exempt from the provisions of Tucson
Code, subsection
4-3(2)(e)(2).
   (f)   That the animal has access to adequate ventilation and is protected
from temperature extremes at all times. In this connection, it is unlawful for
any person to keep any animal in a vehicle or other enclosed space in which the
temperature is either so high or so low, or the ventilation is so inadequate,
as to endanger the animal's life or health. Any peace officer or county animal
control officer is authorized to use whatever force is reasonable and necessary
to remove any animal from a vehicle or other enclosed space whenever it appears
that the animal's life or health is endangered by extreme temperatures or lack
of ventilation within the vehicle or other enclosed space.
   No peace officer or county animal control officer shall be liable for
damages to property caused by the use of reasonable force to remove an animal
from such a vehicle or other enclosed space under such circumstances.
   (g)   No person shall give or administer anabolic steroids as defined in the
United States Code and the relevant sections of the Code of Federal
Regulations, to any greyhound dog in training for or being used for racing
within the State of Arizona, in order to artificially enhance performance or
suppress estrus. This provision may not be waived as dictated by treatment
under direction of a licensed veterinarian.
   Sec. 4-3(3). Any of the provisions of this section except for the provisions
of Section
4-3(2)(g) may be waived as dictated by treatment under direction of a licensed
veterinarian.
   Sec. 4-3(4). Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.
   Sec. 4-3(5). Penalties. A violation of any provision of this section is
punishable by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more
than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). No judge, magistrate or
special magistrate may suspend the imposition of the minimum fine prescribed
herein. In addition to the fine amount, the penalty may include not more than
six (6) months in jail and not more than three (3) years probation, or any
combination thereof.
In addition, restitution shall be ordered to the victim. This remedy shall not
abridge any civil cause of action by the victim.
In addition, upon finding of neglect or cruelty by a city magistrate or special
magistrate, the magistrate or special magistrate may order that the owner shall
not be permitted to own or control any animal for a period of up to three (3)
years. (Ord. No. 7241, § 1, 7-3-89; Ord. No. 8996, § 1, 12-8-97)
(1953 Code, ch. 4, § 29; Ord. No. 6043, § 2, 6-25-84; Ord. No. 8713, § 1, 6-10-
96; Ord. No. 11027, § 1, 10-9-12)
   State Law References: Cruelty to animals generally, A.R.S. §§ 13-951--13-
953.
Sec. 4-4. Animal or fowl fights prohibited.
Any person who is the owner of, or who has the charge, custody or control of
any animal or fowl, who willfully and knowingly permits or aids, abets or
encourages, such animal or fowl to engage in a fight with any other animal or
fowl within the city, on a wager, or for sport, or for any other purpose, shall
be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
(1953 Code, ch. 4, § 39)
Sec. 4-5. Failure to render aid to animals struck by vehicles.
If any person accidentally or otherwise hits an animal with an automobile or
other vehicle and injures the same within the city and goes away without making
a reasonable effort to render aid and assistance in the care of such animal, he
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
(1953 Code, ch. 4, § 25)
Sec. 4-6. Harboring lost animals.
It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor or keep within the city any lost
or strayed animal. Whenever any animal shall be found which appears to be lost
or strayed, it shall be the duty of the finder to notify the animal shelter or
pound at once.
(1953 Code, ch. 4, § 30)
Sec. 4-7. Vicious or destructive animals.
   Sec. 4-7(1). Definitions. In this section, unless the context otherwise
requires:
   (a)   Bite means any penetration of the skin by the teeth of any animal.
   (b)   Destructive animal means any animal that has a propensity to destroy,
damage or cause damage to the property of a person other than the animal's
owner.
   (c)   Owner shall be defined in section
4-9 of this article.
   (d)   Vicious animal means any animal that bites, attempts to bite,
endangers or otherwise injures or causes to be injured human beings or other
animals, except as provided in minor section
4-7(4), or one that has been declared vicious pursuant to this article.
   (e)   Police dog means any dog belonging to any law enforcement agency
service dog unit.
   (f)   Provocation means any behavior toward an animal or its owner which is
likely to cause a defensive reaction by the animal.
   Sec. 4-7(2). Prohibited Activity.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, control, harbor or
otherwise have under control any animal which is vicious or destructive. This
section shall not apply to zoos, wild animal parks, animal shelters or persons
complying with section
4-25 of article II of this chapter, or with the orders of a city magistrate
issued pursuant to this article.
   (b)   The owner of any animal that bites, attempts to bite, endangers or
otherwise injures or causes injury to human beings or other animals is guilty
of a misdemeanor, except as provided in minor section
4-7(4).
   (c)   The owner of any animal that destroys, damages or causes damage to the
property of another person is guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (d)   It is unlawful for any person to fail to comply with an order of a
city magistrate or special magistrate regarding a vicious or destructive
animal. It is a separate offense for each day that such person fails to comply
with the magistrate's order.
   Sec. 4-7(3). Penalty. A violation of any provision of this section is
punishable by a fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more
than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). No magistrate or special
magistrate may suspend the imposition of the minimum fine prescribed herein. In
addition to the fine amount, the penalty may include not more than six (6)
months in jail and not more than three (3) years probation, or any combination
thereof.
In addition, unless the animal has been previously forfeited or destroyed, upon
a finding of guilt, a magistrate or special magistrate shall declare an animal
vicious or destructive and shall order one (1) or more of the following:
   (a)   That the animal shall be spayed or neutered by a licensed veterinarian
at the owner's expense and that the owner of the animal shall comply with the
provisions of sections
4-13(e), (f) and (g); or
   (b)   That the animal be banished from the city limits after first being
spayed or neutered, microchipped and tattooed, by a licensed veterinarian at
the owner's expense; the animal may be forfeited to the city enforcement agent
or the owner shall provide a certificate of spaying or neutering, and
microchipping and tattooing from a licensed veterinarian to the city
enforcement agent within the time given by the court to ensure the humane
destruction of the animal or the spaying or neutering and microchipping and
tattooing of the animal before banishment; or
   (c)   That the animal be humanely destroyed.
In addition, restitution shall be ordered made by the owner to the victim. This
remedy shall not abridge any civil cause of action by the victim.
(Ord. No. 6828, § 1, 11-16-87; Ord. No. 6854, § 1, 11-30-87; Ord. No. 7007, §
1, 8-1-88; Ord. No. 7241, § 2, 7-3-89; Ord. No. 9804, § 3, 1-13-03; Ord. No.
10206, § 1, 10-4-05)
   Sec. 4-7(4). Defenses. It shall be an affirmative defense to the provisions
of this section if the animal is:
   (a)   Not at large and there is provocation; or
   (b)   A police dog under the command of its trainer.
   Sec. 4-7(5). Authority and procedures to remove and impound. The authority
and procedure to remove and impound an animal shall be pursuant to those
described in sections
4-10 and
4-11 of the Tucson Code.
(Ord. No. 6197, § 2, 3-11-85; 1953 Code, ch. 4., § 28; Ord. No. 6043, § 3, 6-
25-84; Ord. No. 8996, § 2, 12-8-97)
   State Law References: Liability for injury caused by animal, A.R.S. § 24-501
et seq.
Sec. 4-8. Sale of animals at swap meets and public property prohibited; sale of
baby chickens, ducklings or young rabbits forbidden; exceptions; penalties.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful to display or offer for sale, trade, gift or
other transfer of ownership or to make a sale, trade, gift or otherwise
transfer any animal including birds and reptiles on or from any public street,
roadway, right-of-way, sidewalk, park or swap meet.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or to give away baby
chickens or ducklings under six (6) weeks of age or rabbits under two (2)
months of age in less than half- dozen lots as premiums, novelties, prizes,
pets or toys, for the promotion of any business, sale, activity or other
promotional use.
   (c)   Exceptions. Subsection (a) shall not prohibit the sale, gift or other
transfer of ownership of animals at activities or events that are regulated by
other state or county agencies. Subsection (b) shall not be considered to
prohibit the sale of display of baby chickens or ducklings or rabbits in proper
facilities that comply with the provisions of any sanitary code, or other rules
and regulations of the board of health, by breeders and those engaged in the
business of selling for commercial breeding and raising purposes. Subsections
(a) and (b) of this section shall not prohibit the use of off-site signs or
advertising, to the extent such signs or advertising are otherwise permitted.
   (d)   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of
a Class 2 misdemeanor.
   (e)   Penalties. A violation of any provision of this section is punishable
by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) for any person. Each
day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 2704, § 1, 12-7-64; Ord. No. 10475, § 1, 11-13-07)
Sec. 4-9. Definitions.
In this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:
   (a)   Animal means any fowl, reptile, amphibian or mammal, except human
beings.
   (b)   Fowl means a bird of any kind.
   (c)   Owner means any person owning, keeping, possessing, harboring,
maintaining or having custody or otherwise having control of an animal.
   (d)   Wild animal means any animal which is now or historically has been
found in the wild, or in the wild state. Wild state means living in its
original, natural condition; not domesticated. Any hybrid cross resulting from
the cross breeding between two (2) different species or types of animals,
including crosses between wild animal species and domestic animals such as dog-
wolf crosses, are considered wild animals.
(Ord. No. 4531, § 1, 6-28-76; Ord. No. 6043, § 4, 6-25-84; Ord. No. 8996, § 3,
12-8-97)
Sec. 4-10. Authority to remove and impound animals.
   (a)   A peace officer or a city enforcement agent is hereby authorized and
empowered to remove and impound any animal in plain view, or pursuant to a
valid search warrant if the officer has probable cause to believe any of the
following:
   (1)   That an animal is in distress caused by mistreatment, tie-out,
exposure to the elements, extremes of temperature, lack of adequate ventilation
or drainage, lack of sanitation, deprivation of proper food or potable water,
restraint, restriction of movement, confinement, lack of sufficient exercise
space, constrictive gear, injury, illness, physical impairment or parasites; or
   (2)   That an animal's well-being is threatened by a dangerous condition or
circumstance;
and if he has reason to believe either:
   a.   That the distress of the animal or the dangerous condition or
circumstance was caused or allowed to be caused by the willful act or omission
or negligence of the owner; or
   b.   That it is likely the animal would be in distress from any cause, or
its well- being would be threatened by any dangerous condition or circumstance
if the owner retains ownership of the animal.
   (3)   That an animal is vicious or destructive and may be a danger to the
safety of any person or other animal.
   (b)   An animal is deemed to be in distress if it is on a tie-out.
(Ord. No. 6043, § 5, 6-25-84; Ord. No. 8996, § 4, 12-8-97)
Sec. 4-11. Procedure to remove and forfeit animals; notice; order to show cause
hearing; disclosure; appeal.
   (a)   The following procedures shall be followed by the city enforcement
agent or a peace officer when any animal is removed or impounded pursuant to
sections
4-7 and
4-10:
   (1)   If the owner is known, and unless the owner signs a statement
permanently relinquishing ownership of the animal to the city enforcement
agent, the owner shall be provided with a written notice containing, at a
minimum, the following information:
   a.   Within ten (10) days of the owner's receipt of the notice, the city
intends to file a written request with the magistrate or special magistrate for
a hearing to determine if the animal was in distress or danger or is vicious,
destructive or dangerous, and to determine the appropriate remedy, including
possible forfeiture.
   b.   The owner's right to present witnesses and be represented by an
attorney at the hearing.
   c.   The following statement, printed in bold twelve (12) point type or
larger capital letters:
      YOUR ANIMAL MAY BE HUMANELY DESTROYED IF IT IS FORFEITED TO THE CITY
ENFORCEMENT AGENT.
   d.   The bond amount required pursuant to section
4-11(h), along with a statement that if the bond is not posted within ten (10)
days of receipt of the notice, the animal shall be deemed forfeited to the city
enforcement agent to be placed by adoption in a suitable home or humanely
destroyed.
   e.   The owner's right to receive disclosure of witnesses and evidence and
the owner's obligation to disclose witnesses and evidence as provided in
section
4-11(a)(4) and (5).
   (2)   If the owner's whereabouts cannot be determined, the notice shall be
mailed to the owner at the owner's last-known address by registered or
certified mail, return receipt requested.
   (3)   If the city files a written request for a hearing before the
magistrate or special magistrate the hearing shall be set for a date not less
than fifteen (15) nor more than twenty (20) working days after the request has
been filed with Tucson City Court. The request for hearing shall contain either
a written description of the legal basis for the hearing or citation to the
specific code section and subsection that provides the legal basis for the
hearing.
   (4)   As required disclosure to the other party, each party shall:
   a.   provide the name of any victim and the names, addresses and telephone
numbers of any other witnesses the party plans to call at the hearing with a
fair description of the substance of each witness' expected testimony, and
   b.   make available for examination and reproduction any exhibits and
written or recorded statements of any witness which have been prepared and may
be offered at the hearing.
   (5)   The disclosure required by paragraph (4) above shall be made by the
city not later than ten (10) days prior to the hearing and by the animal owner
not later than five (5) days prior to the hearing. If a party fails to make
disclosure as required by this section, the other party shall have the right,
if requested, to a recess or continuance to permit examination of the evidence.
At the court's discretion, undisclosed evidence or witnesses may be excluded
from the hearing.
   (b)   If the owner fails to appear at the hearing, the magistrate or special
magistrate shall order the animal forfeited to the city enforcement agent to be
placed by adoption in a suitable home or humanely destroyed.
   (c)   At the hearing, the magistrate or special magistrate shall order the
animal to be forfeited to the city enforcement agent to be placed by adoption
in a suitable home or humanely destroyed if the magistrate or special
magistrate finds from a preponderance of the evidence either:
   (1)   That an animal was in distress caused by mistreatment, tie-out,
exposure to the elements, extremes of temperature, lack of adequate ventilation
or drainage, lack of sanitation, deprivation of proper food or potable water,
restraint, restriction of movement, confinement, lack of sufficient exercise
space, constrictive gear, injury, illness, physical impairment or parasites; or
   (2)   That the well-being of the animal was threatened by a dangerous
condition or circumstance; and either:
   (3)   That the distress of the animal or dangerous condition or circumstance
was caused or allowed to be caused by the willful act or omission or negligence
of the owner; or
   (4)   That it is likely the animal would be in distress from any cause, or
its well being would be threatened by any dangerous condition or circumstance
if the owner retains ownership of the animal.
   (d)   An animal is deemed to be in distress if it is on a tie-out.
   (e)   The hearing shall be conducted pursuant to the City of Tucson Local
Rules of Practice and Procedure in City Court Civil Proceedings, except that
the more specific requirements of this section shall apply in the case of
conflicting provisions.
   (f)   At the hearing, if the magistrate or special magistrate finds by clear
and convincing evidence that an animal is dangerous or vicious or destructive,
or is a danger to the safety of any person or other animal, then the magistrate
or special magistrate shall order the owner to do one (1) or more of the
following:
   (1)   That the animal shall be spayed or neutered by a licensed veterinarian
at the owner's expense and that the owner of the animal shall comply with the
provisions of sections
4-13(e), (f) and (g); or
   (2)   That the animal be banished from the city limits after first being
spayed or neutered, microchipped and tattooed by a licensed veterinarian at the
owner's expense; the animal may be forfeited to the city enforcement agent or
the owner shall provide a certificate of spaying or neutering, microchipping
and tattooing from a licensed veterinarian to the city enforcement agent within
the time given by the court to ensure the humane destruction of the animal or
the spaying or neutering, microchipping and tattooing of the animal before
banishment; or
   (3)   That the animal be humanely destroyed.
   (g)   Use of the civil procedures and remedies provided for in this chapter
shall neither require nor preclude other enforcement action on the same facts,
including a criminal prosecution of the owner. The civil procedures and
remedies provided for in this chapter are remedial and not punitive, and are
not precluded by an acquittal or conviction in a criminal proceeding. This
section shall not be construed as precluding the destruction of any animal if
destruction is otherwise authorized by law, nor shall anything in this section
be construed as precluding the spaying or neutering of any animal. If any
provision of this section is in conflict with any other provisions of this
Code, the provisions of this section shall be controlling.
   (h)   If an animal is impounded pursuant to this section, the owner must
post twenty (20) days of impoundment fees in advance as a bond to defray some
of the costs of boarding, impoundment and any veterinary care needed. This sum
shall be listed as the bond amount on the notice provided to the owner pursuant
to section
4-11(a)(1)(d). If the bond is not posted within ten (10) days of receipt of the
notice, the animal shall be deemed forfeited to the city enforcement agent to
be placed by adoption in a suitable home or humanely destroyed.
   (i)   A defendant in a criminal proceeding who testifies at a hearing held
pursuant to this section does not, by so testifying, waive the right to remain
silent during a trial in the criminal proceeding; and if a defendant in a
criminal proceeding does testify at the hearing, neither this fact nor the
defendant's testimony at the hearing shall be mentioned at the trial in the
criminal proceeding unless the defendant testifies at the trial in the criminal
proceeding concerning the same matters.
   (j)   After a hearing conducted under this section, the magistrate or
special limited magistrate shall issue an order that includes written findings
of fact and conclusions of law.
   (k)   Appeal by either party of the decision of the magistrate or special
magistrate shall be by way of special action to the superior court on the
record of the hearing. If either party claims the record to be incomplete or
lost, and the magistrate or special magistrate who conducted the hearing so
certifies, a new hearing shall be conducted before that magistrate or special
magistrate. The owner must post a bond equivalent to sixty (60) days of
impoundment costs in order to perfect the owner's appeal. Notice of the amount
due shall be given to the owner by the magistrate or special magistrate at the
time of the order to show cause hearing if forfeiture is ordered. The appealing
party shall bear the cost of preparing the record of the hearing on appeal. No
appeal shall be taken later than ten (10) days after the decision.
   (l)   Unless good cause is shown, the owner shall be liable for all
veterinary, impound and board fees resulting from the animal's impoundment
until a final decision by the magistrate or special magistrate including the
pendency of an appeal. The owner shall not be responsible for any fees if the
owner prevails at the hearing or ultimately on appeal.
(Ord. No. 6044, § 1, 6-25-84; Ord. No. 6197, § 1, 3-11-85; Ord. No. 8996, § 5,
12-8-97; Ord. No. 9804, § 1, 1-13-03; Ord. No. 10206, § 2, 10-4-05)
Sec. 4-12. Disposition of animals.
   (a)   Any animal forfeited, abandoned, ownerless or unclaimed, and any other
animals to be permanently disposed of by the city enforcement agent, shall be
disposed of by one of the following methods:
   (1)   Placed by adoption in a suitable home; or
   (2)   Humanely destroyed; or
   (3)   Transferred to a duly incorporated humane society or other nonprofit
corporate animal-welfare organization devoted to the welfare, protection and
humane treatment of animals. Transferred animals shall be placed by adoption in
a suitable home after first being sterilized; humanely destroyed; or released
as part of a community cat program.
   (b)   As a condition of any transfer of animals under subsection (a)(3), the
city enforcement agent shall verify that any organization that receives animals
is organized for the pursuit of animal welfare activities, is actively engaged
in those activities, does not breed animals nor release unsterilized animals,
releases animals only through community cat programs or through adoption into
suitable homes after first being sterilized, and complies with the
sterilization, placement, and all other applicable provisions of this chapter
and other applicable laws. Such verification shall include announced and
unannounced inspections of the organization's facilities and records. The city
enforcement agent may repossess any animals and their offspring from any
organization that is not in compliance with these conditions, and shall
repossess these animals if the organization is not in compliance with the
mandates set forth in subsection (a)(3), or if the organization or its
personnel violate any animal cruelty law. Any organization wishing to receive
animals must agree in writing to the terms of this section.
   (c)   For the purposes of this section, a "community cat program" means a
program in which healthy, free-roaming cats are humanely trapped or otherwise
humanely captured, sterilized, vaccinated against rabies, ear-tipped, and
returned to the location where they were found.
   (d)   If a city enforcement agent disposes of animals by transfer of the
animals pursuant to subsection (a)(3) of this section, and pursuant to written
agreement with the city charges the costs associated with that disposition to
the city, the city enforcement agent may dispose of animals in that manner and
charge the costs to the city only to the extent that the city has previously
approved the appropriation of funds for that specific purpose. In the absence
of prior city approval to appropriate funds for this purpose, a city
enforcement agent may dispose of animals by transfer pursuant to subsection (a)
(3) of this section at its own cost.
(Ord. No. 6320, § 1, 10-25-85; Ord. No. 8996, § 6, 12-8-97; Ord. No. 11204, §
1, 10-9-14)
Sec. 4-13. Dangerous animals.
   (a)   Definition. A dangerous animal is one that:
   (1)   Has been declared to be vicious or destructive pursuant to section
4-7 or
4-11; or
   (2)   Displays or has a tendency, disposition or propensity, as determined
by the city enforcement agent, to:
   a.   Injure, bite, attack, chase or charge, or attempt to injure, bite,
attack, chase or charge a person or domestic animal in a threatening manner; or
   b.   Bare its teeth or approach a person or domestic animal in a threatening
manner.
   (b)   Exception. A dangerous animal does not include an animal used in law
enforcement, nor does this section apply to animals in custody of zoos or wild
animal parks, animals placed in animal shelters, animals under the care of
veterinarians or wild animals under section
4-25.
   (c)   Declaring an animal dangerous; notice.
   (1)   The city enforcement agent shall develop guidelines to determine if an
animal is dangerous under section
4-13(a)(2).
   (2)   Whenever the city enforcement agent has reason to believe an animal is
dangerous, an evaluation of the animal shall be conducted.
   (3)   If the city enforcement agent declares that an animal is dangerous,
the owner, if known, shall be notified and issued an order of compliance. Once
an animal is declared dangerous, the animal is dangerous and the order of
compliance shall remain in effect until a hearing officer or judge determines
otherwise. If the owner is known, the owner shall be provided with a written
notice containing, at a minimum, the following information:
   a.   The owner's right to file, within ten (10) days of receipt of the
notice, a written request with the city enforcement agent for a hearing in
accordance with section
4-13(d).
   b.   The owner's right to present witnesses and be represented by an
attorney at the hearing.
   c.   The following statement, printed in bold twelve (12) point type or
larger capital letters:
      YOUR ANIMAL WILL BE HUMANELY DESTROYED IF IT IS FORFEITED OR VOLUNTARILY
RELINQUISHED TO THE CITY ENFORCEMENT AGENT.
   d.   The owner's right to receive disclosure of witnesses and evidence and
the owner's obligation to disclose witnesses and evidence as provided in
section
4-13(d)(2) and (3).
   (4)   If the owner's whereabouts cannot be determined or the animal poses a
threat to public safety or domestic animals, the animal shall be impounded and
the notice shall be posted on the property or mailed forthwith to the owner's
last-known address by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested.
   (d)    Hearing; disclosure; burden of proof; appeal.
   (1)   The owner of the animal may request a hearing to contest one (1) or
both of the following:
   a.   The declaration of dangerousness under section
4-13(c); provided, however, that the declaration of dangerousness may not be
contested if the animal has already been declared vicious or destructive under
section
4-7 or
4-11.
   b.   The confinement conditions ordered under section
4-13(e)(1).
   (2)   As required disclosure to the other party, each party shall:
   a.   provide the name of any victim and the names, addresses and telephone
numbers of any other witnesses the party plans to call at the hearing with a
fair description of the substance of each witness' expected testimony; and
   b.   make available for examination and reproduction any exhibits and
written or recorded statements of any witness which have been prepared and may
be offered at the hearing.
   (3)   The disclosure required by paragraph (2) above shall be made by the
city enforcement agent when the owner is given notice that the animal has been
declared dangerous and by the animal owner not later than five (5) days prior
to the hearing. If a party fails to make disclosure as required by this
section, the other party shall have the right, if requested, to a recess or
continuance to permit examination of the evidence. At the hearing officer's
discretion, undisclosed evidence or witnesses may be excluded from the hearing.
   (4)   If the owner of an impounded animal fails to appear at a hearing or
fails to request a hearing, the animal shall be forfeited to the city
enforcement agent to be humanely destroyed.
   (5)   If the owner of an animal that has not been impounded fails to appear
at a hearing or fails to request a hearing, the declaration that the animal is
dangerous and the order of compliance shall remain in effect.
   (6)   After a request for a hearing, the city enforcement agency shall set a
hearing date within ten (10) working days at a time and place designated by the
city enforcement agent. The hearing shall be conducted by a hearing officer
appointed for that purpose.
   (7)   The hearing shall be held in an informal manner and a record thereof
shall be made by stenographic transcription or by electronic tape recording.
The Arizona rules of evidence do not apply, and hearsay is admissible so long
as the hearing officer determines that the offered evidence is relevant,
material and has some probative value as to a fact at issue.
   (8)   It is the burden of the city enforcement agent to establish by a
preponderance of the evidence that the animal is dangerous. The animal owner
may be represented by counsel and present witnesses at the animal owner's cost.
   (9)   The hearing officer shall make a written decision within five (5)
working days of the hearing and notify the owner of the animal of the decision.
   a.   If the declaration of dangerousness is sustained by the hearing
officer, the owner of the animal shall obey the order of compliance issued by
the enforcement agent within the time given by the order of compliance or ten
(10) days whichever is more.
   b.   If the animal is found not to be dangerous, the order of compliance is
null and void. The finding that an animal is not dangerous does not prevent the
city enforcement agent from declaring an animal dangerous again if the agent
has additional reasons, supported by facts or evidence not at issue in the
prior proceeding, to believe the animal is dangerous after a new evaluation of
the animal is conducted.
   (10)   Appeal by either party of the decision of the hearing officer shall
be by way of special action to the Superior Court on the record of the hearing.
If either party claims the record to be incomplete or lost, and the hearing
officer who conducted the hearing so certifies, a new hearing shall be
conducted before that officer. The appealing party shall bear the cost of
preparing the record of the hearing on appeal. No appeal shall be taken later
than thirty (30) days after the decision.
   (e)   Order of compliance, confinement, muzzling, signs, insurance,
identification, spaying or neutering, microchipping and tattooing. When an
animal is declared dangerous, the city enforcement agent shall issue an order
of compliance requiring the owner within thirty (30) days to have a licensed
veterinarian spay or neuter, microchip and tattoo the animal at the owner's
expense and to pay the license fee as indicated in T.C. Section 4-82. The owner
shall obtain written certification signed by the veterinarian that the spaying
or neutering, microchipping and tattooing has been performed. In addition, the
order of compliance may require the owner to do one (1) or more of the
following:
   (1)   Confine the animal sufficiently to prevent the animal's escape as
follows:
   a.   The city enforcement agent shall determine the appropriate fencing
requirements for the size and nature of the animal. The city enforcement agent
may require a fence including gates to be six (6) feet in height; the fence,
from five (5) feet in height to six (6) feet in height to incline to the inside
of the confinement area at a forty-five-degree angle from the vertical; or that
the confinement area be wholly covered by a material strong enough to keep the
animal from escaping.
   b.   The city enforcement agent may require the bottom of the confinement
area to be of concrete, cement or asphalt, or of blocks or bricks set in
concrete or cement; or if such bottom is not provided, then a footing of such
material shall be placed along the whole perimeter of the confinement area to a
depth of one (1) foot below ground level, or deeper if the city enforcement
agent determines that greater depth is necessary to confine the animal.
   c.   The gates to the confinement area shall be locked at all times with a
padlock except while entering or exiting.
   d.   The city enforcement agent may require temporary confinement measures
until the order of compliance has been obeyed or the hearing officer determines
that the animal is not dangerous. If the owner does not immediately comply with
the temporary confinement requirements, the animal shall be impounded.
   (2)   Muzzle and restrain the animal outside of the confinement area with a
leash, chain, rope or similar device not more than six (6) feet in length
sufficient to restrain the animal and under the control of a person capable of
preventing the animal from engaging in any prohibited activity.
   (3)   Post a sign on every gate or entry way to the confinement area
stating: "Beware of Dangerous Animal. Per T.C. section 4-13." The sign shall be
provided by the city enforcement agent.
   (4)   Obtain and maintain liability insurance in a single incident amount of
fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), unless that animal has been declared to be
vicious or destructive pursuant to section
4-7 or
4-11 of the Tucson Code, in which case the amount of insurance shall be no less
than two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00), to cover any damage or
injury that may be caused by the dangerous animal. The city enforcement agent
shall maintain a registry of the animals, owners and insurance carrier for each
dangerous animal.
   (5)   Pay the reasonable cost to the city enforcement agent to tattoo and
microchip the animal with an identification number. The city enforcement agent
shall maintain a registry of such numbers and the owners of the animals.
   (f)   Consent to inspection, inspection, failure to obey order of
compliance, seizure of animal.
   (1)   By continuing to own an animal declared dangerous, an owner gives
consent to the city enforcement agent or any law enforcement officer to inspect
the animal, the premises where the animal is kept, the liability insurance
documents required for the animal, and the veterinarian's certification of
spaying or neutering, microchipping and tattooing for the animal.
   (2)   The city enforcement agent may seize and impound the dangerous animal
if the owner fails to obey the order of compliance. Five (5) days after
seizure, the city enforcement agent may humanely destroy the animal unless the
owner has demonstrated obedience to the order of compliance. The owner of the
animal is responsible for any impound fees. If the owner of the animal
demonstrates proof that the order of compliance has been obeyed, then the
animal will be returned to the owner after payment of impound fees. Any action
taken under this section shall be in addition to any criminal penalties set out
in section
4-13(h).
   (g)   Required acts and unlawful activities.
   (1)   An owner of an animal declared dangerous shall obey the order of
compliance.
   (2)   An owner of an animal declared dangerous shall not sell, give away,
abandon or otherwise dispose of the animal without notifying the city
enforcement agent in writing in advance.
   (3)   An owner of an animal declared dangerous shall provide proof of
licensure at the rate indicated in T.C. Section 4-82, liability insurance and
the veterinarian's certificate of spaying or neutering, microchipping and
tattooing, to the city enforcement agent upon demand.
   (4)   An owner of an animal declared dangerous shall not prevent or try to
prevent inspection of the animal or the premises where the animal is kept.
   (5)   When the owner of an animal is notified that the city enforcement
agent is evaluating an animal or wants to evaluate an animal to determine if
the animal is dangerous, the owner of the animal shall present the animal for
inspection within twenty-four (24) hours of a request by the city enforcement
agent. The owner shall not sell, give away, hide or otherwise prevent the city
enforcement agent from making an evaluation of the animal.
   (6)   The owner of an animal declared dangerous shall prevent the animal
from running at large as defined in section
4-97 of the Tucson Code.
   (7)   The owner of an animal declared dangerous shall prevent the animal
from biting, injuring or attacking any person or domestic animal outside of the
confinement area.
   (h)   Minimum penalties, enhancement.
   (1)   A person convicted for the first time of any offense prohibited by
section
4-13(g)(1) through (6) shall be punished by imprisonment for not less than
twenty-four (24) hours nor more than six (6) months and by a fine of not less
than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than two thousand five hundred
dollars ($2,500.00). A person convicted of a second or subsequent offense
prohibited by section
4-13(g)(1) through (6) shall be punished by imprisonment for not less than ten
(10) days nor more than six (6) months and by a fine of not less than two
hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00). No judge may grant probation to or suspend the imposition of the
minimum jail sentence and fine prescribed herein upon a conviction of any
offense prohibited in section
4-13(g)(1) through (6). In addition, a person convicted of any offense
prohibited in section
4-13(g)(1) through (6) may be placed on probation for not more than three (3)
years and the dangerous animal may be ordered humanely destroyed or banished
from the city after first being spayed or neutered, microchipped and tattooed
by a licensed veterinarian at the owner's expense. If the animal is not spayed
or neutered, microchipped and tattooed within the time given by the court, the
animal is forfeited to the city enforcement agent to be humanely destroyed.
This shall not be construed to affect, in any way, the imposition of the
minimum mandatory penalties provided herein.
   (2)   A person convicted of violating section
4-13(g)(7) shall be punished by imprisonment for not less than thirty (30) days
nor more than six (6) months and by a fine of not less than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) nor more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
No judge may grant probation to or suspend the imposition of the minimum jail
sentence and fine prescribed herein upon a person convicted of violating
section
4-13(g)(7). In addition, a person convicted of violating section
4-13(g)(7) may be placed on probation for not more than three (3) years and the
dangerous animal shall be ordered humanely destroyed. This shall not be
construed to affect, in any way, the imposition of the minimum mandatory
penalties provided herein.
   (3)   Wherever in this section any act is prohibited or declared to be
unlawful or the doing of any act is required or the failure to do an act is
declared to be unlawful, the violation of such provision of this section is a
misdemeanor punishable (except for the penalties already set forth for section
4-13(g) by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more
than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) and/or by imprisonment of
not more than six (6) months. No judge may grant probation to or suspend the
imposition of the minimum fine prescribed herein. In addition, a person may be
placed on probation for not more than three (3) years. This shall not be
construed to affect, in any way, the imposition of the minimum mandatory
penalties provided herein.
   (4)   Each day any violation continues or occurs shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Ord. No. 6828, § 2, 11-16-87; Ord. No. 9804, § 2, 1-13-03; Ord. No. 10206, §
3, 10-4-05)
Sec. 4-14. Duty to produce; penalties.
An owner of an animal charged with a violation of section
4-3,
4-6,
4-7 or
4-44 shall produce that animal for inspection or impoundment upon the request
of the enforcement agent. All owners shall be responsible for any and all
applicable impoundment and boarding fees in connection therewith.
A violation of this section shall be punishable by imprisonment for not less
than twenty- four (24) hours nor more than six (6) months and by a fine of not
less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00). No judge may grant probation to or suspend the imposition of the
minimum jail sentence and fine prescribed herein.
In addition, restitution up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) shall be
ordered to the victim, if any, for damages caused by an owner's failure to
comply with this section. This remedy shall not abridge any civil cause of
action by the victim.
This section shall not apply where an animal has bitten a member of the owner's
household.
(Ord. No. 7241, § 7, 7-3-89)
Secs. 4-15--4-20. Reserved.
ARTICLE II.
LIVESTOCK, LARGE AND DANGEROUS ANIMALS
Sec. 4-21. Running at large prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for the owner or person having the control and custody of
any horse, colt, mule, donkey, burro, ox, bull, cow, calf, hog, pig, sheep,
goat or other large or dangerous animals to permit the same to run at large
within the city.
(1953 Code, ch. 4, § 12)
Sec. 4-22. Grazing or pasturing in city.
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having control of any animal
mentioned in section
4-21 of this article to graze or pasture the same, or cause the same to be
grazed or pastured, or permit the same to graze or pasture upon any land within
the city, except upon land owned or leased by the owner of such animals, and
unless such animals are securely fastened so that the same shall not run at
large or trespass within the meaning of section
4-21 of this article, and provided also, that such animal shall be adequately
fed and watered and reasonably protected from the weather.
(1953 Code, ch. 4, § 13)
Sec. 4-23. Impounding, disposal of animals running at large or grazing.
Animals found running at large or grazing or pasturing in violation of section
4-21 or
4-22 shall be impounded and disposed of in the manner provided by state law.
(1953 Code, ch. 4, §§ 14--18)
   State Law References: Authority to regulate animals running at large, A.R.S.
§ 9-240(B)(16); livestock and animals generally, A.R.S. title 24.
Sec. 4-24. Open range exception.
Sections
4-21,
4-22, and
4-23 shall not apply to land annexed into the city after December 1, 2000 that
is (a) owned and held in trust by the State of Arizona as state trust land
pursuant to Arizona Revised Statutes Title 37, Chapter 2, or (b) land for which
the state land patent provides for continued use as open range.
(Ord. No. 9498, § 1, 12-11-00)
Sec. 4-25. Keeping wild animals.
It shall be unlawful for any person having charge, care of or control of any
wild animal, by nature dangerous or vicious, to keep, bring, maintain or
exhibit such animal within the city, unless the animal be confined in a cage or
enclosure adequate to prevent its escape and prevent any access to it by any
non-authorized person. Any person keeping, bringing, maintaining or exhibiting
any such animal within the city without the same being confined as above
recited shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
(1953 Code, ch. 4, § 27; Ord. No. 8996, § 7, 12-8-97)
Sec. 4-26. Keeping pigs and hogs prohibited; exception: maximum of three (3)
miniature pigs allowed per household.
   Sec. 4-26(1). Except as otherwise provided in this Code and in subsection
(b) below, it shall be unlawful for any person to keep, raise or feed any pig
or hog within the city limits.
   Sec. 4-26(2). Exception. Nothing contained in subsection (a), shall prevent
the keeping of registered purebred miniature Vietnamese potbelly pigs (sus
bittati), also known as Asian-shar pei or Chinese potbelly pigs or other
similarly registered purebred miniature pigs under the following conditions:
   (1)   No miniature pig shall measure more than twenty-three (23) inches in
height at the shoulders when at normal stance.
   (2)   No more than three (3) miniature pigs are allowed per household.
(1953 Code, ch. 4, § 31; Ord. No. 6043, § 7, 6-25-84; Ord. No. 8170, § 1, 12-6-
93)
Sec. 4-27. Proximity of corrals, barns, etc., to dwellings.
Except as otherwise provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to keep or
maintain within twenty (20) feet of the dwelling house of any person, within
the city, any corral, barn, shed or other structure for the purpose of housing,
keeping or caring for any horse, mule, cow or goat.
(1953 Code, ch. 4, § 38)
Sec. 4-28. Disposal and accumulation of manure, animal bedding and body waste
of domestic animals and pets.
   Sec. 4-28(1). Except as otherwise provided, no owner, proprietor, agent or
occupant of any premises where horses, cows, donkeys, goats or other domestic
animals or dogs, cats or other domestic pets are kept within the city shall
deposit, cause to be deposited or allow to accumulate within or about such
premises for a longer time than twenty-four (24) hours, any manure, animal
bedding or body wastes from domestic animals and pets. Such person shall
provide a receptacle of sufficient size for the reception of such manure,
animal bedding or body wastes of domestic animals and pets.
   Sec. 4-28(2). Such receptacle shall be so constructed that the contents
thereof will not be accessible to flies; and such receptacle shall be placed
upon the premises owned, occupied or controlled by such person in a location as
remote as possible from any surrounding dwelling or street. Such person shall
empty and cleanse the same as often as necessary, but not less than twice each
week, and oftener when directed to do so by the health officer.
   Sec. 4-28(3). Nothing contained in this section shall operate to prevent the
owner, proprietor, agent or occupant of a residential premises from placing
animal manure produced by herbivorous animals into a residential compost pile
or residential compost windrow, provided it is placed into the compost pile or
windrow within twenty-four (24) hours from the time it is deposited and
provided it is maintained under the conditions set forth in section
15-16(4) of the Tucson Code.
   Sec. 4-28(4). When applicable, the definitions contained in section
15-1 shall apply to the provisions of chapter
4 of the Tucson Code.
   Sec. 4-28(5). It shall be a civil infraction for any person to violate the
provisions of this section.
(1953 Code, ch. 4, § 41; Ord. No. 4374, § 1, 7-7-75; Ord. No. 8028, § 1, 4-19-
93; Ord. No. 8170, § 1, 12-6-93; Ord. No. 8174, § 1, 12-13-93)
Sec. 4-29. Animals attached to vehicles to be hitched.
If any person shall leave any horse or other animals attached to any carriage,
wagon, cart or other vehicle in any street, avenue, alley or lane within the
corporate limits of the city without securely fastening the same, or without
the same being fastened by a chain or strap from the bit to a metal weight upon
the ground, such weight weighing fifteen (15) pounds at least for a single
horse and twenty-five (25) pounds for a team, every such person shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor.
(1953 Code, ch. 4, § 40)
Sec. 4-30. Penalties.
A violation of this article is punishable by a fine of not less than fifty
dollars ($50.00) nor more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
No judge may suspend the imposition of the minimum fine prescribed herein. In
addition to the fine amount, the penalty may include not more than six (6)
months in jail and not more than three (3) years probation, or any combination
thereof.
(Ord. No. 7241, § 8, 7-3-89; Ord. No. 8174, § 2, 12-13-93; Ord. No. 8996, § 8,
12-8-97)
Secs. 4-31--4-39. Reserved.
ARTICLE III.
DISEASED ANIMALS
Sec. 4-40. Keeping diseased animals prohibited; destruction authorized.
It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor or keep within the city any
animal afflicted with any contagious or infectious disease unless such animal
is under the control of a certified veterinarian. It shall be the duty of the
county humane officer to immediately take possession of any such animal not so
controlled. After confirmation of such disease by a certified veterinarian, the
humane officer shall immediately destroy the animal and dispose of the carcass
thereof, unless the owner shall forthwith place such animal under the control
of a certified veterinarian.
(1953 Code, ch. 4, § 20)
Sec. 4-41. Diseased animals running at large prohibited; impounding or
confinement enforced.
   Sec. 4-41(1). It is hereby declared unlawful for any animal, infected with,
or suffering from, a communicable or infectious disease such as ringworm or
other disorder, to run at large or to be on public streets, alleys or other
public property; any such dog, cat or other animal shall be impounded when
found in any such places or when running at large.
   Sec. 4-41(2). The expense of impounding and keeping and the procedure for
keeping, disposing and returning the animal shall be the same as is provided in
A.R.S. sections 24-371, 24-372, and the other sections contained in A.R.S.
title 24, chapter 2, article 8.
   Sec. 4-41(3). The owner of any such infected or diseased animal shall keep
same segregated and confined and not knowingly allow or permit it to run at
large or be off the premises upon which it is customarily kept until it shall
have fully and completely recovered from the infectious disease or disorder.
   Sec. 4-41(4). It shall be the duty of all police officers of the city to
enforce the provisions of this section
4-41, and the county humane officer is hereby empowered and authorized to
apprehend and impound such animals.
(1953 Code, ch. 4, § 20a; Ord. No. 2019, §§ 1, 2, 4-18-60)
Sec. 4-42. Animals suspected of rabies--Report required.
Subject to the provisions of article V of this chapter relating to dogs, any
animal suspected of having rabies shall immediately be reported to the county
humane officer or his deputies.
(1953 Code, ch. 4, § 21)
Sec. 4-43. Same--Refusal to deliver to enforcement officer.
Subject to the provisions of article V of this chapter relating to dogs, after
a showing has been made that any animal has symptoms of rabies, it shall be
unlawful for any person having care or control of such animal to refuse to
deliver such animal to the county enforcement officer or his deputies.
(1953 Code, ch. 4, § 22; Ord. No. 4530, § 1, 6-28-76)
Sec. 4-44. Same--Impounding biting animals; disposition.
Biting animals shall be impounded and quarantined as set forth at A.R.S.
section 24-372, as amended from time to time; and all owners of such biting
animals shall be responsible for any and all applicable impoundment and
boarding fees incurred in connection therewith.
(1953 Code, ch. 4, § 23; Ord. No. 6043, § 8, 6-25-84)
Sec. 4-45. Violations; penalties.
An owner or other person violating any provision of this article shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, and each such person shall be guilty of a separate
offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of
this article is committed or permitted; and, except as otherwise specified in
this article, upon conviction of any such violation, such person shall be
punished by a fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) and not more
than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00), or by imprisonment for not
more than four (4) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. No judge may
suspend the imposition of the minimum fine prescribed herein.
In addition, the judge shall order abatement as necessary.
(Ord. No. 4530, § 2, 6-28-76; Ord. No. 6043, § 9, 6-25-84; Ord. No. 7241, § 3,
7-3-89; Ord. No. 8996, § 9, 12-8-97)
Secs. 4-46--4-54. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV.
FOWL
Sec. 4-55. Running at large prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any chickens, ducks, geese or
turkeys to run at large within the city.
(1953 Code, ch. 4, § 32)
Sec. 4-56. Limit on number kept.
Except as to the extent permitted by chapter
23B, Unified Development Code, of the Tucson Code or as otherwise provided, it
shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain within the city more than
twenty-four (24) fowl.
(1953 Code, ch. 4, § 33; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 6-1961; Ord. No. 11328, § 10, 12-
8-15)
Sec. 4-57. Proximity of coop or place kept to dwellings.
Except as otherwise provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to keep or
maintain, within fifty (50) feet of the dwelling house of any other person
within the city, any coop, house, shed or other structure, or yard, corral or
enclosure for housing, keeping or caring for any pigeons or fowl of any kind.
(1953 Code, ch. 4, § 34)
Sec. 4-58. Coop or place kept to be clean, sanitary.
Every person keeping or maintaining any fowl of any kind within the city shall
keep and maintain the coops, houses, sheds, structures, yards, corrals or
enclosures wherein such fowl are kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
(1953 Code, ch. 4, § 35)
Sec. 4-59. Keeping male fowl or guinea fowl prohibited.
Except as to the extent permitted by chapter
23B, Unified Development Code, of the Tucson Code, or as otherwise provided, it
shall be unlawful for any person to keep, house or feed any male fowl or guinea
fowl within the city.
(1953 Code, ch. 4, § 36; Ord. No. 2178, § 2, 6-19-61; Ord. No. 11328, § 10, 12-
8-15)
Sec. 4-60. Keeping pigeons.
Except as otherwise provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to keep any
pigeons within the city unless they are securely housed or cooped so as to
prevent them going at large; however, pigeons bearing a seamless leg band,
issued by a recognized association of pigeon fanciers, may be released for
exercise, performance or the commencement of races, within the corporate limits
of the city, upon the condition that the owner or person who has possession of
such pigeons shall not permit them to alight upon buildings or property of
others.
(1953 Code, ch. 4, § 37; Ord. No. 2997, § 2, 4-24-67)
Sec. 4-61. Penalties.
A violation of this article is punishable by a fine of not less than fifty
dollars ($50.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). No judge may
suspend the imposition of the minimum fine prescribed herein. In addition to
the fine amount, the penalty may include not more than six (6) months in jail
and not more than three (3) years' probation, or any combination thereof.
In addition, the judge shall order abatement as necessary.
(Ord. No. 7241, § 9, 7-3-89)
Secs. 4-62--4-70. Reserved.
ARTICLE V.
DOGS
Sec. 4-71. Definitions.
In this article, unless the context otherwise requires:
   Sec. 4-71(1). At large means not confined within a building, shelter, walled
or fenced area or under the control of a person, either by leash, cord, chain
or other physical restraint, whether on or off the premises of the owner or
person acting for the owner; in a manner such as to keep the dog exclusively on
the premises where secured. Tieouts are prohibited. (Ord. No. 6043, § 10, 6-25-
84; Ord. No. 8713, § 3, 6-10-96)
   Sec. 4-71(2). City enforcement agent means any peace officer or any county
animal control officer. (Ord. No. 6043, § 11, 6-25-84)
   Sec. 4-71(3). Collar means a band, chain, harness or suitable device worn
around the neck of a dog to which a license may be affixed.
   Sec. 4-71(4). Dog means a member of the Canis familiaris family.
   Sec. 4-71(5). Owner means any person owning, keeping, possessing, harboring,
maintaining or having custody or otherwise having control of a dog within the
city. (Ord. No. 4531, § 2, 6-28-76; Ord. No. 6043, § 12, 6-25-84)
   Sec. 4-71(6). Vaccination means an anti-rabies vaccination using a type of
vaccine approved by the state veterinarian. (Ord. No. 6043, §§ 14, 15, 6-25-84)
   Sec. 4-71(7). Household means all those persons who regularly dwell together
at the same place of residence. (Ord. No. 6043, § 15, 6-25-84)
   Sec. 4-71(8). Altered dog means a spayed female or neutered male. (Ord. No.
7998, § 3, 6-7-93)
(1953 Code, ch. 4, art. II, § 1; Ord. No. 2558, § 1, 12-16-63; Ord. No. 5095, §
1, 1-28-80; Ord. No. 5219, § 1, 9-22-80; Ord. No. 4531, § 2, 6-28-76; Ord. No.
6043, §§ 10--15, 6-25-84)
Sec. 4-72. Authority of city manager.
The city manager is hereby authorized and may enter into a cooperative
agreement with the county board of supervisors for the establishment and
operation of a city-county pound, to designate the city enforcement agent, and
to do all things necessary to ensure the enforcement of this article.
(Ord. No. 2558, § 2, 12-16-63)
Sec. 4-73. Violations; penalties.
   (a)   Any owner or other person violating any provisions of this article
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor; and such person shall be guilty of a separate
offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of
this article is committed or permitted; and, except as otherwise specified in
this article, upon conviction of any such violation, such person shall be
punishable by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). No judge may suspend the imposition of
the minimum fine prescribed herein. In addition to the fine amount, the penalty
may include imprisonment for not more than four (4) months and not more than
two (2) years probation, or any combination thereof.
   (b)   Any person convicted of violating section
4-76 and/or section
4-81 shall be fined not less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for each
offense; however, the fine shall be reduced to seventy-five dollars ($75.00)
for each offense upon a showing to the court of proof of vaccination and/or
licensing, as required of such dog or dogs, within fifteen (15) working days of
issuance of the complaint. No judge may suspend the imposition of the minimum
fine prescribed herein. In addition to the fine amount, the penalty may include
imprisonment for not more than four (4) months and not more than two (2) years
probation, or any combination thereof.
   (c)   In addition, the judge shall order abatement as necessary.
(1953 Code, ch. 4, art. II, § 10; Ord. No. 2558, § 1, 12-16-63; Ord. No. 4529,
§ 1, 6-28-76; Ord. No. 5010, § 1, 9-10-79; Ord. No. 5219, § 2, 9-22-80; Ord.
No. 6043, § 16, 6-25-84; Ord. No. 7241, § 4, 7-3-89; Ord. No. 9159, § 1, 11-9-
98)
Sec. 4-74. Issuance of citations for violations.
The city enforcement agent is hereby authorized to issue citations to owners
for any violation of this article.
(1953 Code, ch. 4, art. II, § 8; Ord. No. 2558, § 1, 12-16-63)
Sec. 4-75. Reserved.
   Editors Note: Former §
4-75 was repealed by § 17 of Ord. No. 6043, adopted June 25, 1984; the section
had pertained to the duty to care for dogs and the prohibition of mistreatment
of dogs. The repealed provisions had been derived from the 1953 Code, ch. 4,
art.II, § 9, as amended by Ord. No. 2558, § 1, adopted Dec. 16, 1963, and Ord.
No. 5219, § 3, adopted Sept. 22, 1980.
Sec. 4-76. Vaccination required.
It shall be unlawful to own, keep, possess, harbor or maintain a dog over the
age of three (3) months in the city without having such dog vaccinated in
accordance with the provisions of this article.
(1953 Code, ch. 4, art.II, § 2.1; Ord. No. 2558, § 1, 12-16-63; Ord. No. 9916,
§ 1, 12-8-03)
Sec. 4-77. Vaccination certificate prerequisite to license.
No license shall be issued for any dog until the owner has presented a
vaccination certificate signed by a licensed veterinarian containing the
information required by this article.
(1953 Code, ch. 4, art. II, § 2.2; Ord. No. 2558, § 1, 12-16-63)
Sec. 4-78. Regulations governing vaccinations.
   (a)   The type or types of anti-rabies vaccination that may be used for
vaccination of dogs, the period of time between vaccination and revaccination,
and the dosage and method of administration of the vaccine shall be in
accordance with the rules and regulations designated by the state veterinarian.
   (b)   The fee for rabies vaccinations at the city enforcement agent center
shall be as set by Pima County Code of Ordinances (PCCO) section 6.040.060.
(1953 Code, ch. 4, art. II, § 2.3; Ord. No. 2558, § 1, 12-16-63; Ord. No. 4671,
§ 1, 6-20-77; Ord. No. 5405, § 1, 7-6-81; Ord. No. 7998, § 4, 6-7-93; Ord. No.
10430, § 1, 6-26-07; Ord. No. 10893, § 1, 5-3-11, eff. 7-1-11)
Sec. 4-79. Certificate of vaccination required; contents.
The person causing a dog to be vaccinated shall demand and be given an official
certificate certifying to the fact of such vaccination and the date thereof,
stating the owner's name and address and giving a brief description of the dog,
date of vaccination and type thereof, manufacture and serial number of the
vaccine used, and the date revaccination is due.
(1953 Code, ch. 4, art.II, § 2.4; Ord. No. 2558, § 1, 12-16-63)
Sec. 4-80. Vaccination other than in Pima County.
A dog vaccinated in any area outside of the county prior to entry into the city
may be licensed in this city, provided that, at the time of licensing, the
owner of such dog presents a vaccination certificate signed by a duly licensed
veterinarian; and the certificate shall contain the information required by
this article, and the regulations promulgated thereunder.
(1953 Code, ch. 4, art. II, § 3; Ord. No. 2558, § 1, 12-16-63)
Sec. 4-81. License required.
All dogs owned, possessed, harbored or maintained in the city for more than
thirty (30) days shall be licensed, if over three (3) months of age, in
accordance with this article.
(1953 Code, ch. 4, art. II, § 4.1; Ord. No. 2558, § 1, 12-16-63; Ord. No. 9916,
§ 2, 12-8-03)
Sec. 4-82. License fee.
   No dog license shall be issued by the city enforcement agent until the
payment of a license fee has been made. The license fees for altered dogs,
unaltered dogs, and vicious, destructive, or dangerous dogs shall be as set by
PCCO section 6.040.070. The license fees for such dogs for senior and disabled
persons shall be as set by PCCO section 6.040.070.
(1953 Code, ch. 4, art. II, § 4.2; Ord. No. 2558, § 1, 12-16-63; Ord. No. 3867,
§ 1, 6-26-72; Ord. No. 4315, § 1, 1-27-75; Ord. No. 4671, § 1, 6-20-77; Ord.
No. 7998, § 1, 6-7-93; Ord. No. 9064, § 1, 6-1-98; Ord. No. 9159, § 2, 11-9-98;
Ord. No. 9942, § 1, 3-15-04; Ord. No. 9978, § 1, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 10206, § 4,
10-4-05; Ord. No. 10430, § 2, 6-26-07; Ord. No. 10575, § 1, 9-3-08; Ord. No.
10683, § 1, 6-16-09; Ord. No. 10893, § 1, 5-3-11, eff. 7-1-11)
Sec. 4-82.1. Altered dogs; animal age and health.
Any person who presents to the city enforcement agent an affidavit or
veterinarian's certificate stating that the dog is already altered, that the
dog is at least ten (10) years of age, or that the dog cannot be altered for
health reasons, shall be eligible for the altered dog fee.
(Ord. No. 4315, § 2, 1-27-75; Ord. No. 5010, § 3, 9-10-79; Ord. No. 5095, § 2,
1-28-80; Ord. No. 7998, § 2, 6-7-93)
Sec. 4-82.2. Senior citizen fee.
   Any person sixty-five (65) years or older and any disabled person shall be
eligible for the senior citizen/disabled citizen owner license fee as set by
PCCO section 6.040.070. The city enforcement agent shall establish reasonable
standards of proof for eligibility for such fee. The limit of dogs per
household for persons eligible for such fee shall be as set by PCCO section
6.040.070.
(Ord. No. 5095, § 3, 1-28-80; Ord. No. 7998, § 2, 6-7-93; Ord. No. 10893, § 1,
5-3-11, eff. 7-1-11)
   Editors Note: Section 3 of Ord. No. 5095, adopted Jan. 28, 1980, repealed §
482.2, dealing with the license fee for unneutered male dogs, derived from Ord.
No. 5010, § 4, adopted Sept. 10, 1979, and enacted a new §
4-82.2, reading as set out. Section 2 of Ord. No. 7998, adopted June 7, 1993,
amended §
4-82.2 by vote of the city council.
Sec. 4-82.3. Rebate.
Any person who has paid the license fee for an unaltered dog who, during the
license year, presents to the city enforcement agent a veterinarian's
certificate that the licensed animal has been altered, shall be entitled to a
rebate. The rebate shall be the difference between the fee paid and the fee for
an altered dog.
(Ord. No. 7998, § 3, 6-7-93)
Sec. 4-82.4. Licensed breeder fee.
Dog breeders who are licensed by the city to conduct wholesale or retail sales,
pursuant to chapter
19 of the Tucson Code, shall be eligible for a dog license fee equal to that
for altered dogs.
(Ord. No. 7998, § 3, 6-7-93)
Sec. 4-83. Certain dogs exempt from fee.
A guide dog belonging to a blind person who is a resident of the state, or a
hearing ear dog belonging to a deaf person who is a resident of the state, or a
certified "Handi-Dog" belonging to a person who is a resident of the state
shall be licensed pursuant to this article without payment of a fee.
(1953 Code, ch. 4, art. II, § 4.3; Ord. No. 2558, § 1, 12-16-63; Ord. No. 5138,
§ 1, 4-21-80)
Sec. 4-84. Reserved.
   Editors Note: Section 4-84, specifying the duration of dog licenses, derived
from 1953 Code, ch. 4, art. II, § 4.4, and Ord. No. 2558, § 1, adopted Dec. 16,
1963, was repealed by § 4 of Ord. No. 5095, adopted Jan. 28, 1980.
Sec. 4-85. Application for license.
At the time application is made for a license, the owner shall provide his name
and address, and the name, breed, age, color and sex of each dog licensed by
such owner.
(1953 Code, ch. 4, art. II, § 4.5; Ord. No. 2558, § 1, 12-16-63; Ord. No. 5405,
§ 2, 7-6-81)
Sec. 4-86. Enforcement officer to keep records.
The city enforcement officer shall keep a register of all dogs licensed, and
any other records necessary for the enforcement of this article.
(1953 Code, ch. 4, art. II, § 4.6; Ord. No. 2558, § 1, 12-16-63)
Sec. 4-87. When fees delinquent; delinquency penalty.
   Each dog license fee which is not paid after thirty (30) days from the
expiration date of the license is delinquent; and there shall be added to such
fee, and collected in addition thereto, a penalty as set by PCCO section
6.040.070 if the license application is made less than one (1) year subsequent
to the date on which the dog is required to be licensed. There shall be an
additional penalty fee if the license application is made one (1) year but no
more than two (2) years from the date on which the dog is required to be
licensed and an additional penalty fee if the license is obtained two (2) or
more years from the date on which the dog is required to be licensed. The
additional penalty fees shall be as provided by PCCO section 6.040.070.
(1953 Code, ch. 4, art. II, § 4.7; Ord. No. 2558, § 1, 12-16-63; Ord. No. 5405,
§ 3, 7-6-81; Ord. No. 7241, § 5, 7-3-89; Ord. No. 9064, § 2, 6-1-98; Ord. No.
9916, § 3, 12-8-03; Ord. No. 10430, § 3, 6-26-07; Ord. No. 10575, § 2, 9-3-08;
Ord. No. 10683, § 2, 6-16-09; Ord. No. 10893, § 1, 5-3-11, eff. 7-1-11)
Sec. 4-88. Issuance, contents of tags.
   Upon issuance of a license it shall be the duty of the city enforcement
agent to issue a tag for each dog so licensed. Upon each tag for each dog so
licensed shall be inscribed the name of the city or county, and the number of
the license.
(1953 Code, ch. 4, art. II, § 4.8; Ord. No. 2558, § 1, 12-16-63; Ord. No. 9916,
§ 4, 12-8-03; Ord. No. 10893, § 1, 5-3-11, eff. 7-1-11)
Sec. 4-89. Tag to be worn.
Every owner shall be required to provide each dog licensed by such owner with a
collar to which the license tag must be affixed, and it shall be the duty of
such owner to see that the collar and tag are constantly worn by each dog.
(1953 Code, ch. 4, art. II, § 4.9; Ord. No. 2558, § 1, 12-16-63)
Sec. 4-90. Duplicate license tags.
   Whenever a dog license tag is lost, a duplicate license tag will be issued
upon application by the owner and the payment of a fee as provided for by PCCO
section 6.040.070.
(1953 Code, ch. 4, art. II, § 4.10; Ord. No. 2558, § 1, 12-16-63; Ord. No.
4671, § 1, 6-20-77; Ord. No. 10430, § 4, 6-26-07; Ord. No. 10575, § 3, 9-3-08;
Ord. No. 10683, § 3, 6-16-09; Ord. No. 10893, § 1, 5-3-11, eff. 7-1-11)
Sec. 4-91. Transfer of licenses.
   (a)   Whenever the ownership of a dog has been changed, the new owner must
secure a transfer of license to such owner. A transfer fee shall be charged to
transfer any license as set by PCCO section 6.040.070.
   (b)   At time of transfer, the releasing owner shall obtain the name,
address, and phone number of the new owner. This information, together with the
age and sex of dog and license number, shall be reported to the city
enforcement agent within ten (10) days of transfer.
   (c)   Any violation of this section shall be deemed a civil infraction.
(1953 Code, ch. 4, art. II, § 4.11; Ord. No. 2558, § 1 12-16-63; Ord. No. 4315,
§ 3, 1-27-75; Ord. No. 9159, § 3, 11-9-98; Ord. No. 10430, § 5, 6-26-07; Ord.
No. 10575, § 4, 9-3-08; Ord. No. 10683, § 4, 6-16-09; Ord. No. 10893, § 1, 5-3-
11, eff. 7-1-11)
Sec. 4-92. Tags not transferable to other dogs.
Dog license tags shall not be transferable from one dog to another.
(1953 Code, ch. 4, art. II, § 4.12; Ord. No. 2558, § 1, 12-16-63)
Sec. 4-93. Counterfeiting or transferring tags prohibited.
Any person who counterfeits or attempts to counterfeit an official dog license
tag, or causes such a tag to be removed from any dog for the purpose of placing
such tag upon a dog other than the dog to which the tag was issued, is guilty
of a misdemeanor.
(1953 Code, ch. 4, art. II, § 4.13; Ord. No. 2558, § 1, 12-16-63)
Sec. 4-94. When tag need not be worn.
Dogs while being used for hunting, or dogs while being exhibited at an American
Kennel Club approved show, or dogs while engaged in races approved by the
Arizona Racing Commission, and such dogs while being transported to and from
such events, need not wear a collar or harness with a valid license attached,
provided that they are properly vaccinated and licensed.
(1953 Code, ch. 4, art. II, § 4.14; Ord. No. 2558, § 1, 12-16-63)
Sec. 4-95. Impounding, vaccination of unvaccinated dogs.
If a dog is impounded and found to be unvaccinated the city enforcement agent
is hereby authorized to cause such dog to be vaccinated and microchipped at a
cost to be borne by the owner. The vaccination shall be performed by a licensed
veterinarian, who shall issue a certificate of vaccination and microchipping.
(1953 Code, ch. 4, art. II, § 5.1; Ord. No. 2558, § 1, 12-16-63; Ord. No. 7998,
§ 4, 6-7-93; Ord. No. 10206, § 5, 10-4-05)
Sec. 4-96. Reserved.
   Editors Note: Former §
4-96, relative to impounding and disposition of biting dogs or dogs suspected
of rabies, was repealed by § 18 of Ord. No. 6043, adopted June 25, 1984. The
former section was derived from ch. 4. art. II, §§ 5.2--5.6 of the 1953 Code,
as amended by the following: Ord. No. 2558, § 1, adopted Dec. 16, 1963; Ord.
No. 3078, §§ 1, 2, adopted Jan. 15, 1968; and Ord. No. 3711, § 1, adopted Sept.
7, 1971.
Sec. 4-97. Being at large prohibited; exceptions; impoundment; penalties.
   Sec. 4-97(1). It shall be unlawful for any dog owned, possessed, harbored,
kept or maintained to be upon public streets, sidewalks, alleys, parks or other
public property unless such dog is restrained by means of a leash, chain, rope,
cord or similar device not more than six (6) feet in length, and of sufficient
strength to control the action of such dog, except as may otherwise be provided
in this Code.
The owner of any dog found to be at large shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
punished pursuant to this section. (Ord. No. 7241, § 6, 7-3-89)
   Sec. 4-97(2). It shall be unlawful for any dog owned, possessed, kept,
harbored or maintained to be at large upon or about the private property of any
person, including that of the owner of such dog. Confinement shall be
accomplished by means of a fence or similar enclosure of sufficient strength
and height to prevent the dog from escaping therefrom, or inside a house or
other building, to keep the dog exclusively on the premises where secured.
Tieouts are prohibited.
The owner of any dog found to be at large shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
punished pursuant to this section. (Ord. No. 7241, § 6, 7-3-89; Ord. No. 8713,
§ 4, 6-10-96)
   Sec. 4-97(3). Police dogs, dogs while participating in dog training classes,
dogs while being exhibited or trained at a kennel club event, or dogs while
engaged in races approved by the Arizona Racing Commission, shall be exempt
from the provisions of minor sections
4-97(1) and
4-97(2), provided that the dog is accompanied by and under the control of his
owner or trainer; dogs confined within a city maintained temporary or permanent
dog run located within a park will be exempt from the provisions of minor
sections
4-97(1). (Ord. No. 9167, § 1, 11-23-98; Ord. No. 9547, § 1, 5-7-01)
   Sec. 4-97(4). The city enforcement agent shall impound, or cause to be
impounded, any dog running at large contrary to the provisions of this article.
Prior to redemption or adoption, the city enforcement agent may microchip the
dog at the owner's expense. (Ord. No. 10206, § 6, 10-4-05)
   Sec. 4-97(5). A person convicted of the offense prohibited by minor section
4-97(1) or
4-97(2) shall be punished as follows:
For a first conviction within a twelve-month period, by a fine of not less than
one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00), by imprisonment for not more than four (4) months, by probation for
not more than three (3) years, or any combination thereof; for a second
conviction within a twelve-month period, by a fine of not less than one hundred
fifty dollars ($150.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), by
imprisonment for not more than four (4) months, by probation for not more than
three (3) years, or any combination thereof; for a third or subsequent
conviction within a twelve-month period, by a fine of not less than two hundred
dollars ($200.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), by
imprisonment of not more than four (4) months, by probation for not more than
three (3) years, or any combination thereof.
No judge may suspend the imposition of the minimum prescribed fine. In
addition, the judge shall order abatement as necessary. (Ord. No. 5010, § 2, 9-
10-79; Ord. No. 6043, § 19, 6-25-84; Ord. No. 7241, § 6, 7-3-89; Ord. No. 9159,
§ 4, 11-9-98; Ord. No. 10475, § 2, 11-13-07)
(1953 Code, ch. 4, art. II, §§ 6.1--6.4: Ord. No. 2558, § 1, 12-26-63; Ord. No.
2567, §§ 1, 2, 1-6-64; Ord. No. 5219, § 4, 9-22-80)
Sec. 4-98. Impounding unlicensed dogs.
The city enforcement agent may apprehend and impound, or cause to be impounded,
any dog found without a license tag for the current year. Prior to redemption
or adoption, the city enforcement agent may microchip the dog at the owner's
expense.
(1953 Code, ch. 4, art. II, § 6.5; Ord. No. 2558, § 1, 12-16-63; Ord. No. 9605,
§ 1, 9-10-01; Ord. No. 10206, § 7, 10-4-05)
Sec. 4-99. Impoundment time, notice and costs.
   Sec. 4-99(1). Upon impounding any licensed dog, the owner shall be promptly
notified and such owner may reclaim his dog within five (5) days from the date
of the actual notice or mailing of notice, upon proof of ownership and payment
of all costs and charges incurred in impounding and maintaining the dog.
   Sec. 4-99(2). Impounding costs may be set from time to time by the city
manager to include an assessment of not less than the amount set in the Pima
County Code for the impoundment of any dog, for pickup or delivery of the dog,
and for each day the city impoundment agent cares for and feeds the dog. Prior
to redemption or adoption, the city enforcement agent may microchip the dog at
the owner's expense. (Ord. No. 4315, § 4, 1-27-75; Ord. No. 4671, § 1, 6-20-77;
Ord. No. 7240, § 1, 7-3-89; Ord. No. 10206, § 8, 10-4-05; Ord. No. 10430, § 3,
6-26-07)
   Sec. 4-99(3). If an impounded dog is unlicensed, the owner may reclaim such
dog within three (3) days upon paying all costs and charges as provided for by
this article and after securing a vaccination and a license for such dog. Any
dog not claimed within the prescribed time, whether licensed or unlicensed,
shall be placed in a suitable home, or shall be humanely destroyed.
   Sec. 4-99(4). Any unlicensed dog which apparently is suffering from serious
injuries and is in great pain and probably would not recover, or which has
evidence of rabies, mange or other infectious disease which is a danger to
other dogs, shall be humanely destroyed by a city enforcement agent in as
humane a manner as possible after reasonable efforts to notify the owner have
failed.
   Sec. 4-99(5). Any licensed dog which apparently is suffering from serious
injuries and is in great pain and probably would not recover, or which has
evidence of rabies, mange, or other infectious disease which is a danger to
other dogs, shall be humanely destroyed by a city enforcement agent in as
humane a manner as possible after reasonable efforts to notify the owner have
failed, and after authorization by a veterinarian. The veterinarian's charge or
fee shall be paid by the owner.
   Sec. 4-99(6).
   (a)   Any unaltered dog which has been impounded more than once within any
twelve (12) month period shall be spayed or neutered by a licensed veterinarian
at the owner's expense. If the unaltered dog has not been spayed or neutered
within ten (10) days of impoundment the dog will be relinquished to the city
enforcement agent, to be disposed of pursuant to Tucson Code section
4-12.
   (b)   Notice of this requirement shall be given to the owner at the time of
the first release of the impounded unaltered dog. Upon a second impoundment
within twelve (12) months, any owner who contests the spaying or neutering of
the unaltered dog including whether or not the dog is already spayed or
neutered or cannot be altered for health reasons, will receive a request for
hearing form from the city enforcement agent. The request for hearing must be
filed within twenty-four (24) hours of receipt of the form or no hearing will
be held and the dog will be altered at the owner's expense by a licensed
veterinarian or relinquished to the city enforcement agent. If the city
enforcement agent is presented with a veterinarian's certificate stating that
the dog cannot be altered for health reasons or is already spayed or neutered
then no hearing shall be held and the dog shall be returned to the owner. If
the city enforcement agent does not accept a certificate, the hearing shall
proceed. After a request for a hearing has been filed, the city enforcement
agent shall set a hearing date within three (3) working days at a time and
place designated by the city enforcement agent. The hearing shall be conducted
by a hearing officer selected by the city enforcement agent and shall be
informal in manner. The burden of proof is on the owner to establish by a
preponderance of the evidence that the dog is in fact spayed or neutered or
cannot be altered for health reasons.
(1953 Code, ch. 4, art. II, § 7: Ord. No. 2558, § 1, 12-16-63; Ord. No. 7998, §
4, 6-7-93; Ord. No. 9159, § 5, 11-9-98; Ord. No. 11376, § 1, 6-21-16)
Sec. 4-100. Reserved.
   Editors Note: Section 4-100, prohibiting howling, etc., dogs from disturbing
the peace, derived from Ord. No. 2829, § 1, adopted Dec. 13, 1965, and Ord. No.
4469, § 1, adopted Apr. 1976, was repealed by § 1 of Ord. No. 5886, adopted
Oct. 17, 1983. This subject is now covered by §
11-73(3).
Sec. 4-101. Reserved.
   Editors Note: Section 4-101, establishing a fee for the dogs from the city
enforcement agent, derived 4671, § 2, adopted June 20, 1977, and Ord. of July
6, 1981, was repealed by Ord. of Aug. 5, 1985.
Sec. 4-102. Dog waste removal; exceptions.
It shall be unlawful for the owner or person having custody of any dog to fail
immediately to move and dispose of in a sanitary manner any solid waste
deposited by such dog on public property or deposited on private property
without the consent of the person in control of the property. This section
shall not apply to blind persons, persons with mobility disabilities, or police
officers or other law enforcement officers accompanied by police dogs while on
emergency.
(Ord. No. 5219, § 5, 9-22-80)
Sec. 4-103. Dogs prohibited on school grounds; exceptions.
   (a)   The purpose of this section is to minimize the spread of disease and/
or injuries related to the presence of dogs on school grounds. This section is
not intended to prevent the presence of dogs that are required or permitted as
part of a formal school activity or event.
   (b)   Except for police dogs, as defined in minor section
4-7(1) of this chapter, and guide dogs for the deaf, blind and physically
handicapped, no person shall bring any dog onto school grounds, regardless of
whether the dog is on a leash.
(Ord. No. 6043, § 20, 6-25-84)
Chapter 5
BICYCLES AND SHARED MOBILITY DEVICES*
__________
*   Cross References: Traffic regulations,
ch. 20.
   State Law References: Traffic regulations applicable to bicycles, A.R.S. §§
28-811--28-817; municipal authority to regulate bicycles, A.R.S. § 28-627(A)
(8).
__________
Art. I.   In General, §§ 5-1--5-3
Art. II.   Motorized Bicycle or Tricycle, §§ 5-4--5-11
Art. III.   Electric Bicycles, §§ 5-12—5-14
Art. IV.   Shared Mobility Devices, §§ 5-15—5-23
Article I. In General
Sec.
5-1.   Parking of bicycles.
Sec.
5-2.   Riding on sidewalks and pedestrian paths, and through underpasses;
yielding the right of way and passing or overtaking.
Sec.
5-2.1.   Postal employees and law enforcement officers exempt from certain
riding and parking provisions.
Sec.
5-3.   Enforcement.
Article II. Motorized Bicycle or Tricycle
Sec.
5-4.   Regulating motorized bicycle or tricycle; purpose and intent.
Sec.
5-5.   Definition.
Sec.
5-6.   Applicability of traffic laws.
Sec.
5-7.   Prohibited operation.
Sec.
5-8.   Helmet use requirement.
Sec.
5-9.   Nighttime use requirements.
Sec.
5-10.   Responsibilities of parents, guardians, and legal custodians.
Sec.
5-11.   Violation declared a civil traffic violation.
Article III. Electric Bicycles
Sec.
5-12.   Definition.
Sec.
5-13.   Applicability of traffic laws; specific rules for electric bicycles.
Sec.
5-14.   Violation declared a civil traffic violation.
Article IV. Shared Mobility Devices
Sec.
5-15.   Purpose and intent.
Sec.
5-16.    Definitions.
Sec.
5-17.   Shared mobility prohibition without permit.
Sec.
5-18.   Rules and regulations.
Sec.
5-19.   Violations and penalties.
Sec.
5-20.   Enforcement authority.
Sec.
5-21.   Jurisdiction of court.
Sec.
5-22.   Commencement of proceedings.
Sec.
5-23.   Appeal of court decision.
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL*
__________
*   Editors Note: Section 1 of Ord. No. 7276, adopted Sept. 11, 1989, repealed
former art. I, §§
5-1--
5-6, derived from 1953 Code, ch. 7, §§ 1--6, and Ord. No. 5336, § 2, adopted
Apr. 6, 1981, and added a new art. I, §§
5-1--
5-3.
__________
Sec. 5-1. Parking of bicycles.
It shall be unlawful to park a bicycle upon any public sidewalk or street in a
manner that substantially impedes pedestrian or vehicular traffic or obstructs
access to public or private facilities.
(Ord. No. 7276, § 1, 9-11-89)
Sec. 5-2. Riding on sidewalks and pedestrian paths, and through underpasses;
yielding the right of way and passing or overtaking.
   (a)    It shall be unlawful to ride a bicycle on any public sidewalks, or
upon a designated pedestrian path in any public park, unless signs are posted
specifically permitting bicycling.
   (b)    It shall be unlawful to ride a bicycle through any underpass when
signs are posted prohibiting bicycling.
   (c)   A person riding a bicycle on a multi-use path, trail, or shared use
path under the jurisdiction of the City of Tucson must yield the right-of-way
to any pedestrian or horse and shall slow to ten (10) miles per hour and
communicate to the pedestrian or equestrian rider before overtaking or passing.
(Ord. No. 7276, § 1, 9-11-89; Ord. No. 11582, § 1, 9-5-18)
Sec. 5-2.1. Postal employees and law enforcement officers exempt from certain
riding and parking provisions.
The provisions of sections
5-1 and
5-2 shall not apply to U.S. Postal Service employees engaging in the collection
or delivery of mail or to law enforcement officers while engaged in the
performance of law enforcement duties. For purposes of this section, law
enforcement officer shall include local traffic enforcement agents.
(Ord. No. 7276, § 1, 9-11-89; Ord. No. 9046, § 1, 4-20-98)
Sec. 5-3. Enforcement.
Any violation of a provision of this chapter shall be a civil infraction,
unless otherwise specified, subject to the provisions of chapter
8 of this Code.
Violations of this chapter shall be deemed civil infractions subject to a
sanction of twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
(Ord. No. 7276, § 1, 9-11-89; Ord. No. 8958, § 1, 9-22-97)
ARTICLE II.
MOTORIZED BICYCLE OR TRICYCLE
Sec. 5-4. Regulating motorized bicycle or tricycle; purpose and intent.
The state has granted municipalities express authority to regulate or prohibit
the operation of motorized gas-powered bicycles or tricycles. It is the purpose
and intent of this article to provide for the regulation of motorized gas-
powered bicycle or tricycle ("motorized bicycle or tricycle") to protect the
safety of pedestrians, bicyclists, motor vehicle drivers and operators of
motorized bicycles or tricycles. The mayor and council find it is in the public
interest to regulate the operation of motorized bicycles or tricycles by
prohibiting their use on sidewalks, multi-use paths, shared use paths and
pedestrian paths, and by imposing age restrictions and safety requirements for
the riders of motorized bicycles or tricycles.
(Ord. No. 10321, § 1, 9-19-06; Ord. No. 11582, § 2, 9-5-18)
Sec. 5-5. Definition.
As used in this article "motorized bicycle or tricycle" means a gas-powered
bicycle or tricycle that is equipped with a helper motor that has a maximum
piston displacement of forty-eight (48) cubic centimeters or less, that may
also be self-propelled and that is operated at speeds of less than twenty (20)
miles per hour.
(Ord. No. 10321, § 1, 9-19-06; Ord. No. 11582, § 2, 9-5-18)
Sec. 5-6. Applicability of traffic laws.
In the City of Tucson, a person riding a motorized bicycle or tricycle is
granted all of the rights and is subject to all the duties applicable to a
bicycle rider under state and local law, except as otherwise provided herein.
Motorized bicycles or tricycles that are operated at speeds in excess of
nineteen (19) miles per hour are regulated by state law and must comply with
state law requirements.
(Ord. No. 10321, § 1, 9-19-06; Ord. No. 11582, § 2, 9-5-18)
Sec. 5-7. Prohibited operation.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for a person under sixteen (16) years of age to
operate a motorized bicycle or tricycle.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful to operate a motorized bicycle or tricycle on any
public sidewalk, multi-use path, and shared-use path or on any designated
pedestrian path in any public park.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful to use a motorized bicycle or tricycle to carry
more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped.
   (d)   It shall be unlawful to ride a motorized bicycle or tricycle through
any underpass or at any other location where signs are posted prohibiting
bicycling.
(Ord. No. 10321, § 1, 9-19-06)
Sec. 5-8. Helmet use requirement.
No person under eighteen (18) years of age shall operate a motorized bicycle or
tricycle or be a passenger on motorized bicycle or tricycle, ride in a
restraining seat attached to a motorized bicycle or tricycle, or ride in a
trailer towed by a motorized bicycle or tricycle unless the person is wearing a
properly fitted and fastened bicycle helmet which meets the current standards
of the American National Standards Institute for protective headgear.
(Ord. No. 10321, § 1, 9-19-06)
Sec. 5-9. Nighttime use requirements.
A motorized bicycle or tricycle that is used at nighttime shall have a lamp on
the front that emits a white light visible from a distance of at least five
hundred (500) feet to the front and a red reflector in the rear of a type that
is visible from all distances from fifty (50) feet to three hundred (300) feet
to the rear where the reflector is directly in front of the upper beams of head
lamps on a motor vehicle. A motorized bicycle or tricycle may have a lamp that
emits a red light visible from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the
rear in addition to the red reflector.
(Ord. No. 10321, § 1, 9-19-06)
Sec. 5-10. Responsibilities of parents, guardians, and legal custodians.
   (a)   The parent, guardian, or legal custodian of any minor shall not
authorize or knowingly permit such minor to violate any of the provisions of
this article.
   (b)   If a fine is imposed upon a minor who is found to be in violation of
this section, the parents or legal guardian having custody or control of the
minor shall be jointly and severally liable with the minor for payment of the
fine, whether or not the parents or guardian knew of, or anticipated, a
violation of this section.
(Ord. No. 10321, § 1, 9-19-06)
Sec. 5-11. Violation declared a civil traffic violation.
   (a)   Violation of this article shall constitute a civil traffic violation
punishable by a mandatory minimum fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
   (b)   All complaints for violations of this article shall be issued and
adjudicated in accordance with the Arizona Rules of Procedure in Civil Traffic
Violation Cases and applicable state and local law.
(Ord. No. 10321, § 1, 9-19-06)
ARTICLE III.
ELECTRIC BICYCLES
Sec. 5-12.   Definition.
   An "electric bicycle" is defined as a bicycle or tricycle equipped with
fully operable pedals and an electric motor and that meets the requirements of
one of the following classes:
   (a)   A "Class 1 electric bicycle" is a bicycle or tricycle that is equipped
with an electric motor that provides assistance only when the rider is pedaling
and that ceases to provide assistance when the bicycle or tricycle reaches the
speed of twenty (20) miles per hour.
   (b)   A "Class 2 electric bicycle" is a bicycle or tricycle that is equipped
with an electric motor that may be used exclusively to propel the bicycle and
that is not capable of providing assistance when the bicycle or tricycle
reaches the speed of twenty (20) miles per hour.
   (c)   A "Class 3 electric bicycle" is a bicycle or tricycle that is equipped
with an electric motor that provides assistance only when the rider is pedaling
and that ceases to provide assistance when the bicycle or tricycle reaches the
speed of twenty-eight (28) miles per hour.
(Ord. No. 11582, § 3, 9-5-18)
Sec. 5-13.   Applicability of traffic laws; specific rules for electric
bicycles.
   (a)   In the City of Tucson, a person riding an electric bicycle is granted
all of the rights and is subject to all the duties applicable to a bicycle
rider under state and local law, including Article I of this Chapter 5, except
as otherwise provided herein.
   (b)   Electric bicycles are permitted on bicycle, shared and multiuse paths
under the jurisdiction of the City of Tucson, in the same manner as any other
bicycle and when operated at posted or regulated speeds, or under twenty (20)
miles per hour, whichever is lower.
   (c)   No person under the age of sixteen (16) may operate an electric
bicycle. A person under the age of sixteen (16) may ride as a passenger on an
electric bicycle designed to accommodate passengers.
   (d)   All electric bicycles shall comply with the equipment and
manufacturing requirements for bicycles adopted by the United States Consumer
Product Safety Commission (16 C.F.R. Part 1512).
   (e)   All electric bicycles must be equipped with a speedometer that
displays the speed the electric bicycle is traveling in miles per hour.
(Ord. No. 11582, § 3, 9-5-18)
Sec. 5-14.   Violation declared a civil traffic violation.
   (a)   Violation of this article shall constitute a civil traffic violation
punishable by a mandatory minimum fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
   (b)   All complaints for violations of this article shall be issued and
adjudicated in accordance with the Arizona Rules of Court Procedure for Civil
Traffic and Civil Boating Violations, as they may from time to time be amended
or replaced.
(Ord. No. 11582, § 3, 9-5-18)
ARTICLE IV. SHARED MOBILITY DEVICES
Sec. 5-15.   Purpose and intent.
   It is the purpose and intent of this article to provide for the regulation
of bicycles, electric scooters and other "shared mobility devices" to protect
the safety of pedestrians, bicyclists, motor vehicle drivers and operators of
shared mobility devices. The mayor and council find it is in the public
interest to regulate the operation of shared mobility devices by prohibiting
their use unless authorized and permitted by the director of the department of
transportation and by imposing age restrictions and safety requirements for the
users of shared mobility services.
(Ord. No. 11583, § 2, 9-5-18; Ord. No. 11779, § 1, 9-9-20)
Sec. 5-16.    Definitions.
   In this article, unless the context otherwise requires:
   (a)   Applicant means an entity or person authorized to apply for a Mobility
Share Permit.
   (b)   Director means the director of the department of transportation or the
director's designee.
   (c)   Electric scooter means a self-propelled device that has an electric
motor, a deck on which a person may ride, at least two (2) tandem wheels in
contact with the ground and is designed to be operated in a standup mode.
   (d)   Mobility share entity means any person, corporate or otherwise,
offering a shared mobility device for hire for use in the City of Tucson right
of way (ROW), whether the use in the ROW is intended or not, pursuant to a
Mobility Share Permit.
   (e)   Mobility Share Permit means a non-exclusive license to offer shared
mobility devices for hire within the City of Tucson or a portion thereof.
   (f)   Permittee means any entity or person granted a Mobility Share Permit.
   (g)   Shared mobility device means any motorized or non-motorized wheeled
device, including, but not limited to, an electric scooter:
      (1)   offered for hire on a short-term use basis (typically for a half
hour or less, or one (1) or two (2) trips);
      (2)   designed for moving one (1) or more persons by means of human or
electric power, or any combination thereof; and
      (3)   not required to be returned to a specific origin point. This may
include, but is not limited to, bicycles, electric bicycles, and electric
scooters.
(Ord. No. 11583, § 2, 9-5-18; Ord. No. 11779, § 1, 9-9-20)
Sec. 5-17.   Shared mobility prohibition without permit.
   (a)   It is unlawful for a mobility share entity to operate within the
corporate limits of the City of Tucson unless they hold a valid Mobility Share
Permit through a mobility share program authorized by the director.
   (b)   A mobility share entity operating pursuant to a valid Mobility Share
Permit as described in paragraph (a) shall comply with all permit requirements
and regulations promulgated by the director.
   (c)   The director is authorized to develop and adopt a mobility share pilot
program with reasonable and necessary rules to carry out the purposes of this
article. Such rules shall, at a minimum, address the following areas:
      (1)   Minimum safety requirements;
      (2)   Parking of shared mobility devices;
      (3)   Operations and rebalancing;
      (4)   Data sharing and privacy;
      (5)   Fees;
      (6)   Application requirements;
      (7)   Indemnification, bond and insurance requirements.
   (d)   The director shall provide three (3) copies of the above rules to the
city clerk for a public review. In addition, the rules shall be posted on a
City website in a timely manner.
   (e)   The rules for the mobility share pilot program shall be effective only
upon the approval of the mayor and council.
(Ord. No. 11583, § 2, 9-5-18; Ord. No. 11779, § 1, 9-9-20)
Sec. 5-18.   Rules and regulations.
   (a)   Notwithstanding Tucson Code
Chapter 20, Article I, Sec. 30(C)(1), an electric scooter, when operated as a
shared mobility device as part of an authorized mobility share program, is
granted all of the rights and is subject to all the duties applicable to a
bicycle rider under state and local law, except as provided herein.
   (b)   It is unlawful for a person under the age of sixteen (16) to operate
an electric scooter pursuant to this article.
   (c)   It is unlawful for a person under the age of eighteen (18) to operate
an electric scooter pursuant to this article unless the person is wearing a
properly fitted and fastened helmet which meets the current standards of the
American National Standards Institute for protective headgear.
(Ord. No. 11583, § 2, 9-5-18; Ord. No. 11779, § 1, 9-9-20)
Sec. 5-19.   Violations and penalties.
   (a)   The penalty for a violation of this article shall be as follows:
      (1)   Any mobility share entity or an employee of a mobility share entity
who commits, causes, permits, facilitates, or aids or abets any violation of,
or who fails to perform any act or duty required by, this article is
responsible for a civil infraction and is subject to a civil sanction of not
less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than two thousand five hundred
dollars ($2,500.00).
      (2)   Any user of a shared mobility device who commits a violation of, or
who fails to perform any act or duty required by, this article is responsible
for a civil traffic violation punishable by a mandatory minimum fine of twenty-
five dollars ($25.00).
      (3)   Each day any violation of any provision of this article or the
failure to perform any act or duty required by this article exists shall
constitute a separate violation or offense.
(Ord. No. 11583, § 2, 9-5-18; Ord. No. 11779, § 1, 9-9-20)
Sec. 5-20.   Enforcement authority.
   (a)   Any law enforcement officer or any other employee of the city with the
authority to issue civil infraction or civil traffic citations may enforce the
provisions of this article. This section is not intended to create or expand
the authority of any department to perform acts that are otherwise prohibited
by law.
   (b)   Any shared mobility device operated in violation of this article may
be seized and impounded under the direction of the police department. Upon
impound, TDOT shall cause the mobility share entity having ownership of the
shared mobility device, if known, to be notified in writing of the removal, the
reason therefor, and the place to which the shared mobility device is removed
to, within a period of three (3) days of the impound date. If the mobility
share entity is not known or not readily ascertainable, TDOT shall make
available to the public a written report of the complete description of the
shared mobility device, the date, time and place from which removed, the
reasons for such removal, and the name of the garage or place where the shared
mobility device is stored. The shared mobility device may be recovered upon
compliance with this article and payment of all costs of removal, storage and
any assessments provided for pursuant to the applicable mobility share program
rules, provided this is done within sixty (60) days following date of
impoundment. The city, upon order of the city magistrate, may dispose of or
destroy any shared mobility device not claimed nor made to comply with the
provisions of this article within a period of sixty (60) days.
(Ord. No. 11583, § 2, 9-5-18; Ord. No. 11779, § 1, 9-9-20)
Sec. 5-21.   Jurisdiction of court.
   (a)   Jurisdiction of all proceedings to enforce the provisions of this
chapter shall be in the city court of the city.
   (b)   Civil infraction proceedings to enforce this chapter may be
adjudicated by a magistrate or a special limited magistrate.
(Ord. No. 11583, § 2, 9-5-18; Ord. No. 11779, § 1, 9-9-20)
Sec. 5-22.   Commencement of proceedings.
   (a)   Any civil infraction proceedings to enforce the provisions of this
chapter shall be commenced and summons shall be issued in accordance with the
procedures set forth in Arizona Revised Statutes, city ordinance, or as
provided in the Local Rules of Practice and Procedure - City Court - City of
Tucson. If the city is unable to personally serve the complaint, the complaint
may be served in the same manner prescribed for alternative methods of service
by the Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure or by certified or registered mail,
return receipt requested.
   (b)   All complaints for civil traffic violations of this article shall be
issued and adjudicated in accordance with the Arizona Rules of Procedure in
Civil Traffic Violation Cases and applicable state and local law.
(Ord. No. 11583, § 2, 9-5-18; Ord. No. 11779, § 1, 9-9-20)
Sec. 5-23.   Appeal of court decision.
   Any party may appeal the judgment of city court to the superior court.
Appeals from civil infraction proceedings shall be in accordance with the
Superior Court Rules of Appellate Procedure - Civil.
(Ord. No. 11583, § 2, 9-5-18; Ord. No. 11779, § 1, 9-9-20)
Chapter 6
BUILDINGS, ELECTRICITY, PLUMBING, AND MECHANICAL CODE*
__________
*   Charter References: General authority over buildings, plumbing and
electricity,
ch. VII, § 1(12).
   Cross References: Building safety division created under administration of
chief inspector, §
2-5; advertising and outdoor signs generally, ch.
3; fire protection and prevention, ch.
13; privilege tax on construction contracting, §§
19-415--
19-418; planning and zoning, ch.
23; sewerage and sewage disposal, ch.
24.
__________
Art. I.   In General, §§ 6-1--6-9
Art. II.   Tucson-Pima County Joint Consolidated Code Committee, §§ 6-10--6-30
Art. III.   Buildings, §§ 6-31--6-80
   Div. 1. Building Code, §§ 6-29--6-65
   Div. 2. Existing Building Code, §§ 6-66--6-70
   Div. 3. Reserved, §§ 6-71--6-80
Art. IV.   Electricity, §§ 6-81--6-120
   Div. 1. Electrical Code, §§ 6-81--6-100
   Div. 2. Outdoor Lighting Code, §§ 6-101--6-120
Art. V.   Plumbing Code, §§ 6-121--6-159
Art. VI.   Mechanical Code, §§ 6-160--6-170
Art. VII.   Solar System Code, §§ 6-171--6-180
Art. VIII.   Rainwater Collection and Distribution Requirements, §§ 6-181--6-
190
Art. IX.   Swimming Pool and Spa Code, §§ 6-191--6-193
Article I. In General
Sec.
6-1.   Reserved.
Sec.
6-2.   Clerk to keep copies of Administrative Code.
Sec.
6-3.   Amendments of Administrative Code.
Sec.
6-4.   Reserved.
Sec.
6-5.   Violation.
Sec.
6-6.   Records of applications, permits, inspections required.
Secs.
6-7--6-9.   Reserved.
Article II. Tucson-Pima County Joint Consolidated Code Committee
Sec.
6-10.   Created; qualifications; appointment, term of members.
Sec.
6-11.   Purpose and functions.
Sec.
6-12.   Purposes; created; qualifications; appointment, term of members.
Sec.
6-13.   Authority to regulate hearings and investigations; regulations to be
filed; distribution of decisions.
Sec.
6-14.   Vote required for decisions; quorum.
Sec.
6-15.   Provision for building innovations.
Sec.
6-16.   Appointment, powers, duties of secretary to board.
Sec.
6-17.   Procedure for appeals to board; meetings; effect of decisions.
Sec.
6-18.   Reference to "board of examiners and appeals" to mean "board of
appeals."
Secs.
6-19--6-28.   Reserved.
Article III. Buildings
Division 1. Building Code
Secs. 6-29, 6-30. Reserved.
Sec.
6-31.   Office of building inspection supervisor established.
Sec.
6-32.   Qualifications; assistants.
Sec.
6-33.   General duties.
Sec.
6-34.   Building code adopted.
Sec.
6-35.   Clerk to keep copies of building code.
Sec.
6-36.   Amendments to building code.
Sec.
6-37.   Applicability of administrative and building codes.
Sec.
6-38.   Residential code adopted.
Sec.
6-39.   Reserved.
Sec.
6-40.   Energy conservation code adopted.
Secs.
6-41--6-65.   Reserved.
Division 2. Existing Building Code
Sec.
6-66.   Existing building code adopted.
Secs.
6-67--6-70.   Reserved.
Division 3. Reserved
Secs.
6-71--6-80.   Reserved.
Article IV. Electricity
Division 1. Electrical Code
Sec.
6-81.   Electrical inspection supervisor--Office created.
Sec.
6-82.   Same--Qualifications; assistants.
Sec.
6-83.   Same--General duties.
Sec.
6-84.   Electrical code adopted.
Sec.
6-85.   Clerk to keep copies of electrical code.
Sec.
6-86.   Amendments to the electrical code.
Sec.
6-87.   Reserved.
Secs.
6-88--6-100.   Reserved.
Division 2. Outdoor Lighting Code
Sec.
6-101.   Outdoor lighting code adopted.
Sec.
6-102.   Clerk to keep copies of outdoor lighting code.
Sec.
6-103.   Amendments to outdoor lighting code.
Sec.
6-104.   Penalty.
Secs.
6-105--6-120.   Reserved.
Article V. Plumbing Code
Sec.
6-121.   Office of plumbing inspector established.
Sec.
6-122.   Qualifications of inspectors.
Sec.
6-123.   General duties of inspectors.
Sec.
6-124.   Plumbing code adopted.
Sec.
6-125.   Clerk to keep copies of plumbing code.
Sec.
6-126.   Amendments of plumbing code.
Secs.
6-127--6-159.   Reserved.
Article VI. Mechanical Code
Sec.
6-160.   Reserved.
Sec.
6-161.   Office of mechanical inspection supervisor established.
Sec.
6-162.   Qualifications; assistants.
Sec.
6-163.   General duties.
Sec.
6-164.   Mechanical code adopted.
Sec.
6-165.   Clerk to keep copies of mechanical code.
Sec.
6-166.   Amendments of the mechanical code.
Sec.
6-167.   Fuel gas code adopted.
Secs.
6-168--6-170.   Reserved.
Article VII. Solar System Code
Sec.
6-171.   Solar system code adopted.
Sec.
6-172.   Clerk to keep copies of the solar system code.
Sec.
6-173.   Amendments to the solar system code.
Sec.
6-174.   Reserved.
Secs.
6-175--6-180.   Reserved.
Article VIII. Rainwater Collection and Distribution Requirements
Sec.
6-181.   Definitions.
Sec.
6-182.   Rainwater harvesting plan.
Sec.
6-183.   Construction of rainwater harvesting system; minimum landscape budget
requirements; request for rainwater harvesting plan revision.
Sec.
6-184.   Restrictions on installation of rainwater harvesting system invalid.
Sec.
6-185.   Exceptions.
Sec.
6-186.   Annual report.
Sec.
6-187.   Violation.
Sec.
6-188.   Applicability.
Secs.
6-189, 6-190. Reserved.
Article IX. Swimming Pool and Spa Code
Sec.
6-191.   Swimming pool and spa code adopted.
Sec.
6-192.    Clerk to keep copies of the swimming pool and spa code.
Sec.
6-193.   Amendments to the swimming pool and spa code.
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL
Sec. 6-1. Reserved.
   Editors Note: Ord. No. 10417, § 1, adopted June 12, 2007, repealed §
6-1, which pertained to Administrative Code adopted and derived from Ord. No.
5334, § 2, adopted May 11, 1981; Ord. No. 5770, § 1, adopted May 23, 1983; Ord.
No. 6566, § 1, adopted Nov. 10, 1986; Ord. No. 7180, § 1, adopted April 24,
1989; Ord. No. 7791, § 1, adopted April 13, 1992; Ord. No. 8606, § 1, adopted
Nov. 20, 1995; Ord. No. 9813, § 1, adopted Feb. 10, 2003.
Sec. 6-2. Clerk to keep copies of Administrative Code.
Three (3) copies of the Building Safety Administrative Code of the City of
Tucson adopted in section
6-1 shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and are made public records
and shall be available for public use and inspection during regular office
hours.
(Ord. No. 5334, § 2, 5-11-81)
Sec. 6-3. Amendments of Administrative Code.
The Building Safety Administrative Code adopted in section
6-1 may be amended from time to time by the mayor and council. Three (3) copies
of current ordinances amending the Building Safety Administrative Code shall be
kept on file by the city clerk as public records and shall be kept available
for public use and inspection during regular office hours.
(Ord. No. 5334, § 2, 5-11-81)
Sec. 6-4. Reserved.
   Editors Note: Former §
6-4, pertaining to self regulating building and electrical permits, was
repealed by Ord. No 5770, § 2, adopted May 23, 1983. The former section was
derived from Ord No. 4914, § 1, adopted Dec. 18, 1975.
Sec. 6-5. Violation.
It shall be a civil infraction for any person to violate any of the provisions
of chapter
6 of the Tucson Code.
(Ord. No. 5334, § 3, 5-11-81; Ord. No. 5718, § 2, 2-28-83)
   Cross References: General penalty, §
1-8.
Sec. 6-6. Records of applications, permits, inspections required.
A complete record of all applications for permits, of all permits issued and of
all inspections made under each permit shall be kept in the building safety
division of the city in accordance with applicable law.
(Ord. No. 5531, § 3, 3-22-82)
Secs. 6-7--6-9. Reserved.
ARTICLE II.
TUCSON-PIMA COUNTY JOINT CONSOLIDATED CODE COMMITTEE
Sec. 6-10. Created; qualifications; appointment, term of members.
   (a)   Created. There is created, in joint action with Pima County, a
committee to be called the "Tucson-Pima County Consolidated Code Committee".
The committee shall consist of seven (7) members.
   (b)   Membership. The membership of the committee shall not be employees of
the city or the county, except that the city and the county may each appoint
one (1) staff person to serve as an ex officio, nonvoting member. The committee
shall consist of seven (7) members, each of whom shall possess one (1) or more
of the following qualifications:
   (1)   An architect registered in the State of Arizona;
   (2)   A professional structural engineer registered in the State of Arizona;
   (3)   A design professional registered in the State of Arizona with
mechanical and plumbing engineering experience or a mechanical contractor with
at least ten (10) years of experience, five (5) of which shall have been in
responsible charge of work;
   (4)   A design professional registered in the State of Arizona with
electrical engineering experience or an electrical contractor with at least ten
(10) years of experience, five (5) of which shall have been in responsible
charge of work;
   (5)   A general residential contractor;
   (6)   A general commercial contractor;
   (7)   A contractor engaged in the electrical, mechanical or plumbing trade.
   The city manager shall recommend qualified individuals for appointment by
the mayor and council. Members shall serve staggered terms. In January of 2012
there shall be appointed seven (7) committee members, three (3) of whom shall
be appointed for a term of two (2) years, and four (4) of whom shall be
appointed for a term of four (4) years. All subsequent appointments shall be
appointed for a term of four (4) years or until a Committee member's successor
is appointed. Pursuant to Tucson Code, section
10A-134(b), members are not limited to a maximum of eight (8) years of
continuous service.*
   (c)   Failure to attend meetings. If a member of the committee fails to
attend four (4) consecutive meetings for any reason, or fails to attend at
least forty (40) percent of the meetings called in a calendar year, that
member's appointment shall be terminated, and the member shall be automatically
and immediately removed as a member of the committee. This provision does not
apply to a nonvoting or ex-officio member of the committee appointed by the
city or Pima County.
   (d)   Filling of vacancies. An appointment to fill a vacancy resulting other
than from expiration of a term shall be for the unexpired term only.
   (e)   Chairperson and vice-chairperson. The committee shall elect from its
membership a chairperson and a vice-chairperson, who shall serve for terms of
two (2) years. The vice-chairperson shall act as chairperson in the absence or
disability of the chairperson, or in the event of a vacancy in that office.
   (f)   Compensation. Members of the committee shall serve without
compensation.
   (g)   Requirements for quorum and for committee action. A majority of the
authorized membership of the committee shall constitute a quorum. The
concurrence of the majority of the members present and constituting a quorum
shall be the act of the committee.
   (h)   Rules and regulations. The committee shall be subject to the official
rules, regulations, and bylaws for code committees functions and duties in the
performance of its advisory duties and the rules of the board of appeals when
performing its duty in hearing appeals except where provided to the contrary
herein, and may adopt other rules and regulations consistent with this article,
as it deems necessary or advisable regarding additional advisory duties and
responsibilities. One copy of all applicable rules will be filed with and
available through the Tucson city clerk's office.
   (i)   Limitation of powers. Neither the committee nor any of its members
shall incur expenses, or obligate the city and/or the county in any way,
without prior authorization from both the mayor and council and the Pima County
board of supervisors.
(Ord. No. 10950, § 2, 12-20-11, eff. 1-20-12)
   *Editor's note – Section 4 of Ord. No. 10950 provides: "Concurrent Service
Permitted. T.C. §
10A-134(c) does not apply to the Committee. Members of the Committee may serve
concurrently on other City committees, boards or commissions."
Sec. 6-11. Purpose and functions.
   (a)   Advisory and monitoring functions. The committee shall hear, review,
and make recommendations to the elected officials of the city regarding,
amendments being studied for adoption to the latest: Building Code, Residential
Code, Existing Building Code, Electrical Code, Energy Conservation Code,
Mechanical Code, Plumbing Code, and any swimming pool and/or spa code or any
code that may be adopted by the City of Tucson in the future and made the
purview of the committee by separate ordinance. The committee shall act as
standing committee between the time of adoption of a new code and the time a
newer edition of the code is under review. The standing committee shall monitor
the performance of the code in effect and shall record and recommend changes in
future codes. In the event that a conflict in the newest adopted code becomes
evident, and can only be resolved by code amendment, the standing committee may
convene in order to prepare such amendment for adoption by the governing
bodies.
   (b)   Board of appeals. The committee shall also act as the board of
appeals, in order to determine the suitability of alternate materials or
alternate types or methods of construction and of installation of building
service equipment under the provisions of the building, residential, existing
building, electrical, energy conservation, fire, outdoor lighting, mechanical,
plumbing, solar system and spa/pool codes of the city, or any code that may be
adopted by the City of Tucson in the future and made the purview of the
committee by separate ordinance and to provide for reasonable interpretations
of the provisions of such codes.
(Ord. No. 10950, § 2, 12-20-11, eff. 1-20-12)
Sec. 6-12. Purposes; created; qualifications; appointment, term of members.
In order to determine the suitability of alternate materials or alternate types
or methods of construction and of installation of building service equipment
under the provisions of the Building Safety Administrative Code, building,
electrical, fire, light pollution, mechanical, plumbing, solar system and spa/
pool codes of the city, and to provide for reasonable interpretations of the
provisions of such codes and the address numbering and dangerous buildings
codes, there shall be, and there is hereby created a board of appeals
consisting of seven (7) members who shall be selected upon the following
qualifications:
   (1)   An architect duly licensed in the State of Arizona;
   (2)   A professional engineer duly licensed in the State of Arizona;
   (3)   A general contractor duly licensed in the State of Arizona;
   (4)   A person representing the consuming public;
   (5)   A person engaged in the electrical, mechanical or plumbing trade;
   (6)   Two (2) persons who may be engaged in the construction and design
industry.
The board of appeals members shall be appointed by the mayor and council, shall
serve without compensation, and shall hold office and be subject to removal
therefrom as provided in article XIII of chapter
10A of the Tucson Code. The board of appeals shall recommend an individual to
serve as the representative of the consuming public.
(Code 1953, ch. 9, § 1; Ord. No. 2354, § 1, 10-15-62; Ord. No. 4543, § 1, 9-27-
76; Ord. No. 4764, § 1, 2-21-78; Ord. No. 6159, § 1, 1-21-85; Ord. No. 7176, §
1, 4-24-89)
   Cross References: Provisions pertaining to boards,
ch. XXIV.
Sec. 6-13. Authority to regulate hearings and investigations; regulations to be
filed; distribution of decisions.
The board of appeals shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for
conducting its hearings and investigations; provided, such rules and
regulations shall not be effective unless three (3) copies of same are filed
with the city clerk, and provided further, that same are not inconsistent with
the codes and ordinances of the city. The board shall render all decisions and
findings in writing to the secretary of the board, with a duplicate copy to the
inspector concerned, and with a duplicate copy to the applicant or appellant.
(1953 Code, ch. 9, § 1; Ord. No. 2354, § 1, 10-15-62)
   Cross References: Filing of rules and regulations generally, 1
10A-136.
Sec. 6-14. Vote required for decisions; quorum.
Decisions of the board shall be made by a majority vote of the members present
at any meeting; provided that a quorum shall consist of a majority of the board
members appointed at the time of that meeting.
(1953 Code, ch. 9, § 3; Ord. No. 2354, § 1, 10-15-62; Ord. No. 4903, § 1, 11-
13-78; Ord. No. 7791, § 2, 4-13-92)
Sec. 6-15. Provision for building innovations.
   (A)   Purposes.
   (1)   The purpose of this section is to give flexibility to the building
codes and to encourage innovation in the building industry.
   (2)   This section establishes a procedure for approving changes in building
practices where such changes are found to promote the health, safety and
welfare of the people of Tucson.
   (B)   Definition of "Concept". When used in this section, "concept" means
any alternate material or alternate type of construction which is not presently
allowed by the building, fire, electrical, plumbing and gas, or mechanical
codes of the city.
   (C)   Who May Apply. Any person or organization may propose a concept for
approval.
   (D)   Application; Initiation and Requirements.
   (1)   Applications shall be filed at the offices of the inspection division
of the City of Tucson.
   (2)   Each application shall include the following elements:
   (a)   A title for the proposed concept.
   (b)   A brief description of the proposed concept.
   (c)   A graphic representation of the proposed concept.
   (d)   A specific identification of the code provisions which would prevent
application will specify in what manner the proposed concept provides for
equivalent protection in the public interest.
   (e)   The application shall specify the public purposes which will be served
by approval of the proposed concept.
   (f)   The application shall include a complete listing of any structures to
which the proposed concept is to be applied, including a description of the
proposed locations and the extent to which each such structure is to be
affected.
   (3)   In addition, the application shall include any relevant descriptive,
scientific or engineering literature dealing with the proposed concept or any
other evidence which would assist the decision-making body in evaluating the
application.
   (E)   Procedure; Board of Appeals.
   (1)   The board of appeals shall hold a public hearing on the proposed
concept within sixty-five (65) calendar days after the date of application.
   (2)   Comment and evaluation.
   (a)   The inspection division shall send copies of the proposed concept to
the planning department, the fire department, the chairperson of the
architectural approval board and the chairperson of the fire and building code
committee at least twenty-one (21) calendar days prior to the public hearing.
   (b)   The inspection division shall keep a copy of the proposed concept
available for public inspection during the twenty-one (21) calendar days prior
to the public hearing.
   (c)   Concerned persons or agencies may submit written comments before the
public hearing or appear at the public hearing to express comment on the
proposed concept. If a city agency plans to oppose a proposed concept, it shall
submit a written statement summarizing its objections to the inspection
division at least four (4) working days before the public hearing.
   (d)   The chief inspector shall submit a written recommendation on each
proposed concept to the board of appeals at least four (4) working days before
the public hearing.
   (3)   The board of appeals may take the following actions on an application:
   (a)   Approve the application as submitted.
   (b)   Approve the application subject to modifications.
   (c)   Deny the application with written findings which explain why the
public interest requires denial.
   (d)   Postpone decision until additional studies or consultations are
completed.
   1.   The board shall include a status report on the proposed concept at each
regular meeting until it makes a decision.
   2.   The cost of additional studies may be assessed against the applicant.
The board must inform an applicant as to the nature and extent of further
studies and allow the applicant to withdraw his proposal if he decides the cost
or delay would be prohibitive.
   3.   If the board determines that a proposed concept could be of major
significance in reducing energy or construction costs, then the board may
recommend to the mayor and council that the city contribute to additional
studies.
   (e)   Certify a proposed concept for mayor and council review. This action
shall be taken when the board determines that the proposed concept involves a
question of policy properly left to elected representatives of the people. When
the board refers a proposed concept to the mayor and council, it shall
recommend approval or denial and explain its recommendation.
   (4)   Approval by the board of appeals shall become effective in thirty (30)
days unless there is a mayor and council review.
   (F)   Procedure; Mayor and Council Review.
   (1)   The purpose of the mayor and council review is to provide oversight
and policy guidance to the process of approving building innovations.
   (2)   The mayor and council will review proposed concepts when one (1) of
the following events occurs:
   (a)   The board of appeals certifies an application for mayor and council
review and transmits it records and recommendation to the office of the city
clerk.
   (b)   The chief inspector, with the concurrence of the city manager,
requests a mayor and council review and submits such request in written form to
the office of the city clerk within fourteen (14) calendar days after the
decision by the board of appeals.
   (c)   Three (3) members of the city council request a mayor and council
review and submit such request in written form to the office of the city clerk
within fourteen (14) calendar days after the decision by the board of appeals.
   (3)   The city clerk shall forward all requests for mayor and council review
to the agenda committee of the city council, which shall schedule a mayor and
council review within a reasonable period of time.
   (4)   The mayor and council review will not include a public hearing unless
a majority of the mayor and council votes to have a public hearing.
   (5)   Approval by the mayor and council will be effective immediately to
authorize use of the approved concept.
   (G)   Procedure; Court Review.
   (1)   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the city on a proposed concept
shall file a special action within thirty (30) days after the decision becomes
final. Board of appeals' decisions are final after thirty (30) days, and mayor
and council decisions are final immediately.
   (2)   The court shall base its review on the actions taken by the city
rather than hold a de novo hearing.
   (H)   Criteria for Decision. Decisions on applications under this section
shall be guided by a balanced, overall consideration of the following criteria:
   (1)   The effect of the proposed concept on energy efficiency.
   (2)   The effect of the proposed concept on the cost of construction,
lifetime costs of building operation, and overall quality and durability of
structures.
   (3)   Whether the concept proposed is equivalent to the requirements of the
building, fire, electrical, plumbing and gas, and mechanical codes, in quality,
strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety.
   (4)   The extent to which the above-mentioned code requirements are
genuinely effective in securing quality, strength, effectiveness, fire
resistance, durability and safety in structures.
   (I)   Procedure After a Concept Has Been Approved.
   (1)   Any person planning to use an approved concept shall notify the
inspection department in writing before construction begins. Such notification
shall include a complete listing of structures in which he plans to apply the
concept, the location of such structures, and the extent to which each
structure is to be affected.
   (2)   The building inspector will determine if the proposed use is
consistent with the concept as approved by the board of appeals. The building
inspector's approval will be sufficient authorization to proceed with the
proposed use.
   (3)   In case a building inspector denies approval, the applicant can appeal
a denial to be board of appeals by using the standard procedure for building
code appeals.
   (4)   The chief inspector, a majority of the board of appeals, or three (3)
members of the city council can resubmit an approved concept to the board of
appeals if problems develop in its application. If approval of a concept is
withdrawn, there will be no retroactive effect on projects already under
construction unless there is a clear danger to the public health, safety and
welfare.
   (J)   Record Keeping.
   (1)   The inspection division will keep a file of all approved concepts
indexed in an appropriate manner and open to the public during regular office
hours.
   (2)   The file for each approved concept will include the written submittals
itemizing any later use of that concept. (See subsection (I)(1))
   (K)   Fire and Building Code Committee. The fire and building code committee
shall review the file of approved concepts as part of regularly scheduled code
revisions. Those innovations which the committee determines to have broad
applicability shall be recommended to the mayor and council for adoption and
integration into the appropriate codes.
(Code 1953, ch. 9, § 3; Ord. No. 2354, § 1, 10-15-62; Ord. No. 4403, § 1, 10-
13-75; Ord. No. 4543, § 3, 9-27-76)
Sec. 6-16. Appointment, powers, duties of secretary to board.
The secretary of the board of appeals shall be appointed to such duties by the
chief inspector of the inspection department of the city, and he shall keep the
minutes and records of the board; but the secretary shall have no voting power.
(Code 1953, ch. 9, § 4; Ord. No. 2354, § 1, 10-15-62)
Sec. 6-17. Procedure for appeals to board; meetings; effect of decisions.
   Sec. 6-17(1). An appeal to the board of appeals may be taken by any person
aggrieved by any decision, act or ruling of the city building, electrical,
plumbing and gas, and mechanical inspectors involving the interpretation of the
building, electrical, plumbing and gas and mechanical codes or ordinances of
this city, or by any decision, act, or ruling of the director of water
involving the interpretation of any section of
chapter 27 of the Tucson Code. Such appeal shall be made by filing with the
secretary of the board, within ten (10) days of the date of the decision
complained of, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The secretary
of the board shall immediately transmit a copy of such notice of appeal to the
inspector or director of water whose action, ruling or decision is challenged.
Upon receipt of such notice, the inspector or director of water shall forthwith
transmit to the secretary of the board all papers which shall constitute the
record upon which the action appealed from is taken. (Ord. No. 5718, § 3, 2-28-
83; Ord. No. 8196, § 1, 1-24-94)
   Sec. 6-17(2). The board shall hold a regular monthly meeting on the third
Wednesday of each calendar month when there is pending business. The board
shall hear appeals at its regular monthly meeting unless a special meeting is
requested by the appellant at the time the notice of appeal is filed with the
board's secretary. In such cases a special meeting shall then be held within
five (5) days, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, after the notice
of appeal is filed. (Ord. No. 4403, § 2, 10-13-75)
   Sec. 6-17(3). All other matters, including the consideration of alternate
materials and alternate types of construction normally shall be heard at the
regular monthly meeting. However, a special meeting for any purpose may be
called by the board chairman when he deems such meeting to be reasonably
necessary or proper.
   Sec. 6-17(4). The notice of appeal must be filed with the secretary of the
board not later than the first day of the month, prior to the regularly
scheduled monthly meeting for the matter appealed to be regularly heard at the
meeting. In cases involving the use of alternate materials or alternate types
of construction where tests are necessary, the time for hearing may be enlarged
to permit the making of such tests. Reasonable notice shall be given by the
secretary of the board to the appellant or applicant and to the inspector
concerned of the time and place when any appeal shall be considered by the
board. Any party may attend such hearings in person or by agent or attorney.
The board shall decide any appeal immediately after the hearing, or within a
reasonable time thereafter, but in no event shall the board keep an appeal
under consideration for more than five (5) days after the hearing. After such
notice and hearing, the decision of the board shall be filed with the secretary
of the board. The board shall render its decision and findings in writing, with
a copy to the inspector involved, and with a copy to the appellant or
applicant; and the decision of the board shall be final.
(Code 1953, ch. 9, § 5; Ord. No. 2354, § 1, 10-15-62)
Sec. 6-18. Reference to "board of examiners and appeals" to mean "board of
appeals."
Whenever reference is made to the board of examiners and appeals in any of the
ordinances or codes of the city, such reference shall mean the board of appeals
created in this article.
(Code 1953, ch. 9, § 6; Ord. No. 2354, § 1, 10-15-62)
Secs. 6-19--6-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE III.
BUILDINGS*
__________
*   Cross References: Housing regulations, ch.
16.
__________
DIVISION 1.
BUILDING CODE*
__________
*   Editors Note: Section 1 of Ord. No. 5531, adopted Mar. 22, 1982, repealed
div. 1, §§ 6-29--6-55; and section 2 enacted a new div. 1, §§
6-31--
6-38. Formerly, div. 1 was derived from 1953 Code, ch. 9, §§ 7--14, 9--21, 24,
25; Ord. No. 2450, § 1, adopted May 6, 1963; Ord. No. 4871, § 2, adopted Sept.
5, 1978; and Ord. o. 4935, §§ 2--9, adopted Feb. 5, 1979.
   Cross References: Technical division of administrative hearing office to
have exclusive jurisdiction over alleged violations of building codes, §
28-4(1).
__________
Sec. 6-31. Office of building inspection supervisor established.
The office of building inspection supervisor is established. The building
inspection supervisor shall be responsible to and under the authority of the
building safety administrator.
(Ord. No. 5531, § 2, 3-22-82)
Sec. 6-32. Qualifications; assistants.
No person shall be appointed building inspection supervisor who shall not
possess the required minimum qualifications for that position as expressed in
the position classification plan of the city. The building inspection
supervisor shall be assisted by building inspectors who possess the required
minimum qualifications for their respective positions as are expressed in the
position classification plan of the city. The building inspection supervisor
may from time to time delegate to his assistants such of his authority as is
necessary or desirable.
(Ord. No. 5531, § 2, 3-22-82)
Sec. 6-33. General duties.
The general duties of the building inspection supervisor are to inspect all
buildings and structures erected in or moved into any territorial jurisdiction
of the city; to inspect all additions, alterations, repairs, and changes of use
or occupancy in all such buildings and structures; to enforce the applicable
provisions of the Building Safety Administrative Code of the city and the
applicable regulations of the building safety division; to enforce the
provisions of the building code of the city and, with respect thereto, to
inspect the installation of and approve or condemn all buildings or structures
within the jurisdiction of the city, control types and classes of material and
the method, manner and workmanship for the construction and repair of buildings
and structures, approve or disapprove the use of building materials or devices,
inspect public and private premises for violations of the provisions of this
chapter
6 and of such other portions of the Tucson Code as the building safety
administrator may direct, give notice of defects in construction and repair,
alterations or changes of buildings and structures, receive applications for
issuing permits or building construction repairs, alterations or changes,
collect and account for fees, examine and approve plans and specifications for
proposed building construction, repairs, alterations or changes and advise on
necessary changes in such plans and specifications, certify to compliance with
plans and specifications on building work, make such reports as shall be
required from time to time by the building safety administrator, and make any
recommendations to the building safety administrator which the building
inspection supervisor may deem practical and desirable.
(Ord. No. 5531, § 2, 3-22-82)
Sec. 6-34. Building code adopted.
   The document entitled "International Building Code, 2024 Edition" published
by the International Code Council, with local amendments, a copy of which
amendments are attached to Ordinance No. 12213 as Exhibit "A" are hereby
adopted.
(Ord. No. 5331, § 2, 3-22-82; Ord. No. 5771, § 1, 5-23-83; Ord. No. 6567, § 1,
11-10-86; Ord. No. 7179, § 1, 4-24-89; Ord. No. 7792, § 1, 4-13-92; Ord. No.
8607, § 1, 1-2-96; Ord. No. 9155, § 1, 11-2-98; Ord. No. 9491, § 1, 11-20-00;
Ord. No. 9526, § 4, 3-19-01; Ord. No. 10035, § 1, 9-7-04; Ord. No. 10142, § 2,
4-12-05; Ord. No. 10417, § 2, 6-12-07; Ord. No. 10625, § 1, 1-13-09; Ord. No.
11042, § 1, 12-18-12, eff. 1-2-13; Ord. No. 11478, § 1, 8-8-17, eff. 9-7-17;
Ord. No. 11590, § 1, 10-9-18, eff. 1-1-19; Ord. No. 12171, § 1, 6-3-25, eff. 1-
1-26; Ord. No. 12213, § 1, 12-16-25, eff. 1- 1-26)
   Editor's note – Exhibit A is not printed herein but is on file in the office
of the city clerk and available for public inspection during regular business
hours.
Sec. 6-35. Clerk to keep copies of building code.
Three (3) copies of the building code adopted in section
6-34 shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and are made public records
and shall be available for public use and inspection during regular office
hours.
(Ord. No. 5531, § 2, 3-22-82)
Sec. 6-36. Amendments to building code.
The building code adopted in section
6-34 may be amended from time to time by the mayor and council. Three (3)
copies of current ordinances amending the building code shall be kept on file
by the city clerk as public records and shall be kept available for public use
and inspection during regular office hours.
(Ord. No. 5531, § 2, 3-22-82; Ord. No. 10035, § 3, 9-7-04)
Sec. 6-37. Applicability of administrative and building codes.
Every new building and structure erected in or moved into the jurisdiction of
the city after June 30, 1992, shall conform to the applicable requirements of
the Building Safety Administrative Code adopted in section
6-1 and as amended, and to the requirements of the building code adopted in
section
6-34 and as amended. All additions, alterations, repairs, changes of use or
occupancy in all buildings or structures within the jurisdiction of the city
shall conform to the applicable requirements of the Building Safety
Administrative Code adopted in section
6-1 and as amended, and to the requirements of the building code adopted in
section
6-34 and as amended, applicable to new buildings, except as specifically
provided for therein. Every building and structure existing in the city after
June 30, 1992, shall conform to the requirements of the building code adopted
in section
6-34 and as amended, which expressly or necessarily require that they apply to
such existing buildings and structures, and to the requirements of the Building
Safety Administrative Code of the city, adopted in section
6-1 and as amended, applicable to existing buildings.
(Ord. No. 5531, § 2, 5-23-83; Ord. No. 5771, § 2, 5-23-83; Ord. No. 6000, § 1,
4-23-84; Ord. No. 6567, § 2, 11-10-86; Ord. No. 7179, § 2, 4-24-89; Ord. No.
7792, § 2, 4-13-92)
Sec. 6-38. Residential code adopted.
   The documents entitled "International Residential Code, 2024 Edition"
published by the International Code Council, with local amendments, a copy of
which amendments are attached to Ordinance No. 12213 as Exhibit "A" are hereby
adopted.
(Ord. No. 9491, § 2, 11-20-00; Ord. No. 9526, § 5, 3-19-01; Ord. No. 9813, § 2,
2-10-03; Ord. No. 10035, § 2, 9-7-04; Ord. No. 10142, § 1, 4-12-05; Ord. No.
10417, § 3, 6-12-07; Ord. No. 10579, § 2, 9-23-08; Ord. No. 10605, § 1 (Exh.
A), 11-25-08; Ord. No. 11042, § 2, 12-18-12, eff. 1-2-13; Ord. No. 11089, § 1
(Exh. A), 7-9-13; Ord. No. 11590, § 2, 10-9-18, eff. 1-1-19; Ord. No. 11844, §§
1-2, 6-22-21, eff. 7-22-21; Ord. No. 12009, § 2, 6-6-23, eff. 7-6-23; Ord. No.
12171, § 2, 6-3-25, eff. 1-1-26; Ord. No. 12213, § 2, 12-16-25, eff. 1-1-26) )
   Editor's note – Exhibit B is not printed herein but is on file in the office
of the city clerk and available for public inspection during regular business
hours.
Sec. 6-39. Reserved.
Sec. 6-40. Energy conservation code adopted.
   The document entitled the "International Energy Conservation Code, 2018
Edition" published by the International Code Council, with local amendments, a
copy of which amendments are attached to Ordinance No. 11590 as Exhibit "C" are
hereby adopted.
(Ord. No. 9491, § 3, 11-20-00; Ord. No. 9813, § 4, 2-10-03; Ord. No. 10178, §
1, 7-6-05; Ord. No. 10417, § 4, 6-12-07; Ord. No. 11042, § 3, 12-18-12, eff. 1-
2-13; Ord. No. 11590, § 3, 10-9-18, eff. 1-1-19)
   Editor's note – Exhibit C is not printed herein but is on file in the office
of the city clerk and available for public inspection during regular business
hours.
Secs. 6-41--6-65. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
EXISTING BUILDING CODE*
__________
*   Editor's note – Prior to the reenactment of Div. 2 by Ord. No. 10436, Ord.
No. 9816, § 1, adopted February 24, 2003, repealed Div. 2, §§
6-66--6-68, and enacted similar provisions set out in §§
16-12, 16-14 and 16-20--16-28. Former Div. 2 pertained to the dangerous
buildings code. See the Code Comparative Table.
__________
Sec. 6-66. Existing building code adopted.
   The documents entitled "International Existing Building Code, 2024 Edition"
published by the International Code Council, with local amendments, a copy of
which amendments are attached to Ordinance No. 12171 as Exhibit "B" are hereby
adopted.
(Ord. No. 10436, § 2, 7-10-07; Ord. No. 11042, § 4, 12-18-12, eff. 1-2-13; Ord.
No. 11590, § 4, 10-9-18, eff. 1-1-19; Ord. No. 12171, § 3, 6-3-25, eff. 1-1-26)
   Editor's note – Exhibit D is not printed herein but is on file in the office
of the city clerk and available for public inspection during regular business
hours.
Secs. 6-67--6-70. Reserved.
DIVISION 3.
RESERVED*
__________
   *Editor's note – Ord. No. 9816, § 2, adopted February 24, 2003, repealed
Div. 3, §§
6-71--6-73, and enacted similar provisions set out in new §§
16-11 and 16-12. Former Div. 3 pertained to the housing safety code. See the
Code Comparative Table.
__________
Secs. 6-71--6-80. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV.
ELECTRICITY*
__________
   *Editor's note – Ord. No. 5155, § 1, adopted May 27, 1980, repealed ch. 6,
art. IV, §§ 6-82--6-111, derived from Ord. No. 4688, § 2, adopted August 1,
1977; Ord. No. 4836, § 3, adopted June 26, 1978; § 2 enacted a new art. IV, §§
6-81--6-98. Subsequently, § 2 of Ord. No. 5338, adopted April 6, 1981,
designated §§ 6-81--6-100 as "Division 1. Electrical Code" of art. VI. Section
3 added new §§ 6-101--6-113 as div. 2. Subsequently, § 1 of Ord. No. 5442,
adopted September 28, 1981, repealed div. 1, §§ 6-81--6-98; and § 2 added a new
div. 1, §§ 6-81--6-87.
__________
DIVISION 1.
ELECTRICAL CODE*
__________
   *Cross reference – Technical division of administrative hearing office to
have exclusive jurisdiction over alleged violations of electrical code, §
28-4(1).
__________
Sec. 6-81. Electrical inspection supervisor--Office created.
The office of electrical inspection supervisor is established. The electrical
inspection supervisor shall be responsible to an under the authority of the
building safety administrator.
(Ord. No. 5442, § 2, 9-28-81)
Sec. 6-82. Same--Qualifications; assistants.
No person shall be appointed electrical inspection supervisor who shall not
possess the required minimum qualifications for that position as expressed in
the position classification plan of the city. The electrical inspection
supervisor shall be assisted by electrical inspectors who possess the required
minimum qualifications for their respective positions as are expressed in the
position classification plan of the city. The electrical inspection supervisor
may from time to time delegate to his assistants such of his authority as is
necessary or desirable.
(Ord. No. 5442, § 2, 9-28-81)
Sec. 6-83. Same--General duties.
The duties of the electrical inspection supervisor shall be to inspect the
installation of, and approve or condemn, all electrical wiring, fixtures,
apparatus, appliances, devices or equipment; enforce any and all regulations,
control types and classes of material and method, manner and workmanship for
the installation of wiring apparatus and other electrical equipment; approve or
disapprove the use of electrical materials or devices; inspect public and
private premises for electrical wiring, fixtures or other electrical apparatus;
give notice of defects in wiring, fixtures, appliances or equipment; receive
applications for issuing permits for electrical installations and repairs;
examine and approve plans and specifications for proposed electrical
installations or alterations, and confer and advise on necessary changes;
certify to compliance with plans and specifications on electrical work; make
such reports as shall be required from time to time and make any
recommendations to the building safety administrator which he may deem
practical in connection with this article or its enforcement.
(Ord. No. 5442, § 2, 9-28-81)
Sec. 6-84. Electrical code adopted.
   The document entitled "National Electrical Code, 2023 Edition" published by
the National Fire Protection Association, with local amendments, a copy of
which amendments are attached to Ordinance No. 12171 as Exhibit "H" are hereby
adopted.
(Ord. No. 5442, § 2, 9-28-81; Ord. No. 6106, § 1, 10-15-84; Ord. No. 6787, § 1,
9-14-87; Ord. No. 7504, § 1, 9-24-90; Ord. No. 8043, § 1, 5-10-93; Ord. No.
8750, § 1, 8-5-96; Ord. No. 9287, § 1, 9-27-99; Ord. No. 9812, § 1, 2-10-03;
Ord. No. 10417, § 5, 6-12-07; Ord. No. 11042, § 5, 12-18-12, eff. 1-2-13; Ord.
No. 11590, § 5, 10-9-18, eff. 1-1-19; Ord. No. 12171, § 4, 6-3-25, eff. 1-1-26)
   Editor's note – Exhibit E is not printed herein but is on file in the office
of the city clerk and available for public inspection during regular business
hours.
Sec. 6-85. Clerk to keep copies of electrical code.
Three (3) copies of the electrical code adopted in section
6-84 shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and are made public records
and shall be available for public use and inspection during regular office
hours.
(Ord. No. 5442, § 2, 9-28-81)
Sec. 6-86. Amendments to the electrical code.
The electrical code adopted in section
6-84 may be amended from time to time by the mayor and council. Three (3)
copies of current ordinances amending the electrical code shall be kept
available for public use and inspection during regular office hours.
(Ord. No. 5442, § 2, 9-28-81)
Sec. 6-87. Reserved.
   Editor's note – Section 6-87, declaring violation of this article unlawful,
derived from Ord. No. 5442, § 2, adopted September 28, 1981, was repealed by §
1 of Ord. No. 5717, adopted February 28, 1983. Penalty for violation of this
ch.
6 is now given in § 6.5.
Secs. 6-88--6-100. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
OUTDOOR LIGHTING CODE*
__________
*   Editor's note – Section 1 of Ord. No. 6344, adopted December 2, 1985,
repealed div. 1, §§ 6-101--6-120, derived from § 3 of Ord. No. 5338, adopted
April 6, 1981, entitled "Light Pollution Code." Section 2 of Ord. No. 6344
added a new div. 2, entitled "Outdoor lighting code," §§ 6-101--6-120. Section
4 adopts "The Tucson/Pima County Outdoor Lighting Code," exhibit A to the
ordinance, by reference. The complete text is not set out.
   Cross reference – Technical division of administrative hearing office to
have exclusive jurisdiction over alleged violations of outdoor lighting code, §
28-4(1).
__________
Sec. 6-101. Outdoor lighting code adopted.
   The document entitled "City of Tucson/Pima County Outdoor Lighting Code", a
copy of which is attached to Ordinance No. 10963 as Exhibit A is adopted as the
Outdoor Lighting Code for the City of Tucson, except for those provisions which
are designed for use by Pima County.
(Ord. No. 6344, § 2, 12-2-85; Ord. No. 6786, § 1, 9-14-87; Ord. No. 8210, § 1,
3-21-94; Ord. No. 10135, § 2, 3-22-05; Ord. No. 10963, § 2, 2-7-12)
Sec. 6-102. Clerk to keep copies of outdoor lighting code.
Three (3) copies of the outdoor lighting code adopted in section
6-101 shall be filed in the office of the county clerk and are made public
records and shall be available for public use and inspection during regular
office hours.
(Ord. No. 6344, § 2, 12-2-85)
Sec. 6-103. Amendments to outdoor lighting code.
The outdoor lighting code adopted in section
6-101 may be amended from time to time by the mayor and council. Three (3)
copies of current ordinances amending the outdoor lighting code shall be kept
on file by the city clerk as public records and shall be available for public
use and inspection during regular office hours.
(Ord. No. 6344, § 2, 12-2-85)
Sec. 6-104. Penalty.
It shall be a civil infraction for any person, firm or corporation to violate
any of the provisions of the Outdoor Lighting Code adopted in section
6-101. Each and every day during which any violation continues shall constitute
a separate offense. When a violation of this Code is determined, the following
penalty shall be imposed:
   (1)   A fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation. The imposition of a fine under this
Code shall not be suspended.
   (2)   Any other order deemed necessary in the discretion of the judge,
including correction or abatement of the violation.
(Ord. No. 10135, § 3, 3-22-05)
Secs. 6-105--6-120. Reserved.
ARTICLE V.
PLUMBING CODE*
__________
*   Editor's note – Ord. No. 5331, § 1, adopted May 11, 1981, repealed art. V,
§§ 6-123--6-150; and § 2 enacted a new art. V, §§ 6-121--6-126. Formerly, art.
V was derived from the 1953 Code, ch. 9, §§ 52, 53, 55--59, 61--65, 67--70, and
the following ordinances:
Ord. No. Date     Section
2127     3-20-60  1, 2
2356     10-15-62 1
2770     5-10-65  1, 2
3609     2-16-71  1, 2
3634     4-12-71  1
4253     10-14-74 1
4830     6-12-78  2, 3, 5
4836     6-26-78  4
 
   Cross References – Housing regulations, ch.
16; sewage and sewage disposal, ch.
24; water, ch.
27; technical division of administrative hearing office to have exclusive
jurisdiction over alleged violations of plumbing code, §
28-4(1).
__________
Sec. 6-121. Office of plumbing inspector established.
The office of plumbing inspector is established. The plumbing inspector shall
be responsible to, and under authority of, the building safety administrator.
(Ord. No. 5331, § 2, 5-11-81; Ord. No. 5775, § 2, 5-23-83)
Sec. 6-122. Qualifications of inspectors.
No person shall be appointed a plumbing inspector for the city who shall not
have had a minimum of five (5) years' practical experience. He shall also
possess the required minimum qualifications for such a position, as expressed
in the position classification plan of the city, as promulgated by the
personnel department of the city. He shall be familiar with the codes and
ordinances of the city relating to plumbing piping, fixtures and appliances.
(Ord. No. 5331, § 2, 5-11-81; Ord. No. 5775, § 2, 5-23-83)
Sec. 6-123. General duties of inspectors.
The duties of each plumbing inspector are to inspect all plumbing construction
work, plumbing installations, and renewals thereof in the city; to enforce
rules and regulations concerning plumbing installations of all kinds; and to
perform related duties as required by this article and the code adopted herein.
The plumbing inspector under the code or this article shall perform the
following duties: Inspect the installation of and approve or condemn all
plumbing piping, fixtures, apparatus, appliances, devices, equipment and
drainage work, for any and all purposes within the jurisdiction of the city;
enforce rules and regulations, control types and classes of material and the
method, manner and workmanship for the installation of plumbing equipment;
approve or disapprove the use of plumbing materials or devices; inspect public
and private premises for plumbing fixtures, or other apparatus; give notice of
defects in plumbing fixtures, appliances or equipment; receive applications for
issuing permits for plumbing installations and repairs; collect and account for
fees; examine and approve plans and specifications for proposed plumbing
installations or alterations, and confer and advise on necessary changes
thereto; certify to compliance with plans and specifications on plumbing work;
keep a complete record of all applications for permits, of all permits so
issued, and of all inspections made under each permit; make such reports as
shall be required from time to time and make any recommendations to the
building safety administrator which he may deem practical in connection with
this article and the code adopted in section
6-124, and the enforcement thereof.
(Ord. No. 5331, § 2, 5-11-81; Ord. No. 5775, § 2, 5-23-83)
Sec. 6-124. Plumbing code adopted.
   The document entitled "International Plumbing Code, 2024 Edition" published
by the International Code Council, with local amendments, a copy of which
amendments are attached to Ordinance No. 12171 as Exhibit "E" are hereby
adopted.
(Ord. No. 5331, § 2, 5-11-81; Ord. No. 5775, § 2, 5-23-83; Ord. No. 6571, § 1,
11-10-86; Ord. No. 7178, § 1, 4-24-89; Ord. No. 7796, § 1, 4-13-92; Ord. No.
8604, § 1, 11-20-95; Ord. No. 9491, § 4, 11-20-00; Ord. No. 9526, § 1, 3-19-01;
Ord. No. 10184, § 1, 9-7-05; Ord. No. 10436, § 1, 7-10-07; Ord. No. 11042, § 6,
12-18-12, eff. 1-2-13; Ord. No. 11590, § 6, 10-9-18, eff. 1-1-19; Ord. No.
12009, § 1, 6-6-23, eff. 7-6-23; Ord. No. 12171, § 5, 6-3-25, eff. 1-1-26)
   Editor's note – Exhibit F is not printed herein but is on file in the office
of the city clerk and available for public inspection during regular business
hours.
Sec. 6-125. Clerk to keep copies of plumbing code.
Three (3) copies of the plumbing code adopted in section
6-124 and three (3) copies of the "Manual of Backflow and Cross-Connection
Control," which is in part incorporated by reference in section 1003(q) of the
plumbing code, shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and are made
public records and shall be available for public use and inspection during
regular office hours.
(Ord. No. 5331, § 2, 5-11-81; Ord. No. 5775, § 2, 5-23-83)
Sec. 6-126. Amendments of plumbing code.
The plumbing code adopted in section
6-124 may be amended from time to time by the mayor and council. Three (3)
copies of current ordinances amending the plumbing code shall be kept on file
by the city clerk as public records and shall be kept available for public use
and inspection during regular office hours.
(Ord. No. 5331, § 2, 5-11-81; Ord. No. 5775, § 2, 5-23-83)
Secs. 6-127--6-159. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI.
MECHANICAL CODE*
__________
*   Editor's note – Section 1 of Ord. No. 5467, adopted November 16, 1981,
repealed former art. VI, §§ 6-160--6-169, derived from 1953 Code, Ch. 9, §§ 71-
-77; Ord. No. 2353, § 2, adopted October 15, 1962; and Ord. No. 4777, §§ 2--4,
adopted March 27, 1978. Section 2 adopted a new art. VI, §§ 6-161--6-167.
   Section 3, not specifically amendatory of the Code, prescribes a penalty of
$1.000.00 or 90 days' imprisonment, or both. This section was subsequently
repealed by § 1 of Ord. No. 5718. See the editor's note to §
6-167.
   Cross reference – Technical division of administrative hearing office to
have exclusive jurisdiction over alleged violations of mechanical code, §
28-4(1).
__________
Sec. 6-160. Reserved.
Sec. 6-161. Office of mechanical inspection supervisor established.
The office of mechanical inspection supervisor is established. The mechanical
inspection supervisor shall be responsible to and under the authority of the
building safety administrator.
(Ord. No. 5467, § 2, 11-16-81)
Sec. 6-162. Qualifications; assistants.
No person shall be appointed mechanical inspection supervisor who shall not
possess the required minimum qualifications for that position as expressed in
the position classification plan of the city. The mechanical inspection
supervisor shall be assisted by mechanical inspectors who possess the required
minimum qualifications for their respective positions as are expressed in the
position classification plan of the city. The mechanical inspection supervisor
may from time to time delegate to his assistants such of his authority as is
necessary or desirable.
(Ord. No. 5467, § 2, 11-16-81)
Sec. 6-163. General duties.
The duties of the mechanical inspection supervisor shall be to inspect the
installation of, and approve or condemn all mechanical equipment regulated by
the adopted City of Tucson Mechanical Code; examine and approve plans and
specifications for proposed installations or alterations, and confer and advise
on necessary changes; certify to compliance with plans and specifications on
mechanical work; make such reports as shall be required from time to time and
make any recommendations to the building safety administrator which he may deem
practical in connection with this article or its enforcement.
(Ord. No. 5467, § 2, 11-16-81)
Sec. 6-164. Mechanical code adopted.
   The documents entitled "International Mechanical Code, 2024 Edition"
published by the International Code Council, with local amendments, a copy of
which amendments are attached to Ordinance No. 12171 as Exhibit "D" are hereby
adopted.
(Ord. No. 5467, § 2, 11-16-81; Ord. No. 5774, § 1, 5-23-83; Ord. No. 5825, § 1,
8-1-83; Ord. No. 6570, § 1, 11-10-86; Ord. No. 7183, § 1, 4-24-89; Ord. No.
7795, § 1, 4-13-92; Ord. No. 8605, § 1, 11-20-95; Ord. No. 9491, § 5, 11-20-00;
Ord. No. 9526, § 2, 3-19-01; Ord. No. 10182, § 1, 9-7-05; Ord. No. 10436, § 3,
7-10-07; Ord. No. 11042, § 7, 12-18-12, eff. 1-2-13; Ord. No. 11590, § 7, 10-9-
18, eff. 1-1-19; Ord. No. 12171, § 6, 6-3-25, eff. 1-1-26)
   Editor's note – Exhibit G is not printed herein but is on file in the office
of the city clerk and available for public inspection during regular business
hours.
Sec. 6-165. Clerk to keep copies of mechanical code.
Three (3) copies of the mechanical code adopted in section
6-164 shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and are made public
records and shall be available for public use and inspection during regular
office hours.
(Ord. No. 5467, § 2, 11-16-81)
Sec. 6-166. Amendments of the mechanical code.
The mechanical code adopted in section
6-164 may be amended from time to time by the mayor and council. Three (3)
copies of current ordinances amending the mechanical code shall be kept on file
by the city clerk as public records and shall be kept available for public use
and inspection during regular office hours.
(Ord. No. 5467, § 2, 11-16-81)
Sec. 6-167. Fuel gas code adopted.
   The document entitled "International Fuel Gas Code, 2024 Edition" published
by the International Code Council, with local amendments, a copy of which
amendments are attached to Ordinance No. 12171 as Exhibit "C" is hereby
adopted.
(Ord. No. 10183, § 1, 9-7-05; Ord. No. 10417, § 6, 6-12-07; Ord. No. 11042, §
8, 12-18-12, eff. 1-2-13; Ord. No. 11590, § 8, 10-9-18, eff. 1-1-19; Ord. No.
12171, § 7, 6-3-25, eff. 1-1-26)
   Editor's note – Exhibit H is not printed herein but is on file in the office
of the city clerk and available for public inspection during regular business
hours.
Secs. 6-168--6-170. Reserved.
ARTICLE VII.
SOLAR SYSTEM CODE*
__________
*   Cross reference – Technical division of administrative hearing office to
have exclusive jurisdiction over alleged violations of solar system code, §
28-4(1).
__________
Sec. 6-171. Solar system code adopted.
The document entitled "Solar System Code," a copy of which is attached to
Ordinance No. 5553 as exhibit A, is adopted by reference as the Solar System
Code of the City of Tucson.
(Ord. No. 5553, § 1, 5-3-82)
   Editor's note – Exhibit A is not printed herein but is on file with the
original ordinance in the offices of the city clerk.
Sec. 6-172. Clerk to keep copies of the solar system code.
Three (3) copies of the solar system code adopted in section
6-171 shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and hereby are made public
records and shall be available for public use and inspection during regular
office hours.
(Ord. No. 5553, § 1, 5-3-82)
Sec. 6-173. Amendments to the solar system code.
The solar system code adopted in section
6-171 may be amended from time to time by the mayor and council. Three (3)
copies of current ordinances amending the solar system code shall be kept on
file by the city clerk as public records.
(Ord. No. 5553, § 1, 5-3-82)
Sec. 6-174. Reserved.
   Editor's note – Section 6-174, declaring violation of this article unlawful,
derived from Ord. No. 5553, § 1, adopted May 3, 1982, was repealed by § 1 of
Ord. No. 5718, adopted February 28, 1983. Penalty for violation of this ch.
6 is now found in §
6-5.
Secs. 6-175--6-180. Reserved.
ARTICLE VIII.
RAINWATER COLLECTION AND DISTRIBUTION REQUIREMENTS.
Sec. 6-181. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms are defined as follows:
   Commercial development means any new non-residential development that is
intended to be used primarily for commercial activities, and is subject to the
requirements of the International Building Code.
   Rainwater means water that has fallen as rain and contains little dissolved
mineral matter, or any other form of precipitation.
(Ord. No. 10597, § 1, 10-14-08)
Sec. 6-182. Rainwater harvesting plan.
   A.   All commercial development and site plans submitted after June 1, 2010,
shall include a rainwater harvesting plan. The rainwater harvesting plan shall
include a landscape water budget and an implementation plan.
   1.   The landscape water budget shall calculate the estimated volume of
water required yearly for all site landscaping detailed in the development and/
or landscape plan.
   2.   The implementation plan shall show how any combination of capture,
conveyance, storage, and distribution will be utilized on-site to harvest
rainwater. Implementation plans shall comply with applicable development
standards for water harvesting applications.
   3.   The implementation plan shall also provide for water metering of all
on-site landscape water through either:
   (a)   A separate water meter connected to the main water supply; or,
   (b)   An irrigation sub-meter.
   B.   The rainwater harvesting plan shall be submitted concurrently with the
site plan and landscape plan.
   C.   The director of the development services department may authorize
alternative compliance with development standards when conditions of
topography, site soils or ratio of landscape area to total site area would make
strict adherence to standard provisions unreasonable and the alternative
compliance advances the spirit of this article.
(Ord. No. 10597, § 1, 10-14-08)
Sec. 6-183. Construction of rainwater harvesting system; minimum landscape
budget requirements; request for rainwater harvesting plan revision.
   A.   All new commercial development built pursuant to a development plan
submitted after June 1, 2010, shall include a rainwater harvesting system
constructed according to an approved rainwater harvesting plan.
   B.   No later than three (3) years from the date of issuance of a final
certificate of occupancy, and for every year thereafter, fifty (50) percent of
the estimated yearly landscape water budget shall be provided by rainwater
harvested on-site by a rainwater harvesting system constructed pursuant to an
approved rainwater harvesting plan. The fifty (50) percent landscape budget
provision shall not apply in any calendar year in which the annual
precipitation has fallen below the amount determined in the applicable
development standards.
   C.   Within three (3) years from the date of issuance of a final certificate
of occupancy, the applicant, or a successor in interest, may request to revise
the rainwater harvesting plan. The request shall be submitted to the director
of development services. The request shall be granted only if one of the
following is true:
   1.   A mathematical or engineering error was made in the calculation of
water required for on-site landscaping.
   2.   A variance related to landscape requirements, and which impacts the
landscape water budget, is obtained subsequent to the approval of a submitted
rainwater harvesting plan.
   3.   Additional data on site conditions or performance relevant to the
subject site has been obtained, and results indicated a needed change in water
budget calculations in the rainwater harvesting plan.
(Ord. No. 10597, § 1, 10-14-08)
Sec. 6-184. Restrictions on installation of rainwater harvesting system
invalid.
   A.   Any covenant, restriction or condition contained in any deed, contract,
security agreement or other instrument affecting the transfer or sale of, or
any interest in, real property which effectively prohibits the installation or
use of a rainwater harvesting system is void and unenforceable.
   B.   A deed, contract, security agreement or other instrument affecting the
transfer or sale of, or any interest in, real property entered into before June
1, 2010, shall not be subject to the provisions of this section.
(Ord. No. 10597, § 1, 10-14-08)
Sec. 6-185. Exceptions.
   A.   That portion of a development which includes the following land uses
shall be excepted from the fifty (50) percent rainwater harvesting
requirements:
   1.   Public parks and botanical gardens;
   2.   Outdoor recreation facilities, whether under public or private
ownership, for public use, schools, and day care centers;
   3.   The playing areas of golf courses;
   4.   Cemeteries;
   5.   Natural open space;
   6.   Crop production.
(Ord. No. 10597, § 1, 10-14-08)
Sec. 6-186. Annual report.
   A.   A rainwater harvesting landscape water-use budget report shall be
submitted annually by the owner or owner's agent to Tucson Water. The report
shall include location and ownership information for the property, monthly
rainfall totals collected from an on-site gauge or the SAHRA rain gauge closest
to the site, monthly site water use data, and monthly relevant sub- meter or
service meter data.
(Ord. No. 10597, § 1, 10-14-08)
Sec. 6-187. Violation.
   A.   Failure to meet the fifty (50) percent rainwater harvesting requirement
for landscape irrigation shall constitute water wastage, and notwithstanding
any other provision of this section shall constitute a violation of section
27-15 of this Code.
   B.   The director of development services or the Director of Tucson Water
may require that any development not meeting the landscape budget requirements
conduct and submit a landscape irrigation audit and report the results with the
audit and reporting performed by a third party auditor and paid for by the
property owner.
   C.   The imposition of civil liability shall not preclude the city from
taking any other enforcement actions permitted under the code.
(Ord. No. 10597, § 1, 10-14-08)
Sec. 6-188. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall apply to construction built pursuant to
permits issued after June 1, 2010.
(Ord. No. 10597, § 1, 10-14-08)
Secs. 6-189, 6-190. Reserved.
ARTICLE IX.
SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE
Sec. 6-191. Swimming pool and spa code adopted.
   The document entitled "International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2024
Edition" published by the International Code Council, with local amendments, a
copy of which amendments are attached to Ordinance No. 12171 as Exhibit "G" is
hereby adopted.
(Ord. No. 11590, § 9, 10-9-18, eff. 1-1-19; Ord. No. 12171, § 8, 6-3-25, eff.
1-1-26)
   Editor’s note – Exhibit I is not printed herein but is on file in the office
of the city clerk and available for public inspection during regular business
hours.
Sec. 6-192. Clerk to keep copies of the swimming pool and spa code.
   Three (3) copies of the swimming pool and spa code adopted in section
6-191 shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and hereby are made public
records and shall be available for public use and inspection during regular
office hours.
(Ord. No. 11590, § 10, 10-9-18, eff. 1-1-19)
Sec. 6-193. Amendments to the swimming pool and spa code.
   The swimming pool and spa code adopted in section
6-191 may be amended from time to time by the mayor and council. Three (3)
copies of the current ordinances amending the swimming pool and spa code shall
be kept on file by the city clerk as public records.
(Ord. No. 11590, § 11, 10-9-18, eff. 1-1-19)
Chapter 7
BUSINESSES REGULATED*
__________
*   Cross References: Beekeeping regulated, §
11-3; dance halls regulated, §
11-15; drinking establishments regulated, §§
11-17, 11-18; filling stations prohibited on a portion of Congress Street, §
11-21; guest register required for hotels, rooming houses, motels, §
11-26; license and privilege taxes generally, ch. 19; bond required for
transient merchants, §
19-27; planning and zoning generally, ch.
23.
__________
   Editor’s note: Pursuant to Resolution 23599, adopted April 18, 2023, the
city finds that Regulatory Requirements, as well as any other city law, rule,
regulation, practice or policy that falls within the definition of
"occupational licensing requirement" in A.R.S. § 9-842, is necessary to protect
the public health, safety, and welfare. Municipal Regulatory Requirements,
rules, regulations, practices, and policies are hereby ratified and affirmed
and will continue in full force and effect in accordance with their terms until
modified by action of the mayor and council or other appropriate city official.
Art. I.   Auctions and Auctioneers, §§ 7-1--7-25
Art. II.   Peddlers, §§ 7-26--7-61
Art. III.   Fortunetellers, §§ 7-62--7-79
Art. IV.   Going-Out-of-Business, Fire, Etc., Sales, §§ 7-80--7-96
Art. V.   Pawnbrokers and Secondhand Dealers, §§ 7-97--7-116
Art. VI.   Escorts and Escort Bureaus, §§ 7-117--7-129
Art. VII.   Massage Establishments, §§ 7-130--7-159
Art. VIII.   Drive-In Restaurants, §§ 7-160--7-200
Art. IX.   Swap Meets, §§ 7-201--7-205.1
Art. X.   Adult Entertainment Enterprises and Establishments, §§ 7-206--7-218
Art. XI.   Reserved
Art. XII.   Adult Care Homes and Facilities, §§ 7-219--7-299
Art. XIII.   Street Fairs, §§ 7-300--7-310
Art. XIV.   Vending Machines, §§ 7-311--7-349
Art. XV.   Dance Halls, §§ 7-350--7-385
Art. XVI.   Community Special Event, §§ 7-386--7-409
Art. XVII.   Late Night Retail Establishments, §§ 7-410--7-424
Art. XVIII.   General Provisions, § 7-425
Art. XIX.   Tobacco Retail Establishments, §§ 7-426 – 7-434
Art. XX.   Hotels, §§ 7-440--7-448
Art. XXI.   Alarm Companies and Users, §§ 7-449--7-479
   Div. 1. Alarm Company Licenses, §§ 7-449--7-464
   Div. 2. Alarm User Registration and Fees, §§ 7-465--7-479
Art. XXII.   Merchants' Disclosure Requirements, §§ 7-480--7-489
Art. XXIII.   Ice Cream Truck Vendors, §§ 7-490--7-500
Art. XXIV.   Lessors of Commercial Real Property Disclosure Requirements, §§ 7-
501--7-504
Art. XXV.   Pet Stores and Pet Dealers, § 7-505 – 7-509
Art. XXVI.   Third-Party Restaurant Delivery Services, §§ 7-510 – 7-513
Art. XXVII.   Towing Carriers, §§ 7-514 – 7-528
Article I. Auctions and Auctioneers
Sec.
7-1.   Definitions.
Sec.
7-2.   Exemptions from article.
Sec.
7-3.   Application for auction house license.
Sec.
7-4.   Application for class B license.
Sec.
7-5.   Bond required for class B and auction house license.
Sec.
7-6.   Investigation of applications; issuance of licenses.
Sec.
7-7.   Notification to fire chief required of possession of hazardous
substances; duty to update; hazardous substances defined.
Sec.
7-8.   Auction house or auction prohibited in connection with or on premises of
wholesale or retail businesses; exception.
Sec.
7-9.   Sales of merchant's stock on hand--Duration; to be bona fide.
Sec.
7-10.   Same--Application.
Sec.
7-11.   "Capping", "boosting", false bidding prohibited.
Secs.
7-12--7-15.   Reserved.
Sec.
7-16.   Advertising.
Secs.
7-17--7-25.   Reserved.
Article II. Peddlers
Sec.
7-26.   Definitions.
Sec.
7-27.   License requirements.
Sec.
7-28.   Insurance.
Sec.
7-29.   Unlawful activities.
Sec.
7-30.   Setback requirements.
Sec.
7-31.   Operating before or after required closing time.
Sec.
7-32.   License revocation.
Sec.
7-33.   Violations and penalties.
Sec.
7-34.   Enforcement authority.
Sec.
7-35.   Jurisdiction of court.
Sec.
7-36.   Commencement of civil infraction proceedings.
Sec.
7-37.   Appeal of court decision.
Secs.
7-38--7-61.   Reserved.
Article III. Fortunetellers
Sec.
7-62.   Definitions.
Sec.
7-63.   Approval and license required.
Sec.
7-64.   Investigation of applicants; application for license; fee; issuance of
license.
Sec.
7-65.   Revocation of license.
Sec.
7-66.   Persons regulated.
Sec.
7-67.   License required for each place of business; scope of licenses.
Sec.
7-68.   Transferability of licenses; fee.
Sec.
7-69.   Reserved.
Secs.
7-70--7-79.   Reserved.
Article IV. Going-Out-of-Business, Fire, Etc., Sales
Sec.
7-80.   Definitions.
Sec.
7-81.   Exemptions from article.
Sec.
7-82.   Permit required.
Sec.
7-83.   Application for permit; fee required.
Sec.
7-84.   Issuance, renewal, effect of permit.
Sec.
7-85.   Rules and regulations governing sales.
Sec.
7-86.   Disposal at auction; approval required.
Sec.
7-87.   Revocation of permit for violations.
Sec.
7-88.   Revocation procedure--Appeal.
Sec.
7-89.   Requirements for permittee sign.
Secs.
7-90--7-96.   Reserved.
Article V. Pawnbrokers and Secondhand Dealers
Sec.
7-97.   Definitions.
Sec.
7-98.   Duty to report receipt of articles to police.
Sec.
7-99.   Contents of report to police.
Sec.
7-100.   Form of reports; when due; imposition of fee.
Sec.
7-101.   Requirements; record of transactions; police department hold on
property.
Sec.
7-102.   Prohibited acts.
Sec.
7-103.   Violations, penalties.
Sec.
7-104.   Scope.
Sec.
7-105.   Property included.
Sec.
7-106.   Initiation of petition.
Sec.
7-107.   Service of the petition; notice of hearing.
Sec.
7-108.   Claimant's rights.
Sec.
7-109.   Hearing officer.
Sec.
7-110.   Conduct of hearing.
Sec.
7-111.   Judicial review.
Sec.
7-112.   Release of property.
Sec.
7-113.   Limited effect of hearing officer decision.
Sec.
7-114.   Provisions severable.
Sec.
7-115.   Grounds for denial and revocation of license.
Sec.
7-116.   Revocation hearing.
Article VI. Escorts and Escort Bureaus
Sec.
7-117.   Definitions.
Sec.
7-118.   Licensing of escorts and escort bureaus required; unlawful acts.
Sec.
7-119.   License application--Required; fee.
Sec.
7-120.   Same--Contents.
Sec.
7-121.   Grounds for denial of license.
Sec.
7-122.   Place of business; license nontransferable.
Sec.
7-123.   Licensee records and reports required.
Sec.
7-124.   Revocation of license; grounds.
Sec.
7-125.   Procedure for revocation.
Sec.
7-126.   Penalty.
Secs.
7-127--7-129.   Reserved.
Article VII. Massage Establishments
Sec.
7-130.   Statement of intent.
Sec.
7-131.   Definitions.
Sec.
7-132.   Reserved.
Sec.
7-133.   Licensing of massage establishments required.
Sec.
7-134.   New license application; fee.
Sec.
7-135.   Same--Contents.
Sec.
7-136.   License application investigation.
Sec.
7-137.   Massage establishment license; inspections.
Sec. 7-138.   Massage therapist license; special requirements.
Sec.
7-139.   Criminal record as grounds for denial.
Sec.
7-140.   Display of license.
Sec.
7-141.   Change of location or employment.
Sec.
7-142.   Renewal.
Sec.
7-143.   Sale, transfer or expansion.
Sec.
7-144.   Other unlawful activities; general penalty.
Sec.
7-145.   Revocation of license; grounds.
Sec.
7-146.   Denial or revocation of license; appeal.
Sec.
7-147.   Applicability of regulations to existing businesses.
Sec.
7-148.   Reserved.
Sec.
7-149.   Reserved.
Sec.
7-150.   Finance director may formulate rules.
Sec.
7-151.   Administrative rules.
Secs.
7-152--7-159.   Reserved.
Article VIII. Drive-In Restaurants
Sec.
7-160.   Definitions and rules of construction.
Sec.
7-161.   License required.
Sec.
7-162.   Application for license required; form and contents.
Sec.
7-163.   Plat or drawing to accompany application.
Sec.
7-164.   Application fee.
Sec.
7-165.   Bond or liability insurance required.
Sec.
7-166.   Standards for issuing license.
Sec.
7-167.   Duration, scope, transfer of licenses.
Sec.
7-168.   Compliance with article required.
Sec.
7-169.   Licensee to maintain quiet and good order.
Sec.
7-170.   Noise, other disturbances by patrons prohibited.
Sec.
7-171.   Refuse, waste to be placed in containers; littering prohibited.
Sec.
7-172.   General cleanliness of premises; refuse containers required; disposal
of refuse by licensee.
Sec.
7-173.   Sales from windows, other openings.
Sec.
7-174.   Access required.
Sec.
7-175.   Illumination required.
Sec.
7-176.   Paving or treatment of parking area.
Sec.
7-177.   Barrier or walls required.
Sec.
7-178.   License additional to other licenses.
Sec.
7-179.   Revocation of license authorized; grounds.
Sec.
7-180.   Procedure for license revocation.
Secs.
7-181--7-200.   Reserved.
Article IX. Swap Meets
Sec.
7-201.   Definitions.
Sec.
7-202.   Unlawful practices of swap meet proprietor.
Sec.
7-202.1.   Swap meet proprietor license application.
Sec.
7-203.   Unlawful practices of swap meet vendor.
Sec.
7-204.   Regulations.
Sec.
7-205.   Administration.
Sec.
7-205.1.   Penalty.
Article X. Adult Entertainment Enterprises and Establishments
Sec.
7-206.   Purpose and intent.
Sec.
7-207.   Definitions.
Sec.
7-208.   Exempt activities.
Sec.
7-209.   Licensing required; expiration; annual renewal; unlawful acts.
Sec.
7-210.   License application procedure and fees; renewal procedure and fees;
hearing; appeal.
Sec.
7-211.   License application procedure; renewal; contents.
Sec.
7-212.   Grounds for denial of license.
Sec.
7-213.   Place of business, license nontransferable, available for inspection,
spacing requirements set, exemption.
Sec.
7-214.   Licensee records and reports required.
Sec.
7-215.   Revocation of license; grounds.
Sec.
7-216.   Revocation hearing.
Sec.
7-217.   Unlawful activities; posting required.
Sec.
7-218.   Minimum mandatory penalties, subsequent convictions.
Article XI. Reserved
Article XII. Adult Care Homes and Facilities
Sec.
7-219.   License for adult care homes and adult care facility required.
Sec.
7-220.   Adult care license application; information required.
Sec.
7-221.   Adult care license; inspection required.
Sec.
7-222.   Adult care license; special requirements.
Sec.
7-223.   Annual fee.
Sec.
7-224.   Violations declared a civil infraction.
Secs.
7-225--7-299.   Reserved.
Article XIII. Street Fairs
Sec.
7-300.   Definitions.
Sec.
7-301.   Street fair vendors.
Sec.
7-302.   Animals prohibited; exceptions.
Sec.
7-303.   Violation; penalties.
Sec.
7-304--7-310.   Reserved.
Article XIV. Vending Machines
Sec.
7-311.   License and registration required.
Sec.
7-312.   Gambling devices not permitted.
Sec.
7-313.   Application for license and registration.
Sec.
7-314.   Application fee.
Sec.
7-315.   Investigation.
Sec.
7-316.   Identification marks and numbers.
Sec.
7-317.   Seizure of machines.
Sec.
7-318.   Revocation of license.
Sec.
7-319.   Merchandise vending devices exempted.
Secs.
7-320--7-349.   Reserved.
Article XV. Dance Halls
Sec.
7-350.   Definitions.
Sec.
7-351.   License required.
Sec.
7-352.   License application.
Sec.
7-353.   Types of licenses; fees.
Sec.
7-354.   Grounds for denial of license.
Sec.
7-355.   Place of business; license non-transferable, available for inspection;
license posted.
Sec.
7-356.   Revocation of license; grounds.
Sec.
7-357.   Revocation hearing.
Sec.
7-358.   Age restrictions.
Sec.
7-359.   Location supervisors.
Sec.
7-360.   Notification of hours of operation; prohibited operation during
certain hours.
Sec.
7-361.   Liquor establishments; cigarette machines and sales.
Sec.
7-362.   Prohibited activities.
Sec.
7-363.   Additional responsibilities; responsibility for patron conduct.
Sec.
7-364.   Penalty; violation declared a nuisance; assessment of administrative
charge.
Sec.
7-365.   After hours operation.
Sec.
7-366.   Authority of the chief of police; security; closure of operations.
Sec.
7-367.   Provisions severable.
Secs.
7-368--7-400.   Reserved.
Article XVI. Community Special Events
Sec.
7-401.   Regulated.
Secs.
7-402--7-409.   Reserved.
Article XVII. Late Night Retail Establishments
Sec.
7-410.   Definitions.
Sec.
7-411.   Required interior safety and security measures; deadline for
compliance.
Sec.
7-412.   Required exterior lighting; deadline for compliance.
Sec.
7-413.   Non-compliance unlawful; two or more violations good cause for
revocation of occupational license.
Sec.
7-414.   Promulgation of regulations.
Secs.
7-415--7-424.   Reserved.
Art. XVIII. General Provisions
Sec.
7-425.   Fingerprinting procedures.
Article XIX. Tobacco Retail Establishments
Sec.
7-426.   Purpose and intent.
Sec.
7-427.   Definitions.
Sec.
7-428
.   Tobacco retailing – Generally.
Sec.
7-429.   Accessibility of tobacco products.
Sec.
7-430.   Minimum legal sales age for tobacco products.
Sec.
7-431.   Signage.
Sec.
7-432.   Violation – Penalty.
Sec.
7-433.   Applicability of other laws.
Sec.
7-434.   Hearing upon suspension or revocation by the department.
Sec.
7-435.   License for smoke shop required.
Sec.
7-436.   Smoke shop license application; information required.
Secs.
7-437    Hookah bars — Special requirements.
Secs. 7-438 – 7-439. Reserved.
Article XX. Hotels
Sec.
7-440.   Definitions.
Sec.
7-441.   Guest register required; guest identification required.
Sec.
7-442.   Limitation on consecutive rentals.
Sec.
7-443.   Notification to licensee of violation by employee.
Sec.
7-444.   Suspension of business license; grounds; penalties.
Sec.
7-445.   Hearing upon suspension.
Sec.
7-446.   Operating on a suspended license.
Secs.
7-447--7-448.   Reserved.
Article XXI. Alarm Companies and Users
Division 1. Alarm Company Licenses
Sec.
7-449.   Applicability.
Sec.
7-450.   Definitions.
Sec.
7-451.   License required.
Sec.
7-452.   Types of licenses; reciprocity.
Sec.
7-453.   Alarm business license applications; contents.
Sec.
7-454.   Alarm agent license applications.
Sec.
7-455.   Background investigation; fingerprints.
Sec.
7-456.   Fees; display of licenses.
Sec.
7-457.   Renewal of license.
Sec.
7-458.   Issuance; grounds for denial; petition for review.
Sec.
7-459.   Suspension or revocation; grounds.
Sec.
7-460.   Suspension or revocation procedure; hearing.
Sec.
7-461.   Suspension or revocation; notice to reciprocal licensors.
Sec.
7-462.   Application after denial, suspension or revocation of license.
Sec.
7-463.   Termination and cancellation of license; notice.
Sec.
7-464.   Violation.
Division 2. Alarm User Registration and Fees
Sec.
7-465.   Alarm administration.
Sec.
7-466.   Alarm business duties.
Sec.
7-467.   Alarm user's and proprietor alarm owner duties.
Sec.
7-468.   Activation for unauthorized purposes.
Sec.
7-469.   Shutting off after sounding alarm.
Sec.
7-470.   Automatic or prerecorded messages or signals.
Sec.
7-471.   Confidentiality.
Sec.
7-472.   Government immunity
Sec.
7-473.   Grace period.
Sec.
7-474.   Alarm user registration.
Sec.
7-475.   Excessive false alarms/failure to register.
Sec.
7-476.   Assessment petition.
Sec.
7-477.   Suspension of response.
Sec.
7-478.   Reinstatement.
Sec.
7-479.   Alarm user awareness class.
Article XXII. Merchants' Disclosure Requirements
Sec.
7-480.   Requiring merchants to make certain disclosures related to the sale of
motorized skateboards and motorized play vehicles; penalty.
Sec.
7-481.   Requiring merchants to make certain disclosures related to the sale of
motorized bicycles or tricycles; penalty.
Secs.
7-482--7-489.   Reserved.
Article XXIII. Ice Cream Truck Vendors
Sec.
7-490.   Definitions.
Sec.
7-491.   License requirements and application procedures.
Sec.
7-492.   Appeal procedures.
Sec.
7-493.   Display of license.
Sec.
7-494.   Penalties.
Sec.
7-495.   Separate license required to operate in city parks and other city
property.
Secs.
7-496--7-500.   Reserved.
Article XXIV. Lessors of Commercial Real Property Disclosure Requirements
Sec.
7-501.   Definitions.
Sec.
7-502.   Disclosure required.
Sec.
7-503.   Exemptions.
Sec.
7-504.   Violation declared a civil infraction.
Article XXV. Pet Stores and Pet Dealers
Sec.
7-505.   Pet stores and pet dealers; definitions; prohibitions on dog and cat
purchases; recordkeeping; and penalties.
Secs.
7-506 – 7-509.   Reserved.
Article XXVI. Third-Party Restaurant Delivery Services
Sec.
7-510.    Definitions.
Sec.
7-511.    Advertisement of services or delivery for non-partnered restaurants
prohibited.
Sec.
7-512.    Commission fees not to exceed 15% during time of declared emergency;
exclusion of certain restaurants.
Sec.
7-513.    Penalties.
Article XXVII. Towing Carriers
Sec.
7-514.    Definitions.
Sec.
7-515.   Applicability.
Sec.
7-516.   Private parking areas-generally.
Sec.
7-517.   Required signs.
Sec.
7-518.   Exemption from sign requirements.
Sec.
7-519.   Permission to tow required.
Sec.
7-520.   Photographic evidence of parking violation required.
Sec.
7-521.   Notice to Police Department required.
Sec.
7-522.   Staging prohibited.
Sec.
7-523.   Reasonable care required.
Sec.
7-524.   Release of motor vehicles.
Sec.
7-525.   Maximum charge for towing.
Sec.
7-526.   No charge for incomplete service call.
Sec.
7-527.   Violations.
Sec.
7-528.   Penalties.
ARTICLE I.
AUCTIONS AND AUCTIONEERS
Sec. 7-1. Definitions.
   Sec. 7-1(1). Auctioneers--Class A, as used in this article, means any person
by whom the outcry of the sale of any real estate, livestock or secondhand
goods, wares or merchandise at public action is made.
   Sec. 7-1(2). Auctioneers--Class B, as used in this article, means any person
by whom the outcry of the sales of any property other than real estate,
livestock or secondhand goods, wares or merchandise at public auction is made,
or by whom the outcry of the sale of other property together with any real
estate, livestock or secondhand goods, wares or merchandise at public auction
is made.
   Sec. 7-1(3). Auction house, as used in this article, means a place where
sales of household goods, personal property or interest therein, including new
or secondhand goods, wares or merchandise other than new silverware, jewelry or
precious stones, at auction are conducted as an established business within the
city limits.
(1953 Code, ch. 5, § 1)
Sec. 7-2. Exemptions from article.
Nothing contained in this article shall apply to any sale made upon execution
or by virtue of any process issued by a court, nor to any sale made by any
public officer in his official capacity required to be made under the laws of
the United States or of the state or under the Charter of the city, nor to any
sale of property by any social or charitable organization for the purpose of
raising funds to promote or further its objects, or for any public purpose
whatsoever.
(1953 Code, Ch. 5, § 14)
Sec. 7-3. Application for auction house license.
Each applicant for an auction house license shall specify the location to the
place of business in the city where the applicant proposes to conduct the
auction house. The application must be accompanied by a bond, in the sum of
five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) to be conditioned and in the form as provided
in section
7-5. The application shall be signed and verified by the applicant and shall
specify his name and address, the length of his residence in the city, the
location of his last place of business, and the name and character of such
business, and the length of time he was engaged therein, and the names and
addresses of three (3) persons residing within the city as references. An
application for a license hereunder shall be accompanied by a fee of fifty
dollars ($50.00). A single auction house license shall cover auctions conducted
by auctioneer house licensees at various locations throughout the city.
(1953 Code, ch. 5, § 2; Ord. No. 7434, § 1, 6-18-90)
Sec. 7-4. Application for class B license.
When an application is for a class B license, it shall specify the store or
place in the city where the applicant proposes to conduct an auction sale and
the owner and the character of the property to be sold. Such application must
be accompanied by a bond conditioned and in the form as provided in section 17-
5. An application for a license hereunder shall be accompanied by a fee of
fifty dollars ($50.00).
(1953 Code, ch. 5, § 3; Ord. No. 7434, § 2, 6-18-90)
Sec. 7-5. Bond required for class B and auction house license.
The bond required to be filed with the application for an auctioneer class B
and an auction house license shall be in the sum of five thousand dollars
($5,000.00) payable to the city and executed by two (2) or more good and
sufficient sureties or by a surety company qualified to execute surety bonds in
the state, and shall be approved by the director of finance. Such bonds shall
be joint and several and conditioned that the principal in the bond will
faithfully conform to each and all ordinances of the city then in force or
thereafter adopted, relating to auction sales of the business of auctioneers.
The principal and surety or sureties named in such bond shall be jointly and
severally bound unto any and every person aggrieved or damaged by any breach of
the condition of the bond; and the bond shall not be void upon the first
recovery but may be sued and recovered upon from time to time until the whole
penalty is exhausted; and the life obligation of such bond length of time as
such license remains in force and effect and for ninety (90) days thereafter.
(1953 Code, ch. 5, § 4; Ord. No. 7434, § 3, 6-18-90)
Sec. 7-6. Investigation of applications; issuance of licenses.
Alter the application and bond have been made and filed, the license inspector
shall make an investigation of the statements and references contained in the
application; and if satisfied that the statements are true, and that the
applicant is a fit and proper person to carry on such business, the license
inspector shall recommend that a license be granted; and there shall be issued
to the applicant either a class A, class B or auction house license to do
business as in the case of other licenses provided for in this article.
(1953 Code, ch. 5, § 5)
   Cross References: Fee for auctioneer's and auction house licenses, §
19-23(12).
Sec. 7-7. Notification to fire chief required of possession of hazardous
substances; duty to update; hazardous substances defined.
   (a)   Every applicant for any type of business license and every person who
has already been is sued a business license pursuant to chapter
19 of the Tucson Code shall file an affidavit with the city in such form and
manner as is required by the city, stating whether the applicant or licensee
intends to or does store, utilize, possess or otherwise have custody of
hazardous substances at the business location. Such affidavit shall be
forwarded to the fire chief to be utilized for the prevention of accidents and
for dealing with incidents involving hazardous materials. Persons already
issued business licenses shall have one hundred eighty (180) days from the time
of enactment of this provision in which to comply.
   (b)   If the status of any licensee changes materially with regard to the
storage, utilization, possession or custody of hazardous substances, the
licensee shall, within thirty (30) days of such material change, file a new
affidavit as provided for in subsection (a), to reflect that change.
   (c)   For the purposes of this section, "hazardous substances" shall be
defined as any substance or material which has been designated by the United
States Department of Transportation in its Hazardous Materials Regulations, 49
Code of Federal Regulations, Parts 171, 172 and 173, as capable of posing an
unreasonable risk to health, safety or property when transported in commerce,
and which falls within one of the department's hazardous classes.
(Ord. No. 5149, § 1, 5-5-80)
   Editors Note: Ord. No. 3740, § 1, adopted Nov. 22, 1971, repealed former §
7-7 derived from the 1953 Code, ch. 5, § 6. Former §
7-7 contained provisions pertaining to citizenship and residence requirements
for auctioneers. Subsequently, Ord. No. 5149, § 1, adopted May 5, 1980, adopted
a new §
7-7.
Sec. 7-8. Auction house or auction prohibited in connection with or on premises
of wholesale or retail businesses; exception.
No auction house license shall be issued and no such business shall be
conducted in any way in connection with or on the same premises as any licensed
wholesale or retail merchant's business except when authorized and conducted
pursuant to the provisions of sections
7-9 and
7-10 of this article, and section
7-86 of this chapter.
(1953 Code, ch. 5, § 2; Ord. No. 1798, § 1, 1-6-58; Ord. No. 3120, § 7, 4-22-
68)
Sec. 7-9. Sales of merchant's stock on hand--Duration; to be bona fide.
Where the stock on hand of a merchant is sold at public auction on the premises
of the merchant, no such sale shall be held during the month of December. No
such sale shall continue for more than one (1) day, not a Sunday or legal
holiday, and shall be permitted only where such merchant is bona fide disposing
of his stock for the purpose of retiring from business.
(1953 Code, ch. 5, § 7; Ord. No. 3120, § 8, 4-22-68)
Sec. 7-10. Same--Application.
Any merchant intending to dispose of his stock on hand by sale at public
auction must make a sworn written application to the mayor and council at least
fifteen (15) days before the intended sale is to begin, specifying under oath
the name and address of the applicant, the location and purpose of the sale,
and its expected duration, a statement itemizing in detail the quality,
quantity, kind or grade of each item of goods, wares and other articles to be
sold, with the wholesale market value thereof, together with a declaration that
the merchandise or property proposed to be sold at public auction is a bona
fide part of the merchant's stock in trade, and not secured, purchased or
brought into such place of business for or in anticipation of such sale, and
the name of the auctioneer who shall conduct the sale.
(1953 Code, ch. 5, § 8)
Sec. 7-11. "Capping", "boosting", false bidding prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to act, or to employ another to act, as a
by-bidder, or what is commonly known as a "capper" or "booster" at any auction
sale, or to make or accept any false or misleading bid or to pretend to buy any
articles sold or offered for sale at any auction.
(1953 Code, ch. 5, § 9)
Secs. 7-12--7-15. Reserved.
   Editors Note: Sections 7-12--7-15, regulating jewelry auctions, derived from
1953 Code, ch. 5, §§ 10-13, were repealed by § 4 of Ord. No. 7434, adopted June
18, 1990.
Sec. 7-16. Advertising.
Auction advertisements must contain auction house or auctioneer's license
number of the party conducting such auction.
(Ord. No. 7434, § 5, 6-18-90)
Secs. 7-17--7-25. Reserved.
ARTICLE II.
PEDDLERS*
__________
*   Editors Note: Ord. No. 10041, § 1, adopted Sept. 20, 2004, amended Art. II
in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. II, §§ 7-26--7-40,
pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 4677, § 1,
adopted June 27, 1977; Ord. No. 8129, §§ 1, 2, adopted Sept. 27, 1993; Ord. No.
8195, § 1, adopted Jan. 24, 1994.
__________
Sec. 7-26. Definitions.
The term:
   (1)   "City property" means all real property owned by the city, except the
right-of- way.
   (2)   "Director" means the director of the department of finance.
   (3)   “Peddler” means a person selling merchandise or food products from a
temporary, fixed location by means of a motor vehicle, towed vehicle, pushcart,
or apparatus that displays merchandise or food for sale that can be removed on
a daily basis and who is not licensed pursuant to another provision of the
Tucson Code. Such term does not include an operation and vendors which are
approved to sell merchandise or food within an area permitted by the Unified
Development Code or approved by the zoning administrator, or other city
official designated by the director of Planning and Development Services,
pursuant to the Unified Development Code.
   (4)   "Peddler operation" means the area designated by the peddler on the
site plan required by sections
7-27(b)(5) and (6) as the area in which the peddler will conduct business.
Unless such area is physically demarcated at the site, it shall be assumed
that, for purposes of measuring the distance between the operation and the
nearest residential property, other peddler operation, or right-of-way, the
boundary of the operation is the outer edge of the property being occupied by
the peddler's personal property or customers' vehicles.
   (5)   "Site" means the tax parcel of the property for private property or
location or address of the property for city property or right-of-way.
(Ord. No. 10041, § 1, 9-20-04; Ord. No. 10054, § 1, 9-27-04; Ord. No. 10141, §
1, 4-12-05; Ord. No. 12060, § 5, 11-28-23)
Sec. 7-27. License requirements.
   (a)   In general. It shall be unlawful for a person to operate as a peddler
unless such person has received a license from the director.
   (b)   License application. Any person desiring to obtain or renew a
peddler's license shall file an application with the director. In renewing a
license, the peddler need only update any information that changed since the
previous license was issued. Such application shall contain the following
information:
   (1)   The full legal name, date of birth, and residence address of the
applicant.
   (2)   The address or location where the applicant intends on conducting
business. If the applicant is applying for a license for more than one
location, each address or location where the applicant intends on conducting
business.
   (3)   If the applicant intends on conducting business on private property,
notarized authorization from the owner or the owner's agent giving the
applicant permission to conduct business at each location. Such authorization
shall be on a form provided by the director. If the applicant is applying for a
license for a site on an improved lot that does not show compliance with
parking requirements, but is seeking approval of the site pursuant to paragraph
(6), the authorization form must indicate the hours of operation of all
established businesses on the site. Such form must be updated by the applicant
due to any change in the hours of operation of any such business.
   (4)   If the applicant intends on conducting business on city property,
written authorization from the director of the department having control over
such property.
   (5)   If the applicant intends on conducting business on an unimproved lot,
a site plan approved by the director of the department of development services
showing conformance with the requirements of this article. The plan need not be
professionally prepared but shall be drawn showing the dimensions of the site,
available parking, location of entrances and exits, and where the peddler's
vehicle will be parked. If there are any subsequent changes, a new plan shall
be submitted to the director after being approved by the director of the
department of development services.
   (6)   If the applicant intends on conducting business on an improved lot, an
amendment to the site plan approved by the director of the department of
development services showing conformance with the requirements of this article
and the Land Use Code. Such amendment need not be professionally prepared
unless otherwise required by the Land Use Code or other applicable city law.
The plan must show the dimensions of the site, available parking, location of
entrances and exits, and where the peddler's vehicle will be parked. An
applicant who otherwise meets the requirements of this paragraph may be
approved by the director of development services for operation if the proposed
site does not meet parking requirements, but only after all established
businesses on the site are closed for business. The license shall be valid only
for the times that such businesses are closed. If there are any subsequent
changes, a new plan shall be submitted to the director after being approved by
the director of the department of development services.
   (7)   If the applicant intends on conducting business in the right-of-way
pursuant to section
7-29(b), written authorization from the director of the department of
transportation.
   (8)   Any conviction of any violation of this article of the applicant
occurring in the previous twelve (12) months.
   (9)   Proof of insurance complying with section
7-28 if operating in the right-of-way pursuant to section
7-29(b) or on city property.
   (10)   A valid health certificate issued by Pima County if selling prepared
food.
   (c)   Term of license. The license issued pursuant to subsection (b) shall
be valid for one (1) year from the date of its issuance.
   (d)   Multiple peddler license applications. A person may apply for a
license for as many locations as meets the requirements of this article at one
time, but the applicant shall pay a license fee for each location. In the case
of multiple locations licensed under one individual, that individual is
responsible for violations of this article at all locations.
   (e)   Denial of license. A peddler whose license is revoked pursuant to
section
7-32 shall not be issued another peddler's license for twelve (12) months after
the revocation is final. The director may not issue or renew a peddler license
to any person who has been convicted of a violation of any provision of this
article within the previous twelve (12) months.
   (f)   Lost licenses. The fee to replace a lost or stolen license shall be
ten dollars ($10.00).
(Ord. No. 10041, § 1, 9-20-04; Ord. No. 10054, § 1, 9-27-04; Ord. No. 10141, §
2, 4-12-05)
Sec. 7-28. Insurance.
Any person applying for a peddler license for a location on city property or
the right-of- way pursuant to section
7-29(b) must obtain and show proof of liability insurance in a form and with a
company approved by the director against death, damages, or injury, in an
amount of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). Such policy shall
include the city as an additional named insured and shall be primary insurance
with respect to any other insurance or self- insurance program of the city. The
peddler shall maintain this policy in full force and effect during the term of
the license.
(Ord. No. 10041, § 1, 9-20-04; Ord. No. 10054, § 1, 9-27-04)
Sec. 7-29. Unlawful activities.
   (a)   In general. It shall be unlawful for a peddler:
   (1)   To fail to maintain the site in a clean manner or provide a trash
receptacle;
   (2)   To place advertising signs any place other than on the peddler's
vehicle;
   (3)   Or the peddler's employee to fail to be present at the site during
operating hours;
   (4)   Except as provided by section
7-31, to operate between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.;
   (5)   To fail to remove the vehicle, all equipment, and other personal
property from the site after closing;
   (6)   To fail to display a current, valid peddler's license in a conspicuous
location;
   (7)   To operate a generator that violates federal regulations relating to
noise or exhaust mufflers;
   (8)   To operate outside the boundaries of the peddler's operation; or
   (9)   Except as provided in subsection (b), to operate in the right-of-way.
   (b)   Operation in right-of-way. With approval of the director of the
department of transportation, a peddler may operate in the right-of-way in the
Downtown or Fourth Avenue Business Zones, as defined in sections
11-36.2(a)(1) and (2), or in the pilot location at the northeast corner of
Silverbell Road and El Camino del Cerro, as defined in section
20-248.1.
(Ord. No. 10041, § 1, 9-20-04; Ord. No. 10054, § 1, 9-27-04; Ord. No. 12196, §
1, 10-21-25)
Sec. 7-30. Setback requirements.
   (a)   In general. A peddler may not operate a peddler operation in violation
of the setback requirements specified in subsections (b) or (c) and compliance
with such requirements shall be shown on the site plans required by sections
7-27(b)(5) and (6).
   (b)   Setback requirements. A peddler operation shall not locate:
   (1)   Within one hundred (100) feet of a residentially zoned property;
   (2)   Within one hundred (100) feet of another peddler operation located on
the same site, which for private property means the same tax parcel;
   (3)   Within one hundred (100) feet of another peddler operation located on
city property or right-of-way, except at pilot location at the northeast corner
of Silverbell Road and El Camino del Cerro; or   
   (4)   Except as provided in subsection (c), within twenty (20) feet of a
curb or right-of-way pavement.
   (c)   Curb setback requirement exception. In the Downtown and Fourth Avenue
Business Zones, as defined in sections
11-36.2(a)(1) and (2), a peddler operation shall not locate within four (4)
feet of a curb or right-of-way pavement.
(Ord. No. 10041, § 1, 9-20-04; Ord. No. 10054, § 1, 9-27-04; Ord. No. 10141, §
3, 4-12-05; Ord. No. 12196, § 2, 10-21-25)
Sec. 7-31. Operating before or after required closing time.
   (a)   In general. A peddler may operate before or after the time required by
section
7-29(4) by complying with the exemption process provided in subsection (b).
   (b)   Exemption process.
   (1)   Initial application. A peddler desiring to operate before or after the
time required for closing by section
7-29(a)(4) shall apply to the director of the development services department
for such authorization, stating the specific times that the peddler desires to
operate. If the director determines that the peddler's operation is more than
two hundred (200) feet from the nearest residentially zoned property and the
peddler has no convictions for violations of this article within the previous
twelve (12) months, the director shall grant the request for the time period
requested. If the peddler's operation is within one hundred (100) to two
hundred (200) feet from the nearest residentially zoned property, the director
shall refer the application to the zoning examiner pursuant to paragraph (2).
   (2)   Application to zoning examiner. After the director has referred the
application to the zoning examiner, the examiner shall hold a public hearing on
the application. The examiner shall hold the hearing no later than sixty (60)
days after receipt of the application. The director of the development services
department shall notify the chief of police and all residents and registered
neighborhood associations within three hundred (300) feet of the lot lines of
the site where the peddler's operation is located if on private property or
three hundred (300) feet of the peddler's operation if located on city property
or right-of-way. After conducting the public hearing, the examiner shall issue
a decision either granting or denying the application within five (5) business
days of the hearing. The examiner may grant the application if the examiner
determines that the peddler's business is not detrimental to the peace and
quiet of the residents affected by the business or to public safety. If the
zoning examiner grants the application, the authorization shall state the times
in which the peddler is permitted to operate, which may be different from that
requested by the peddler. The decision of the zoning examiner is final and may
not be appealed. If the application is denied, the peddler may not make a
similar application for the same location for twelve (12) months.
   (c)   Operating during times not authorized. If a peddler is permitted to
operate past the time allowed under section
7-29(a)(4), it is unlawful for the peddler to operate before or after the times
permitted under subsections (b)(1) or (2).
(Ord. No. 10041, § 1, 9-20-04; Ord. No. 10054, § 1, 9-27-04)
Sec. 7-32. License revocation.
   (a)   Grounds for revocation. The director may revoke the license of any
peddler for one or a combination of the following:
   (1)   The peddler or the peddler's employee is operating in violation of any
requirement of this article or article IV of chapter
16, Tucson Code, and has failed or refused to cease and desist from such
violation or violations within five (5) days after receiving written notice
from the director, law enforcement officer, or city employee with code
enforcement authority. If an employee of the peddler is operating the peddler's
operation, receipt of the notice by the employee is sufficient.
   (2)   The peddler or the peddler's employee has been convicted of or found
responsible for a violation of this article or article IV of chapter
16, Tucson Code, or A.R.S. § 13-2904 where such violation occurred on the site
occupied by the peddler's operation.
   (3)   The peddler provided false information on the license application.
   (b)   Revocation procedure.
   (1)   Notice of revocation; scheduling of hearing. The director shall
provide written notice of revocation to the peddler stating the grounds for
revocation and the procedures to appeal the revocation. The notice may be
personally served or mailed, return receipt requested, to the address provided
by the peddler on the application. The revocation becomes final five (5)
business days from the date of receipt of the notice by the peddler or five (5)
business days from the date the notice is returned to the director as
undeliverable unless the peddler files an appeal in city court. A hearing shall
be scheduled within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the filing of the appeal
before a magistrate or special limited magistrate. If the peddler files an
appeal, he or she may continue to operate pending the outcome of the hearing in
city court.
   (2)   Revocation order; appeal. At the conclusion of the hearing, if the
magistrate or special limited magistrate finds that the grounds for revocation
have been established by a preponderance of the evidence, the magistrate shall
order the license revoked. Either the city or the peddler may appeal the ruling
to superior court in accordance with the Superior Court Rules of Appellate
Procedure-Civil. If the peddler's license is revoked and the peddler appeals to
superior court, the peddler may not operate unless and until such time as the
superior court orders the license reinstated or otherwise authorizes the
peddler to operate.
   (c)   Reapplication prohibited. If a peddler's license is revoked pursuant
to this section, the licensee may not reapply for a peddler's license for
twelve (12) months following the effective date of the revocation.
(Ord. No. 10041, § 1, 9-20-04; Ord. No. 10054, § 1, 9-27-04)
Sec. 7-33. Violations and penalties.
The penalty for a violation of this article shall be as follows:
   (1)   The penalties under this section are cumulative and the enforcing
officer may proceed under one (1) or more such penalty.
   (2)   Any peddler or an employee of a peddler who commits, causes, permits,
facilitates, or aids or abets any violation of, or who fails to perform any act
or duty required by, this Article is responsible for a civil infraction and is
subject to a civil sanction of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor
more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
   (3)   Any peddler or an employee of a peddler who commits, causes, permits,
facilitates, or aids or abets any violation of, or who fails to perform any act
or duty required by, this article is guilty of a class one misdemeanor.
   (4)   Each day any violation of any provision of this article or the failure
to perform any act or duty required by this article exists shall constitute a
separate violation or offense.
(Ord. No. 10041, § 1, 9-20-04; Ord. No. 10054, § 1, 9-27-04)
Sec. 7-34. Enforcement authority.
Any law enforcement officer or any other employee of the city with the
authority to issue civil infraction citations may enforce the provisions of
this article. This section is not intended to create or expand the authority of
any department to perform acts that are otherwise prohibited by law.
(Ord. No. 10041, § 1, 9-20-04; Ord. No. 10054, § 1, 9-27-04)
Sec. 7-35. Jurisdiction of court.
   (a)   Jurisdiction of all proceedings to enforce the provisions of this
chapter shall be in the city court of the city.
   (b)   Civil infraction proceedings to enforce this chapter may be
adjudicated by a magistrate or a special limited magistrate.
(Ord. No. 10041, § 1, 9-20-04; Ord. No. 10054, § 1, 9-27-04)
Sec. 7-36. Commencement of civil infraction proceedings.
Any civil infraction proceedings to enforce the provisions of this chapter
shall be commenced and summons shall be issued in accordance with the
procedures set forth in Arizona Revised Statutes, city ordinance, or as
provided in the Local Rules of Practice and Procedure- City Court-City of
Tucson. If the city is unable to personally serve the complaint, the complaint
may be served in the same manner prescribed for alternative methods of service
by the Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure or by certified or registered mail,
return receipt requested.
(Ord. No. 10041, § 1, 9-20-04; Ord. No. 10054, § 1, 9-27-04)
Sec. 7-37. Appeal of court decision.
Any party may appeal the judgment of city court to the superior court. Appeals
from civil infraction proceedings shall be in accordance with the Superior
Court Rules of Appellate Procedure-Civil. Appeals from criminal proceedings
shall be in accordance with the Superior Court Rules of Appellate Procedure-
Criminal.
(Ord. No. 10041, § 1, 9-20-04; Ord. No. 10054, § 1, 9-27-04)
Secs. 7-38--7-61. Reserved.
ARTICLE III.
FORTUNETELLERS*
__________
*   Cross References: License fee for fortunetellers, §
19-28(68).
__________
Sec. 7-62. Definitions.
As used in this article, "fortuneteller" means every person who within the city
carries on, practices or professes to practice the business or art of
fortunetelling through means of astrology, palmistry, phrenology,
fortunetelling, either of the past, present or future, clairvoyance,
clairaudience, crystal gazing, trance induced by hypnosis, mediumship,
prophecy, augury, divination, magic or necromancy, and demands or receives a
fee for the exercise or exhibition of their art therein, directly or
indirectly, either as a gift, donation or otherwise, or who shall render their
services free with the purchase of any article of merchandise, or who gives an
exhibition thereof at any place where an admission fee is charged, or who
broadcasts the same by radio or television.
(1953 Code, ch. 32, § 1; Ord. No. 2209, § 2, 9-5-61; Ord. No. 6874, § 1, 1-25-
88)
Sec. 7-63. Approval and license required.
No person shall engage in the business of fortunetelling within the city
without first meeting the requirements of this article and obtaining a license
authorized by article I of chapter
19 from the revenue division.
(1953 Code, ch. 32, § 2; Ord. No. 2209, §§ 2, 9, 9-5-61; Ord. No. 4916, § 1,
12-18-78)
Sec. 7-64. Investigation of applicants; application for license; fee; issuance
of license.
Upon receipt of an application upon the forms provided by the revenue division
and payment of a nonrefundable application fee in the amount of one hundred
dollars ($100.00), the finance director shall forward the application to the
chief of police. The chief shall investigate the character of all applicants.
The applicant shall furnish such information to the chief as may be reasonably
required to determine the moral character and fitness of the applicant and
shall include a statement by the applicant showing the applicant's past
residences for a period of five (5) years next preceding the application. If
the chief is satisfied that the applicant is of good moral character, the chief
shall certify such finding to the finance director, who shall then, upon
payment by the applicant of the occupational license tax imposed in article I
of chapter
19, issue an occupational license to the applicant to engage in the business of
fortunetelling. No license shall be granted, however, to any person who has
been convicted of any felony.
(1953 Code, ch. 32, § 3; Ord. No. 2209, § 2, 9-5-61; Ord. No. 4916, § 2, 12-18-
78; Ord. No. 10448, § 11, 9-5-07, eff. 1-1-08)
Sec. 7-65. Revocation of license.
Any license issued under this article may be revoked at any time by action of
the mayor and council if it finds that the business or service conducted under
such license is being or has been conducted in an unlawful manner in violation
of the laws of the state or the ordinances of the city.
(1953 Code, ch. 32, § 4; Ord. No. 2209, § 2, 9-5-61)
Sec. 7-66. Persons regulated.
The nonrefundable application fee, investigation and approval required by
section
7-64 shall apply to any person initially applying to engage in the business of
fortunetelling, and to any person applying after the occupational license of
such person has elapsed for more than one- quarter ( 1/4) year, or been
surrendered or revoked.
(Ord. No. 4916, § 4, 12-18-78)
   Editors Note: Ord. No. 4916, §§ 3, 4, adopted Dec. 18, 1978, specifically
amended the Code by repealing former §
7-66, and adopting in lieu thereof new §
7-66 as herein set out. Former §
7-66 pertained to delinquent license fees and was derived from the 1953 Code,
ch. 32, § 5, and Ord. No. 2209, § 2, adopted Sept. 5, 1961.
Sec. 7-67. License required for each place of business; scope of licenses.
A separate license must be obtained for each branch establishment or separate
place of business. Each license granted under this article shall authorize only
the individual obtaining the license to practice, transact or carry on the
business or service licensed under this article, and only at the location or
place of business designated in said license.
(1953 Code, ch. 32, § 6; Ord. No. 2209, § 2, 9-5-61)
Sec. 7-68. Transferability of licenses; fee.
All licenses issued hereunder shall be nontransferable as to person; however,
the finance director shall, upon receipt of a transfer fee of ten dollars
($10.00), authorize the transfer of any license issued under this article from
one location to another, provided the individual licensee remains the same.
(1953 Code, ch. 32, § 7; Ord. No. 2209, § 2, 9-5-61)
Sec. 7-69. Reserved.
   Editors Note: Ord. No. 4916, § 3, adopted Dec. 18, 1978, specifically
amended the Code by repealing §
7-69, which pertained to license renewals. The section had been derived from
the 1953 Code, ch. 32, § 8, and Ord. No. 2209, § 2, adopted Sept. 5, 1961.
Secs. 7-70--7-79. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV.
GOING-OUT-OF-BUSINESS, FIRE, ETC., SALES
Sec. 7-80. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, and words shall
have the meaning given herein:
   Sec. 7-80(1). Fire and other altered goods sale is a sale held out in such a
manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that the sale will offer
goods damaged or altered while within the city or in transit thereto, by fire,
smoke, water or other means. (Ord. No. 3120, § 1, 4-22-68)
   Sec. 7-80(2). Going-out-of business sale is any sale held out in such a
manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that upon disposal of the
stock of goods on hand, the business will cease and be discontinued, including,
but not limited to, the following sales: adjusters; adjustment; alteration;
assignees'; bankrupt; benefit-of-creditors; benefit-of- administrator; benefit-
of-trustees; building-coming-down; closing; creditors' committee; creditors';
executors'; final days; forced out; forced-out-of-business; insolvents'; last
days; lease expires; liquidation; loss of lease; mortgage sale; receiver's
trustees'; quitting business; or other terminology of similar import.
   Sec. 7-80(3). Goods includes any goods, wares, merchandise or other property
capable of being the object of a sale regulated hereunder.
(1953 Code, ch. 6, § 1; Ord. No. 8011, § 2, 3-22-93)
Sec. 7-81. Exemptions from article.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to or affect the following
persons:
   Sec. 7-81(1). Persons acting pursuant to an order or process of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
   Sec. 7-81(2). Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as
public officials.
(1953 Code, ch. 6, § 7; Ord. No. 8011, § 2, 3-22-93)
Sec. 7-82. Permit required.
Any person, before selling or offering to sell any goods at a sale, held out by
any means whatever to be one of the kinds defined in this article, shall first
obtain a permit from the director of finance.
(1953 Code, ch. 6, § 2; Ord. No. 8011, § 2, 3-22-93)
Sec. 7-83. Application for permit; fee required.
   (a)   Application. Any person desiring to conduct a sale regulated by this
article shall make a written application to the director of finance, prior to
the first day of which such sale or offer to sell, trade or exchange is held or
made, setting forth and containing the following information:
   (1)   The true name and address of the owner or each of the owners of the
goods to be the object of the sale.
   (2)   A description of the place where such sale is to be held.
   (3)   The true names and addresses of all individuals employed by the owner
or owners of the goods to be the object of the sale and to be connected with
the sale and their capacity, including the date of their employment. Such list
must be kept current during the course of the sale.
   (4)   The nature of the occupancy and the effective date of termination of
such occupancy.
   (5)   The dates of the period of time during which the sale is to be
conducted.
   (6)   A concise and clear statement of the reason or reasons for the urgent
and expeditious disposal of the goods, wares or merchandise to be offered at
such sale.
   (7)   A recital that the applicant has read and understands that a false
statement contained in the application constitutes unsworn falsification as
defined in A.R.S. section 13-2704, a class II misdemeanor, punishable by a fine
of no more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
   (8)   A statement that the business out of which the sale is to be held is
to be terminated permanently where such sale is to be held or, if the business
is to be removed to or continued at another place or places, a description of
that place, which may be by street address, the date upon which such removed
business will commence, and the name and designation under which the applicant
will commence such business.
   (9)   A statement that the applicant consents to entry by authorized
representatives of the city upon the premises where the sale will be held, at
any time during business hours, during the sale period.
   (b)   Fee.
   (1)   An application for a permit hereunder shall be accompanied by a fee of
twenty- five dollars ($25.00).
   (2)   An application for a renewal permit hereunder shall be accompanied by
a renewal permit fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
(1953 Code, ch. 6, § 3; Ord. No. 2102, § 1, 10-17-60; Ord. No. 3120, § 2, 4-22-
68; Ord. No. 6652, § 1, 3-16-87; Ord. No. 8011, § 2, 3-22-93)
Sec. 7-84. Issuance, renewal, effect of permit.
A permit may be issued hereunder on the following terms:
   Sec. 7-84(1). The permit shall authorize sale described in the application
for a period of not more than thirty (30) consecutive days, following the
issuance thereof. The director of finance may, upon receipt of revenue
application and renewal fee, renew a permit for one (1) period of time only,
such period to be in addition to the thirty (30) days permitted in the original
permit, and not to exceed thirty (30) consecutive days. (Ord. No. 3120, § 3, 4-
22-68)
   Sec. 7-84(2). Non-transferability: Any permit herein provided for shall not
be assignable or transferable.
   Sec. 7-84(3). Applicant must notify the city of any change of address for a
six-month period following the issuance of the permit.
(1953 Code, Ch. 6, § 4; Ord. No. 2102, § 2, 10-17-60; Ord. No. 8011, § 2, 3-22-
93)
Sec. 7-85. Rules and regulations governing sales.
A permittee hereunder shall:
   Sec. 7-85(1). Post a sign in a prominent location upon the premises for
which the permit is issued. The posted sign must meet the specifications set
out in section
7-89 of the Tucson Code.
   Sec. 7-85(2). State prominently the permit number and the exact closing date
of any sale held hereunder in all advertisements, signs and statements
regarding such sale. (Ord. No. 3120, § 4, 4-22-68)
(1953 Code, ch. 6, § 8; Ord. No. 8011, § 2, 3-22-93)
Sec. 7-86. Disposal at auction; approval required.
   (a)   No auction license shall be issued to any person for use on the sale
premises of an applicant hereunder and no auction of the inventory stock
remaining from a sale conducted pursuant to this article shall be conducted on
the premises until and unless the director of finance has approved the
application and the proposed sale as complying with all applicable provisions
of law, and the provisions of sections
7-9 and
7-10 of the Tucson Code are fulfilled.
   (b)   The zoning district classification in which the sale premises are
located shall not constitute a prohibition of such auction sale, any other
provision of the Tucson Code to the contrary notwithstanding.
(Ord. No. 3120, § 6, 4-22-68; Ord. No. 8011, § 2, 3-22-93)
Sec. 7-87. Revocation of permit for violations.
The director of finance may revoke the permit, provided for in this article, of
any person violating any of the provisions of this article by giving written
notice of the revocation to the permittee, and no such permittee shall
thereafter transact any business under the permit so revoked.
(1953 Code, ch. 6, § 9; Ord. No. 3120, § 5, 4-22-68; Ord. No. 8011, § 2, 3-22-
93)
Sec. 7-88. Revocation procedure--Appeal.
   (a)   Before revoking a permit, the director of finance shall give written
notice to the permittee, in the manner provided in this article, that a
revocation hearing will be held at a place and time specified in the notice,
which hearing shall not be sooner than ten (10) days from the date of the
notice. The notice shall state the grounds relied upon for the proposed
revocation. The director of finance (or designated representative) shall hold
the hearing at the time and place specified, unless agreed otherwise by the
permittee and other parties concerned, and the permittee shall be allowed to
appear in person and by the counsel and offer evidence. A record shall be kept
of all proceedings, including proofs offered and an audio tape of testimony. No
permit shall be revoked unless grounds therefore are satisfactorily established
by the evidence as shown by the record of the hearing. The director of finance
shall give the permittee and other parties written notice of the hearing
decision, and such decision shall be final. Revocation of a permit shall be
effected by the finance director's signing of the written notice of the hearing
decision. A permittee's right to do business under authority of the permit
shall terminate immediately upon the mailing to the permittee of a copy of the
director's signed decision revoking the permit.
   (b)   Notice required by this article may be served by certified mail
addressed to the permittee at the address of the permittee as shown on the
business license application or as shown on the going-out-of-business permit
application. Such notices may also served by personal service.
(Ord. No. 8011, § 2, 3-22-93)
Sec. 7-89. Requirements for permittee sign.
All signs as required in section
7-85(1) of this article shall conform to the following requirements:
   (1)   There shall be a sign posted near to and visible from each entrance to
the business.
   (2)   Each sign shall measure 24" × 24".
   (3)   All information printed on permittee's sign shall be in one-half ( 1/
2) inch letters.
   (4)   Each sign shall contain the city business license number and the sale
permit number.
   (5)   Each sign shall provide the telephone numbers for the consumer affairs
office and the revenue division office for complaint and follow-up information.
(Ord. No. 8011, § 2, 3-22-93)
Secs. 7-90--7-96. Reserved.
ARTICLE V.
PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS*
__________
*   Editors Note: Section 1 of Ord. No. 10254, adopted February 28, 2006,
changed the title of this article from "Pawnbrokers, Secondhand Dealers and
Junk Dealers" to "Pawnbrokers, Secondhand Dealers and Scrap Metal Dealers".
Section 1 of Ord. No. 10854, adopted November 23, 2010, changed the title of
this article from "Pawnbrokers, Secondhand Dealers and Scrap Metal Dealers" to
"Pawnbrokers and Secondhand Dealers".
   Cross References: License fee for pawnbrokers, §
19-28(109); license fee for junk collectors, §
19-28(79); license fee for junk dealers, §
19-28(84).
__________
Sec. 7-97. Definitions.
   Sec. 7-97(1). In this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
given in A.R.S. § 44-1621: identification document, loan, pawn ticket, pawn
transaction, pawnbroker, pawnshop, pledged goods, pledgor, reportable
transaction, and transaction date.
   Sec. 7-97(2). Jewelry includes gold, platinum, silver, gold-filled or plated
ware, diamonds and other precious or semiprecious stones whether mounted or
unmounted, cultured pearls, and watches, clocks and goods, wares and
merchandise commonly classified as jewelry and commonly offered for sale in
jewelry stores.
   Sec. 7-97(3). Secondhand dealer.
   (a)   Secondhand dealer means every person engaged in, conducting, managing
or carrying on the business of buying, selling or otherwise dealing in
secondhand goods, wares, merchandise or other articles, including:
   (1)   Coins, gems or semiprecious stones, jewelry, precious metals purchased
from any person other than the original manufacturer or authorized distributor
selling the same for money, credit or exchange, digital video discs, and all
goods and articles that bear a serial number or owner applied number regardless
of value; and
   (2)   All secondhand goods, wares, merchandise, or other articles that have
a fair market value in excess of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
   (b)    The term defined in paragraph (a) includes:
   (1)   Every person engaged in the described business whether such business
be the principal or sole business so carried on, managed or conducted, or be
merely incidental to, in connection with or a branch or department of, some
other business; and
   (2)   Any person or entity that conducts such activities at a location that
is not that person's or entity's actual business address, such as a hotel,
meeting hall, convention center, or other short term leased or rented location.
   (c)   The term secondhand dealer does not include organizations that are
recognized as not for profit under the laws of this state or any other state,
dealer to dealer transactions, or individuals or businesses conducting estate
sales.
   Sec. 7-97(4). Transaction includes only those items required to be reported
pursuant to section
7-98(b) but does not include compact discs, furniture, and books.
(1953 Code, ch. 19, § 1; Ord. No. 4716, § 2, 11-28-77; Ord. No. 9587, § 1, 8-6-
01; Ord. No. 10254, § 2, 2-28-06; Ord. No. 10790, § 1, 5-18-10, eff. 7-1-10;
Ord. No. 10854, § 2, 11-23-10, eff. 7-1-10)
Sec. 7-98. Duty to report receipt of articles to police.
   (a)   A pawnbroker shall make and deliver to the chief of police a true,
complete, and accurate report of each article the pawnbroker receives through a
reportable transaction, as provided by A.R.S. § 44-1625.
   (b)    It shall be unlawful for any secondhand dealer, or any employee or
agent thereof, to fail, neglect, or refuse to deliver to the chief of police,
within two (2) business days after the receipt thereof, a full, true, and
complete report of the following enumerated goods, wares, merchandise, or other
articles received at the secondhand dealer's place of business on deposit or by
purchase, trade, or consignment:
   (1)   Coins;
   (2)   Gems or semiprecious stones;
   (3)   Jewelry;
   (4)   Precious metals purchased from any person other than the original
manufacturer or authorized distributor selling the same for money, credit or
exchange;
   (5)   Digital video discs, expanded memory cards, and games where the total
value of such goods exceeds fifty dollars ($50.00);
   (6)   Bicycles;
   (7)   Golf clubs;
   (8)   Ballistic vests, bullet-proof vests, and body armor;
   (9)   Any good or article that bears a serial number or owner applied
number; and
   (10)   Collectable goods and articles that contain autographs, limited
edition designations, or number sequences.
   (c)   Any single good or article or combination of goods or articles that
have a fair market value in excess of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be
reported under section
7-98(b) notwithstanding the fact that such good or article or combination of
goods or articles are not enumerated in the provisions of such section.
   (d)   Transactions may not be split into smaller portions for the purpose of
avoiding the reporting requirements of subsections (b)(5) or (c).
(Ord. No. 1053 Code, ch. 19, § 2; Ord. No. 2819, § 1, 10-11-65; Ord. No. 4716,
§ 3, 11-28-77; Ord. No. 8176, § 1, 12-13-93; Ord. No. 9587, § 2, 8-6-01; Ord.
No. 10254, § 3, 2-28-06; Ord. No. 10790, § 1, 5-18-10, eff. 7-1-10; Ord. No.
10854, §§ 3, 4, 11-23-10, eff. 7-1-10)
Sec. 7-99. Contents of report to police.
The report required by section
7-98 shall include the following:
   (1)   The last, first and middle name of the pledgor or seller;
   (2)   The permanent address and telephone number, if applicable, of the
pledgor or seller;
   (3)   The physical description of the pledgor or seller including height,
weight, hair and eye color, sex, race, date of birth, prominent scars and other
distinguishing features;
   (4)   The number and type of the identification document presented by the
pledgor or seller;
   (5)   An accurate, legible description of each item pledged or sold,
including the manufacturer's name, model number, serial number, caliber, size,
type of item and any owner applied number, inscription or monogram;
   (6)   The pawnbroker's or secondhand dealer's name and address and the
initials or identifying number of the employee who received the item;
   (7)   The date and time of the initial pawn or purchase transaction;
   (8)   The type of transaction and initial pawn ticket number;
   (9)   The amount loaned or paid in the transaction;
   (10)   A fingerprint of the pledgor or seller only as required by state law.
(1953 Code, ch. 19, § 3; Ord. No. 4716, § 4, 11-28-77; Ord. No. 9587, § 3, 8-6-
01; Ord. No. 10254, § 4, 2-28-06; Ord. No. 10790, § 1, 5-18-10, eff. 7-1-10)
Sec. 7-100. Form of reports; when due; imposition of fee.
   (a)   All reports required by section
7-98 shall be written or printed entirely in the English language on forms
provided by the chief of police in a clear and legible manner and shall be
delivered to the chief of police by electronic means as approved by the chief
of police. The fingerprint required by section
7-99 shall be affixed in the manner described on the form. All such reports
shall be delivered within two (2) business days after the receipt of an item
through a reportable transaction or transaction. Such reports may be submitted
to the chief by electronic means as determined by the chief.
   (b)    Each transaction report shall include no more than three (3) items.
For the purposes of this subsection, multiple nonserialized items of the same
type (e.g. rings) that are delivered in a single transaction and that have no
owner assigned numbers, engravings, inscriptions, monograms or other unique
identifying characteristics, may be considered as one item on the report (e.g.
"six (6) silver rings").
   (c)    Each pawnbroker and secondhand dealer shall pay to the city a fee in
the amount of one dollar ($1.00) for each report required to be prepared
pursuant to A.R.S. § 44-1625(A) and section
7-98. This fee shall be due and payable to the city on the 20th day of April,
July, October, and January and shall be based on the number of reports
submitted to the city during each quarter.
(Ord. No. 4716, § 5, 11-28-77; Ord. No. 9587, § 4, 8-6-01; Ord. No. 10790, § 1,
5-18-10, eff. 7-1-10)
   Editors Note: Ord. No. 4716, § 1, adopted Nov. 28, 1977, specifically
amended the Code by repealing former §§
7-100--
7-106, which had pertained to reports, records of transactions, dealing with
minors, doubtful ownership, and violation. The sections had been derived from
the 1953 Code, ch. 19, §§ 4--10, and Ord. No. 2819, § 2, adopted Oct. 11, 1965.
§§ 5--8 of Ord. No. 4716 added new §§
7-100--
7-103 as herein set out.
Sec. 7-101. Requirements; record of transactions; police department hold on
property.
   (a)   Every secondhand dealer within the city shall keep a permanent record
at his place of business, in which a complete record of all transactions
required to be reported under this article shall be entered in the English
language in a clear and legible manner and at the time when the transaction
takes place. Such record shall contain all the information required to be
reported to the chief of police under the provisions of sections
7-98 and
7-99 and shall be retained for no less than two (2) years from the date of the
last entry.
   (b)   The record of transactions required by subsection (a) shall be
available for inspection by the chief of police or his designated
representative during normal business hours.
   (c)   Whenever there exists probable cause to believe that property in the
possession of a pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, or other person is stolen, a
police officer or person so designated by the chief of police may place a hold
on the property for a period up to ninety (90) days. When a police officer or
designee places a hold on the property, the police officer or designee shall
initiate such hold by contacting the pawnbroker or secondhand dealer in person
or by telephone and informing the pawnbroker or secondhand dealer of the hold
and describing the item or items to be held. Within three (3) days of the
initial contact, the police officer or designee shall deliver or mail to the
pawnbroker or secondhand dealer a written notice of the hold. The written
notice shall include a description of the item or items to be held.
   (d)   Whenever property that is in the possession of a pawnbroker,
secondhand dealer, or other person is subject to a hold and the property is
required by a police officer in a criminal investigation or for use as evidence
in a criminal proceeding, the pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, or other person
upon reasonable notice, shall deliver the property to any police officer.
   (e)   The police department may extend a hold placed pursuant to this
section for the purpose of criminal investigation or for use in any judicial
proceeding, including that set forth in this article. Any extended hold shall
be no longer than is reasonably necessary.
   (f)   Whenever property that is in the possession of a pawnbroker,
secondhand dealer, or other person is subject to a hold and the property is no
longer required for the purpose of criminal investigation or any criminal
proceeding, and more than one person can reasonably be anticipated to make a
claim for possession of the property, the police department may follow the
procedures set forth in this article for disposition of the property within
forty-five (45) days of the conclusion of the criminal investigation or
criminal proceeding.
   (g)   Whenever property that is in the possession of the police department
pursuant to the procedures set forth in this section is no longer required for
the purpose of criminal investigation or for use as evidence in any criminal
proceeding, the police department may follow the procedures set forth in this
article for disposition of the property within forty-five (45) days of the
conclusion of the criminal investigation or proceeding.
(Ord. No. 4716, § 6, 11-18-77; Ord. No. 8680, § 1, 4-22-96; Ord. No. 9587, § 5,
8-6-01)
   Note: See editor's note following §
7-100.
Sec. 7-102. Prohibited acts.
   (a)   A pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, or any employee or agent thereof
shall not:
   (1)   Receive any goods, wares, merchandise or other articles that are
required to be reported by this article whether on deposit, in pawn or pledge,
or by purchase or otherwise from any person under the age of eighteen (18)
years, or from any person who is at the time intoxicated.
   (2)   Purchase or otherwise take any goods, wares, merchandise or other
articles that are required to be reported by this article without first taking
reasonable steps, including requiring the pledgor or seller to produce an
identification document, to ascertain that such goods, wares, merchandise or
other articles are the property of the person offering to deposit, pawn, pledge
or sell the same.
   (3)   Purchase or otherwise take any goods, wares, merchandise or other
articles, knowing or having reason to know that such goods, wares, merchandise
or other articles are stolen.
   (4)   Sell, trade, transfer, or dispose of any goods, wares, merchandise, or
other articles that are required to be reported under this article until twenty
(20) days after filing the report required by section
7-98. For the purposes of this section, the twenty (20) day retention period
begins upon receipt of the electronic transmission of the transaction report,
as approved by the chief of police.
   (5)   Sell, trade, transfer or dispose of any goods, wares, merchandise or
other articles subject to a police department hold described by section
7-101 except pursuant to a court order, order of a hearing officer issued
pursuant to this article, or upon receipt of a written authorization signed by
any police officer.
   (6)   Purchase, receive, sell or transfer any item from which a
manufacturer's serial number or model designator has been removed, altered or
tampered with. These items shall be reported to the police department.
   (7)   Refuse to permit the chief of police or a designated representative to
enter such business, during normal business hours, for the purpose of
inspecting such goods or records.
   (8)   Fail to pay the transaction fee required to be paid by section
7-100(c) at the time so required.
   (b)   No secondhand dealer may sell, trade, transfer, purchase, receive, or
otherwise take or dispose of any goods, wares, merchandise or other articles
that are required to be reported under this article without first obtaining the
appropriate licenses from the finance department and paying the tax imposed by
section
19-85. In addition, all secondhand dealers and pawnbrokers shall attend any
training required by the chief of police regarding the requirements under this
article. Each attendee shall be given a copy of this article after completing
such training and acknowledging receipt thereof.
   (c)   In any transaction with a secondhand dealer, no pledgor or seller
shall provide false information concerning the pledgor's or seller's: name,
address, phone number or rightful ownership.
(Ord. No. 4716, § 7, 11-28-77; Ord. No. 8680, § 2, 4-22-96; Ord. No. 9587, § 6,
8-6-01; Ord. No. 10254, § 5, 2-28-06; Ord. No. 10790, § 2, 5-18-10, eff. 7-1-
10)
   Note: See editor's note following §
7-100.
Sec. 7-103. Violations, penalties.
Each violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 4716, § 8, 11-28-77; Ord. No. 9587, § 7, 8-6-01; Ord. No. 10254, § 6,
2-28-06)
   Note: See editor's note following §
7-100.
Sec. 7-104. Scope.
Property which is in the possession of pawnbrokers, secondhand dealers, the
police department or other person, and which has all of the characteristics set
forth in section
7-105, below, shall be disposed of pursuant to this article.
(Ord. No. 8680, § 3, 4-22-96; Ord. No. 9587, § 8, 8-6-01)
Sec. 7-105. Property included.
   (a)   The city has reason to believe that the property was stolen.
   (b)   The police department has possession of the property or has placed a
hold on the property as set forth in section
7-101.
   (c)   No state court has before it a petition against a suspect alleged to
have stolen the property.
   (d)   Two (2) or more persons are known or believed to have made, or can
reasonably be anticipated to make, a claim for possession of the property.
   (e)   The city makes no claim to possession of the property.
   (f)   The property will not be required to be retained for use as evidence
in any legal proceeding other than the hearing under this article and the city
police department has no other lawful reason for holding the property.
(Ord. No. 8680, § 4, 4-22-96; Ord. No. 9587, § 9, 8-6-01)
Sec. 7-106. Initiation of petition.
The police department shall file a petition with a hearing officer designated
by the city manager to determine ownership of the property within forty-five
(45) days of the conclusion of the criminal investigation or criminal
proceedings involving the property. Such petition shall set forth the
following:
   (1)   The facts establishing compliance with section
7-105.
   (2)   The name and address of each person described in section
7-105(d).
   (3)   An accurate description of the property, any identifying marks or
serial numbers, the police identification number(s), the location where the
property is currently being held, and the person from whom seized, if the
property was in fact seized.
(Ord. No. 8680, § 5, 4-22-96)
Sec. 7-107. Service of the petition; notice of hearing.
   (a)   The police department shall serve the petition by personal service or
by first class mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, upon all
persons known to have an interest in the property, each person described and
named in section
7-105(d) and section
7-106(b) above, and, in all cases, the person from whom the property was
obtained or who currently possesses the property subject to the police
department hold.
   (b)   A copy of sections
7-104 through
7-113 of this article shall be served with each petition.
   (c)   There shall be served with the petition a notice of hearing setting
forth the date, time and place for the conduct of the hearing to determine the
right of possession to the property. The hearing date shall not be sooner than
twenty-five (25), nor more than forty-five (45), calendar days after the date
of service of the petition and notice.
   (d)   Service shall be made to the last known address of all persons
included in subsection (a) of this section.
   (e)   Service shall be complete upon receipt. If service is made by
certified mail, the return receipt shall be prima facie evidence of service.
   (f)   Proof of service upon each potential claimant shall be delivered to
the hearing officer.
(Ord. No. 8680, § 6, 4-22-96)
Sec. 7-108. Claimant's rights.
   (a)   Any person claiming an interest in the property shall be known as a
respondent.
   (b)   A respondent or any other person claiming any ownership interest of
any kind, or possessory right to the property shall have the right to appear at
the hearing and to present any and all evidence in support of such person's
claim to the property.
   (c)   Except as provided in section
7-110(b) of this article, the failure of any person to appear at such Hearing
shall constitute a waiver of any claim to the property by such person as
against the city, and shall authorize the hearing officer to enter a ruling
consistent therewith.
(Ord. No. 8680, § 7, 4-22-96)
Sec. 7-109. Hearing officer.
All petitions filed pursuant to this article shall be filed with and considered
by a hearing officer appointed by the city manager.
(Ord. No. 8680, § 8, 4-22-96)
Sec. 7-110. Conduct of hearing.
   (a)   The hearing shall be conducted informally and the technical rules of
evidence shall not apply, provided that the decision of the hearing officer
shall in all cases be based upon substantial and reliable evidence. All parties
shall have the right to be represented by counsel, to present evidence and
testimony in support of their position, and to cross-examine adverse witnesses.
All witnesses shall be placed under oath before testifying.
   (b)   The burden of proof shall be by a preponderance of the evidence, and
shall at all times be upon the person or persons challenging the possession of
the party from whom the property was taken by the police department, even if
the party from whom the property was taken does not appear at the hearing. If
the property was not seized by the police department, the burden of proof shall
at all times be upon the person or persons challenging the party who currently
possesses the property subject to the hold.
   (c)   The hearing shall be recorded electronically or by other means.
   (d)   The decision of the hearing officer shall be issued within ten (10)
calendar days of the close of the record. The decision shall be in writing, and
shall be mailed postage prepaid to each respondent or claimant appearing. A
copy of the decision shall also be sent to the city police department.
   (e)   The decision of the hearing officer shall be final upon issuance.
(Ord. No. 8680, § 9, 4-22-96)
Sec. 7-111. Judicial review.
   (a)   Any respondent or other party participating in the hearing who is
aggrieved by the decision of the hearing officer may seek judicial review by
way of special action to the superior court.
   (b)   A complaint seeking special action review shall be filed within thirty
(30) days of a final decision by the hearing officer.
(Ord. No. 8680, § 10, 4-22-96)
Sec. 7-112. Release of property.
   (a)   Any person prevailing in a hearing or uncontested proceeding
administered pursuant to this article shall be entitled to receive the property
described in the petition after producing a copy of the decision in their favor
and appropriate identification to the property's custodian.
   (b)   A receipt shall be signed evidencing delivery of the property to the
person identified in subsection (a) of this section.
   (c)   Any person with custody of the property described in the petition who
is presented with a copy of the hearing officer's decision and appropriate
identification shall release the property to the prevailing party.
(Ord. No. 8680, § 11, 4-22-96)
Sec. 7-113. Limited effect of hearing officer decision.
Nothing in this article shall prevent any person from filing an action in a
court of appropriate jurisdiction to establish ownership to the property.
(Ord. No. 8680, § 12, 4-22-96)
Sec. 7-114. Provisions severable.
If a provision of this article or its application to any person or circumstance
is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions or
applications of the article that can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this article are
severable.
(Ord. No. 9587, § 10, 8-6-01)
Sec. 7-115. Grounds for denial and revocation of license.
   (a)   No license for a secondhand dealer shall be issued or renewed if the
applicant or licensee:
   (1)   Is not eighteen (18) years of age or older;
   (2)   Made any false statement or failed to answer any question in the
application;
   (3)   While licensed under this article, has had such license revoked within
the previous two (2) years;
   (4)   Has been convicted or found responsible of a violation of this article
within one (1) year immediately preceding the application.
   (b)   No license shall be issued or renewed if the location of the business
is not in conformity with applicable zoning regulations.
   (c)   The director of finance shall revoke a license issued under this
article when:
   (1)   The licensee is convicted of or found responsible for two (2) or more
violations of this article committed within a one (1) year period;
   (2)   An employee of the licensee is convicted or found responsible for two
(2) or more violations of this article committed within a one (1) year period.
The licensee shall be notified in writing by the police department whenever an
employee is cited for a violation of this article. Notice shall be given to the
licensee within ten (10) days of the charge being filed. The provisions of this
subsection regarding license suspension shall not apply in the absence of such
notification;
   (3)   The applicant or licensee has made false or misleading statements of
material fact in the application for the license required by this article, or
has entered or given false information in any record or report required by this
article to be kept or made by a licensee;
   (4)   The applicant or licensee has failed to report a transaction using
forms required by this article and approved by the chief of police or has
failed to pay the transaction fee required to be paid by section
7-100(c) at the time so required.
(Ord. No. 10254, § 7, 2-28-06; Ord. No. 10790, § 3, 5-18-10, eff. 7-1-10)
Sec. 7-116. Revocation hearing.
   (a)   The director of finance, upon notification by the chief of police that
grounds for revocation exist, shall file a written petition for revocation with
the city court, requesting that a time and place be set for a hearing and
specifying the grounds for revocation. Within five (5) days, the special
limited magistrate shall schedule a hearing to be conducted within fifteen (15)
days of the receipt of the petition to revoke. The special limited magistrate
shall notify the parties in the manner provided in this article and shall state
the grounds relied upon for the proposed revocation. Should the licensee fail
to appear at the hearing, a default judgment of revocation shall be entered. A
record shall be kept of all proceedings, including proofs offered and a
transcript of testimony. No license shall be revoked unless grounds therefore
are established by a preponderance of the evidence as shown by the record of
the hearing. The hearing shall be held in an informal manner as to the order of
proceeding and presentation of evidence with a record made by electronic tape
recording or stenographic transcription. The Arizona Rules of Evidence shall
apply. However, the special limited magistrate shall admit evidence over
hearsay objections where the proffered evidence has substantial probative value
and reliability. Copies of records and documents prepared in the ordinary
course of business shall be admitted, but subject to challenge as to weight and
authenticity. The special limited magistrate shall provide the licensee and
other parties written notice of the decision within five (5) days, pursuant to
subsection (b) of this section. Revocation of a license shall be effected by
the special limited magistrate's signing of the written notice of the decision.
Appeal of the decision of the special limited magistrate shall be by way of
special action to this Superior Court on the record of the hearing. A
licensee's right to do business under authority of the license shall terminate
immediately upon giving or mailing to the licensee a copy of a signed decision
revoking the license; except that the revocation may be stayed by the superior
court pending a timely appeal of the decision by special action. Such appeal
must be filed within ten (10) days after the decision to revoke is signed
unless the decision is mailed, in which case the appeal must be filed no later
than fifteen (15) days after entry of the decision. The appellee shall bear the
cost of preparing the record of appeal. If an appeal is not timely made, the
revocation becomes final and the license is terminated.
   (b)   Notices required by this article may be served by certified mail to
the licensee's attorney, to the licensee at the address as shown on the
business license, or by personal service.
   (c)   Upon revocation of a license, all fees or taxes theretofore paid for
or on account of any such license shall be deemed forfeited to the city.
(Ord. No. 10254, § 8, 2-28-06)
ARTICLE VI.
ESCORTS AND ESCORT BUREAUS
Sec. 7-117. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this article, shall be
constructed as defined in this section unless in context it appears that a
different meaning is intended:
   (1)   Escort means a person who for pecuniary compensation or any
consideration accompanies others to, from or about social affairs,
entertainments, place of public assembly or places of amusement, or who agrees
to or does consort socially with others for hire or reward to, in or about any
place of public or private resort or any private quarters or business premises.
   (2)   Escort bureau means any business or agency which for pecuniary
compensation or any consideration furnishes or offers to furnish escorts or
introduction service.
   (3)   Introduction service means a service offered or performed for any
pecuniary compensation or any consideration, the principal purpose of which is
to aid individuals to become socially acquainted, or which service is generally
known by the offering or performing party to be used by the recipient thereof
for the purpose of obtaining information about others to be used for social
purposes.
(Ord. No. 4782, § 1, 4-3-78)
Sec. 7-118. Licensing of escorts and escort bureaus required; unlawful acts.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person, selfemployed or employed by
another, to act as an escort without first obtaining and maintaining in effect
an escort license as provided by this article.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership, firm or
corporation to furnish or offer to furnish escorts or introduction service, or
to conduct business as an escort bureau, or to manage an escort bureau, without
first obtaining and maintaining in effect an escort bureau license as provided
by this article.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person or other entity doing business as
an escort bureau to employ as an escort any person who does not have a current
and unrevoked escort license as provided by this article.
   (d)   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity licensed as provided by
this article to act as an escort, or furnish or offer to furnish escorts or
introduction service, or manage or conduct business as an escort bureau under
any name not specified in such license.
   (e)   It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership, firm or
corporation to operate an escort bureau on the same premises whereon is located
a cocktail lounge, bar or tavern, photography studio, telephone answering
service, theater, bookstore, martial arts studio, physical culture, studio,
public bath, motel, hotel, or massage parlor, or for any person to solicit
business as an escort while in or on such business premises.
(Ord. No. 4782, § 1, 4-3-78)
Sec. 7-119. License application--Required; fee.
   (a)   Any person, association, firm, partnership or corporation desiring to
obtain an escort bureau license, and any person desiring to obtain an escort
license, shall apply to the city director of finance, who shall refer each
application to the chief of police for appropriate investigation. A person
desiring licenses authorizing activity as both an escort and escort bureau
shall submit separate applications.
   (b)   Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application
fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00) and the bond required by this article.
The application fee required by this section and the license required by this
article shall be in addition to any business license and fee which may be
required by chapter
19 of the Tucson Code. The granting of a license under this article shall not
be deemed evidence or proof that the licensee has complied with requirements
and provisions of chapter
19 of the Tucson Code.
   (c)   The chief of police shall investigate an application and the
background of the applicant. Based on such investigation, the chief of police
shall recommend to the director of finance approval or denial of a license
within sixty (60) days of receiving a completed application. The sixty (60)
days may be extended for a reasonable time if required by the chief of police
to obtain information from other law enforcement agencies.
(Ord. No. 4782, § 1, 4-3-78; Ord. No. 8130, § 1, 10-4-93)
Sec. 7-120. Same--Contents.
   (a)   An applicant for an escort license or escort bureau license shall
submit an application, verified under oath, containing the following
information and material:
   (1)   The applicant's full legal and current residence address;
   (2)   The applicant's two (2) residence addresses immediately prior to the
applicant's present address, and the dates of residence at each;
   (3)   Any other name by which the applicant has been known during the
previous five (5) years;
   (4)   The address at which the applicant desires to do business, and the
name under which the business will be conducted;
   (5)   Written proof that the applicant is at least twenty-one (21) years of
age;
   (6)   The applicant's height, weight and color of hair and eyes;
   (7)   Two (2) portrait photographs, at least two (2) inches by two (2)
inches in size, taken within the previous six (6) months;
   (8)   The business, occupation or employment history of the applicant during
the previous five (5) years;
   (9)   All felony and misdemeanor convictions of the applicant, excluding
those for traffic offenses;
   (10)   The applicant's complete fingerprints, recorded by the police
department;
   (11)   The name and current residence address of each person employed or
intended to be employed as an escort;
   (12)   If an application is for an escort bureau license for other than an
individual, the full name and current residence address of each of its
partners, members, directors, officers and managers;
   (13)   Such other information and identification as the police department
may require in order to discover the truth of the matters above required to be
set forth in the application.
   (b)   If an application for an escort bureau license is for a firm,
partnership, association or corporation, the applicant shall be the individual
who is to be in actual management of the escort bureau for which a license is
requested, and the information and material required about the applicant by
subsection (a) of this section shall also be required about the individual in
active management of the firm, partnership, association or corporation in whose
name the license is to be issued.
   (c)   An application for a license shall be accompanied by:
   (1)   The application fee required by section
7-119 of this article; and
   (2)   A surety bond in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). The
bond shall be executed and acknowledged by the licensee as principal and by a
corporation licensed to transact fidelity and surety business in the state as
surety. The bond shall be continuous in form and run concurrently with the
license period, and shall be in favor of the city for the benefit of any person
injured by any act of the principal or the principal's agent or employee, and
shall be subject to claim by any person injured thereby.
(Ord. No. 4782, § 1, 4-3-78)
Sec. 7-121. Grounds for denial of license.
No escort license or escort bureau license shall be issued or renewed if the
applicant:
   (1)   Has been convicted within the previous five (5) years of a felony or
of any offense involving moral turpitude, or of any offense involving
prostitution or any of the related offenses enumerated in A.R.S. section 13-
1401 et seq.; rape, indecent exposure, child molesting, lewd and lascivious
acts as enumerated in this Code or defined in the Arizona Revised Statutes, or
of any offense involving the unlawful carrying, possession, or use of a
dangerous weapon, or of any offense involving the unlawful possession, sale, or
use of dangerous or narcotic drugs;
   (2)   Is not eighteen (18) years of age or older;
   (3)   Knowingly made any false statement in his application;
   (4)   While not licensed under the provisions of this article, committed,
aided or abetted the commission of any act for which a license is required by
this article;
   (5)   While licensed under this article, has had such license revoked within
the previous five (5) years.
(Ord. No. 4782, § 1, 4-3-78)
Sec. 7-122. Place of business; license nontransferable.
   (a)   A licensee shall conduct business only at the address shown on the
license. Each additional place of business shall require a separate license.
   (b)   All licenses issued under this article shall be nontransferable as to
licensee; however, the director of finance, upon receipt of a transfer fee of
ten dollars ($10.00), shall authorize the transfer of a license from one
location to another provided the licensee remains the same.
   (c)   No license shall in any manner advertise its services as licensed or
bonded by the city.
(Ord. No. 4782, § 1, 4:3-78)
Sec. 7-123. Licensee records and reports required.
   (a)   Every person licensed as an escort under this article shall maintain a
legible written record of every transaction whereby the licensee acted as an
escort. The record shall show the date and hours of each transaction and the
name, address and telephone number of the person or persons for whom the
licensee acted as escort.
   (b)   Every escort bureau licensee shall maintain:
   (1)   A current list of all escorts employed by the licensee, showing the
name and current address of each.
   (2)   A legible written record of every transaction whereby any introduction
service or escort is furnished to, or arranged for on behalf of, any person,
patron or customer. The records shall show the date and hour of each
transaction, the name, address and telephone number of the person requesting or
arranging for introduction service or escort, and the name of every escort
furnished, or other person about whom information is furnished, by the
licensee.
   (c)   The records required by subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall
be kept available and open for inspection by the police department at any time
or by the director of finance or his authorized representative at any time.
   (d)   Every escort bureau licensee shall report in writing to the police
department the name of any escort employed by the licensee whose employment by
the licensee has terminated, within twenty-four (24) hours after such
termination.
(Ord. No. 4782, § 1, 4-3-78)
Sec. 7-124. Revocation of license; grounds.
The director of finance shall have the authority to revoke a license issued
under this article when:
   (1)   The licensee is operating in violation of this article or of any other
ordinance or regulation relating to or regulating the licensee's business, and
has failed or refused to cease and desist from such violation within five (5)
days after notice to do so from the director of finance.
   (2)   The licensee or its managing agent has been convicted, since the
license was issued, of any of the offenses described in section
7-121(1) of this article.
   (3)   The licensee or its managing agent has knowingly made false or
misleading statements of material fact in the application for the license
required by this article, or has entered or given false information in any
record or report required by this article to be kept or made by a licensee.
(Ord. No. 4782, § 1, 4-3-78)
Sec. 7-125. Procedure for revocation.
   (a)   Before revoking a license, the director of finance shall given written
notice to the licensee, in the manner provided in this article, that a
revocation hearing will be held at a place and time specified in the notice,
which hearing shall not be sooner than ten (10) days from the date of the
notice. The notice shall state the grounds relied upon for the proposed
revocation. The director of finance shall hold the hearing at the time and
place specified, unless agreed otherwise by the licensee and other parties
concerned, and the licensee shall be allowed to appear in person and by counsel
and offer evidence. A record shall be a kept of all proceedings, including
proofs offered and a transcript of testimony. No license shall be revoked
unless grounds therefor are satisfactorily established by the evidence as shown
by the record of the hearing. The director of finance shall give the licensee
and other parties written notice of his decision, and such decision shall be
final. Revocation of a license shall be effected by the finance director's
signing of the written notice of his decision. A licensee's right to do
business under authority of the license shall terminate immediately upon the
mailing to the licensee of a copy of the director's signed decision revoking
the license.
   (b)   Notices required by this article may be served by certified mail
addressed to the licensee at the address of the licensee as shown on the
business license or by personal service.
(Ord. No. 4782, § 1, 4-3-78)
Sec. 7-126. Penalty.
Wherever in this article any act is prohibited or declared to be unlawful, or
the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be
unlawful, the violation of any such provision of this article is a misdemeanor
punishable by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) or
imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense. Revocation of a license shall not be a defense against prosecution.
(Ord. No. 4782, § 1, 4-3-78)
Secs. 7-127--7-129. Reserved.
ARTICLE VII.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS*
__________
*   Editors Note: Ord. No. 9991, § 1, adopted June 28, 2004, repealed the
former Art. VII., §§
7-130--7-151, and § 2 enacted a new Art. VII as set out herein. The former Art.
VII pertained to massage therapists and establishments and derived from Ord.
No. 3779, § 1, 1-17-72; Ord. No. 4597, §§ 1, 2, 12-6-76; Ord. No. 6059, §§ 1--
9, 8-6-84; Ord. No. 7050, § 2, 9-26-88; Ord. No. 7262, § 1, 8-7-89; Ord. No.
8130, § 2, 10-4-93; Ord. No. 8410, § 2, 4-10-95; Ord. No. 8590, §§ 1--3, 10-23-
95; Ord. No. 8962, § 1, 10-6-97; Ord. No. 9925, § 1, 1-5-04.
   Editors Note: It should be noted that § 3 of Ord. No. 9991 states that the
provisions of this article shall become effective July 1, 2004.
__________
Sec. 7-130. Statement of intent.
It is intended that these provisions shall regulate massage establishments, as
that term is defined in this article, that they may serve the health and
therapeutic massage needs of the residents of this community. It is further
intended that those massage establishments be so regulated so as to provide
their services in compliance with standards of safety, hygiene, and
professional ethics, to the end that the health and welfare of this community
may be maintained.
Hospital service corporations and Medical service corporations certified
pursuant to Chapter 4, Article 3 of Title 20 of the Arizona revised statutes
(A.R.S. § 20-821 et seq.) shall be exempt from the provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 9991, § 2, 6-28-04; Ord. No. 10251, § 1, 2-28-06)
Sec. 7-131. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, wherever used in this article, shall be
construed as defined in this section, unless from the context a different
meaning is intended:
   (a)   Massage therapy means a health care service involving the external
manipulation or pressure of soft tissue (muscles, tendons, ligaments), the main
characteristic being to create physiological changes in those tissues. Massage
therapy includes, but is not limited to, effleurage, petrissage, tapotement,
tapping, compression, applications of direct pressure, vibration, friction,
nerve strokes, stretches, range of motion or movements by manual or by any
electrical, mechanical or vibratory apparatus, and the external applications of
heat and cold. Massage therapy does not include the lawful practice of any of
the healing arts to the extent authorized by a state-issued license; or the
practice of an occupation licensed pursuant to chapter
19, article I of this Code, except massage therapy as defined in this article.
Massage therapy does not, as its primary characteristic, attempt to alter or
change energy fields or the life forces (as perceived in traditional Chinese,
Asian, or Ayervedic medicines) of the human body, including, but not limited
to, shiatsu, reflexology, reiki, polarity, and other similar modalities.
   (b)   Massage therapist means a person who is required to be licensed as a
massage therapist by the State of Arizona.
   (c)   Massage establishment means a place of business wherein any of the
methods listed in subsection (a) are administered or practiced and/or from
which is dispatched a person for administering or practicing massage therapy. A
massage establishment must comply with city established building and safety
codes, fire codes, and health codes. Massage establishments may be located in
either business or residential zones, and must comply with all requirements
listed in section
7-137, Massage establishment license; inspections. However, a physical location
that serves only as a dispatching location and at which massage therapy is
never administered or practiced is exempted from section
7-137. This physical location must be licensed as a massage establishment and
must comply with all building safety, health, and fire codes.
   (d)   Moral turpitude means acts that adversely affect one's honesty,
integrity, or personal values, and may be defined as an act of baseness,
vileness, or depravity in the professional duties owed to the community.
(Ord. No. 9991, § 2, 6-28-04)
Sec. 7-132. Reserved.
Sec. 7-133. Licensing of massage establishments required.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person, association, firm or corporation
to conduct or operate a massage establishment without first obtaining and
maintaining in effect a massage establishment license as required by this
article, except as exempted under sections
7-131(a).
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person, association, firm or corporation
to employ as a massage therapist any person who does not hold a current
unrevoked and unsuspended massage therapist license issued pursuant to A.R.S.
title 32, chapter 42.
It shall be the responsibility of the holder of the massage establishment
license to insure that all persons providing massage therapy services on their
premises are currently licensed.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person, association, firm, or corporation
licensed as provided in this article to operate under any name or conduct
business under any designation not specified in the license.
   (d)   It shall be unlawful for any person, association, firm, or corporation
licensed as provided in this article to remain open for business or provide
services any time between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(Ord. No. 9991, § 2, 6-28-04)
Sec. 7-134. New license application; fee.
   (a)   Any person, association, firm, or corporation desiring to obtain a
massage establishment license shall make application to the finance director,
who shall refer each such application to the chief of police for appropriate
investigation.
   (b)   The application for establishment license and/or change of
establishment location shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee
of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
(Ord. No. 9991, § 2, 6-28-04)
Sec. 7-135. Same--Contents.
An applicant for a massage establishment license shall submit the following:
   (1)   The full legal name and current residence address of the applicant;
   (2)   Any other name by which the applicant has been know during the
previous five (5) years;
   (3)   The address at which the applicant desires to do business;
   (4)   All residence addresses of each applicant, and the dates of residence
at each for the last five (5) years;
   (5)   Personally written letters of character reference from three (3)
adults who are not related to and who have known the applicant for three (3)
years. The letters must be written within one (1) year of the date of
application. The letters shall include addresses and telephone numbers of the
references.
   (6)   Written proof that the applicant is over the age of eighteen (18)
years. The following written instruments are the only acceptable types of
identification:
   a.   A valid driver's license issued by any state, provided such license
includes a picture of the licensee.
   b.   A valid identification license issued pursuant to A.R.S. § 28-421.01.
   c.   A valid armed forces identification card.
   d.   A valid passport issued by a government which contains a photograph of
the person and the date of birth.
   (7)   The applicant's height, weight, and hair and eye color;
   (8)   Two (2) passport size portrait photographs, approximately two (2)
inches by two (2) inches in size, taken within the previous six (6) months;
   (9)   The business, occupation or employment history of the applicant during
the previous five (5) years;
   (10)   The business license history of the applicant; whether the applicant,
in previously operating in this or another city or state under license, has had
such license revoked or suspended, the reason therefore, and the business
activity or occupation subsequent to such suspension or revocation;
   (11)   All felony and misdemeanor convictions, excluding those for civil
traffic offenses, and the grounds of such convictions;
   (12)   Such other identification and information as the police department or
the committee of massage examiners may require in order to discover the truth
of the matters above required to be set forth in the application.
(Ord. No. 9991, § 2, 6-28-04)
Sec. 7-136. License application investigation.
   (a)   Any applicant for a license pursuant to these provisions shall
personally appear at the city business license office and shall present a
complete application containing all the information required by section
7-135.
   (b)   The police department shall investigate the application and the
background of the applicant. Based on such investigation, the police department
shall recommend to the finance director approval or denial of a license within
forty-five (45) days of receiving a completed application. In addition, the
city building inspector shall inspect any premises proposed as the site of a
massage establishment, and shall make separate reports to the finance director
concerning compliance with the provisions of section
7-137 within forty-five (45) days of receiving a completed application.
(Ord. No. 9991, § 2, 6-28-04)
Sec. 7-137. Massage establishment license; inspections.
No massage establishment license shall be issued, unless inspection by the city
building inspector and the county health department indicates the site of the
establishment complies with each of the following minimum requirements:
   (1)   A readable sign shall be permanently attached and posted at the main
entrance identifying the establishment as a massage establishment. The sign
shall not be smaller than three (3) inches by five (5) inches and be of a
durable material.
   (2)   Minimum lighting shall be provided in accordance with the Uniform
Building Code, and in addition, at least one (1) artificial light of not less
than forty (40) watts shall be provided in each room or enclosure where massage
therapy is performed on patrons which shall be in operation whenever massage
therapy is performed.
   (3)   Minimum ventilation shall be provided in accordance with the Uniform
Building Code. Rooms must have a window that opens and/or a supply and return
register.
   (4)   Adequate equipment shall be provided for disinfecting instruments used
in administering or practicing any of the subjects or methods of treatment
listed in section
7-131(a).
   (5)   Hot and cold running water, tempered by means of a mixing valve
faucet, shall be provided at all times.
   (6)   Closed cabinets shall be provided, and used, for the storage of clean
linens.
   (7)   Adequate dressing and toilet facilities shall be provided for patrons.
The bathroom must be within the confines of the establishment. One (1) dressing
room (may be the same as the massage treatment room), one (1) toilet and one
(1) wash basin shall be provided by every massage establishment with one (1) to
three (3) treatment rooms. Another toilet and wash basin must be provided when
there are four (4) or more treatment rooms in an establishment. A minimum of
one (1) shower or tub shall be provided for any establishment offering any
hydrotherapy services such as whirlpool baths, saunas, steam baths, herbal
wraps, etc. Each dressing room/treatment room shall contain a locker, lock box
or cabinet for each patron to be served which shall be capable of being locked.
   (8)   Any pool or spa shall be permitted and inspected by the county health
department.
   (9)   All walls, ceilings, floors, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms and all
other physical facilities within the establishment must be in good repair and
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or
vapor rooms, or cabinets, toilets and wash basins shall be thoroughly cleaned
each day business is in operation. Shower compartments and bathtubs, where
provided, shall be thoroughly cleaned after each use.
   (10)   Clean and sanitary sheets and towels shall be provided for each
patron of the establishment. The head rest or face cradle of each table shall
be provided with a clean and sanitary covering for each patron.
   (11)   All wash basins within an establishment shall have hot and cold
running water, tempered by means of a mixing valve faucet; provide sanitary
towels placed in permanently installed dispensers or upon a permanently
attached roll dispenser; and provide a soap dispenser that is placed on or near
the wash basin. A hand wash basin shall be provided in each treatment room
providing hydrotherapy services.
   (12)   In the event that a massage establishment is located in a residence,
the following requirements must be met:
   a.   A separate room that is not used as a living space must be provided.
   b.   Only one (1) massage treatment room within a residence is permitted.
   c.   Toilet and wash basin facilities shall be located on the same floor as
the massage treatment room and shall be easily accessible to the massage
treatment room; no nonresidential plumbing fixtures shall be installed to
accommodate this use.
   d.   Adequate parking shall be available (space for no less than two (2)
cars).
   e.   Full-service hydrotherapy facilities (whirlpool, steam, sauna, etc.),
for public use, shall be prohibited.
   f.   A massage establishment shall be accessible by a separate, outside door
(not through the residence). If installation of an outside entrance is
necessary, such entrance shall be constructed to the side or back of the
residence and conform to all building codes.
   g.   A massage establishment shall be separated from the residence by
complete partitioning and solid, self-closing doors (raised panel doors not
acceptable).
   h.   All other guidelines outlined in this section shall be complied with.
   i.   Compliance with the home occupation regulations of the Tucson Zoning
Code is required.
(Ord. No. 9991, § 2, 6-28-04)
Sec. 7-139. Criminal record as grounds for denial.
No massage establishment license shall be issued or renewed if the applicant
has been convicted within the last five (5) years of any felony or other of any
offense involving moral turpitude, dangerous or narcotic drugs or marijuana, as
enumerated in this Code and as defined in the Arizona Revised Statutes; or any
such offense committed outside the state that would have been classified as one
of the above offenses if committed within the state.
(Ord. No. 9991, § 2, 6-28-04)
Sec. 7-140. Display of license.
Every person, association, firm, or corporation, to whom a license shall have
been granted shall display the license in a conspicuous place upon the business
premises. City license inspectors may inspect all places of business subject to
the provisions of this article and the books and records thereof, and report
all violations to the office of the director of finance and to the chief of
police.
(Ord. No. 9991, § 2, 6-28-04)
Sec. 7-141. Change of location or employment.
A change of location of a massage establishment must be re-licensed pursuant to
section
7-137. The applicant must complete an occupational application and pay all
applicable fees.
(Ord. No. 9991, § 2, 6-28-04)
Sec. 7-142. Renewal.
Every licensed massage establishment shall pay to the office of the finance
director a quarterly occupational tax according to the schedule set forth in
chapter
19, article I of this Code.
(Ord. No. 9991, § 2, 6-28-04)
Sec. 7-143. Sale, transfer or expansion.
   (a)   Upon the sale or transfer of any interest in a massage establishment,
the license therefore shall be null and void. A new application shall be made
by any person, association, firm, or corporation desiring to own or operate the
establishment. The provisions of sections
7-134 and
7-135 shall apply to any person, association, firm or corporation applying for
a massage establishment license for premises previously used as such
establishment.
   (b)   Any such sale or transfer of any interest in an existing massage
establishment, or any application for enlargement or expansion of the building
or other place of business of a massage establishment, shall require inspection
and compliance with section
7-137.
(Ord. No. 9991, § 2, 6-28-04)
Sec. 7-144. Other unlawful activities; general penalty.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person, association, firm or corporation
to conduct or operate a massage establishment on the same premises whereon
alcohol is sold (unless operated by a non-profit corporation or duly licensed
athletic club, spa, or resort), or on the same premises whereon is conducted
the business of adult bookstore, adult motion picture theatre or adult
entertainment enterprise as defined in section
7-207 of this Code.
   (b)   Wherever in this article any act is prohibited or declared to be
unlawful, and wherever in this article the doing of any act is required or the
failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, the violation of any such
provisions of this article is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more
than three hundred dollars ($300.00) or imprisonment for not more than three
(3) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day such violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense. Revocation or suspension of a
license shall not be a defense against prosecution.
(Ord. No. 9991, § 2, 6-28-04)
Sec. 7-145. Revocation of license; grounds.
   (a)   The license of a massage establishment may be revoked upon any one (1)
or more of the following grounds:
   (1)   That the licensee has fraudulently conducted the business of massage
establishment, or fraudulently or deceitfully obtained a license to conduct
such business.
   (2)   That the licensee has been convicted within the last five (5) years in
a court of competent jurisdiction of a felony or of any offense involving moral
turpitude, dangerous or narcotic drugs or marijuana, as enumerated in this Code
and as defined in the Arizona Revised Statutes.
   (3)   That the licensee has engaged in untrue, fraudulent, misleading or
deceptive advertising.
   (4)   That the licensee is engaged in the business of massage therapy
establishment under a false or assumed name, or is impersonating another
practitioner.
   (5)   That the licensee has violated any of the provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 9991, § 2, 6-28-04)
Sec. 7-146. Denial or revocation of license; appeal.
   (a)   Before revoking a license, the director of finance shall give written
notice to the licensee that a revocation hearing will be held at a place and
time specified in the notice, which hearing shall not be sooner than ten (10)
days from the date of the notice. The notice shall state the grounds relied
upon for the denial or revocation.
   (b)   Any person denied a license pursuant to the provisions of this
article, or whose license has been revoked, may appeal in writing to the
director of finance within ten (10) days from the notice, stating reasons why
the action was improper. The director of finance or his designee shall hear the
appeal on its merits not less than seven (7) nor more than thirty (30) days
following the filing of the appeal. If the licensee fails to appear at the
hearing, the director of finance or his designee may conduct the hearing. No
license shall be revoked unless grounds therefore are satisfactorily
established as shown by the record of the hearing. The director of finance/
designee shall give the licensee notice of the hearing decision and such
decision shall be final.
(Ord. No. 9991, § 2, 6-28-04)
Sec. 7-147. Applicability of regulations to existing businesses.
The provisions of this article shall apply to all activities regulated by this
article of such persons and businesses described herein, whether such
activities were commenced before or after the effective date of this article;
however, the provisions of section 7-138 shall not apply to any person licensed
by the city as a massage establishment continuously since May 1, 1971.
(Ord. No. 9991, § 2, 6-28-04)
Sec. 7-148. Reserved.
Sec. 7-149. Reserved.
Sec. 7-150. Finance director may formulate rules.
The city finance director may formulate rules to assist in the administration
of this article by city staff. Such rules, when adopted by mayor and council,
shall have the force of law.
(Ord. No. 9991, § 2, 6-28-04)
Sec. 7-151. Administrative rules.
The city police department may require applicant's fingerprints if it is deemed
necessary for positive identification of the applicant.
(Ord. No. 9991, § 2, 6-28-04)
Secs. 7-152--7-159. Reserved.
ARTICLE VIII.
DRIVE-IN RESTAURANTS*
__________
*   Editors Note: Ord. No. 4382, § 2, adopted Aug. 4, 1975, amended the Code by
adding a new art. VIII to ch.
7. This art. VIII was previously designated as art. IV of ch.
14 and is derived from the various ordinances which constitute the history
notes following each section.
The redesignation was at the specific request of the city.
__________
Sec. 7-160. Definitions and rules of construction.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent
with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in
the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number
include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely
directory.
   Sec. 7-160(1). Drive-in restaurant is any establishment where food, frozen
dessert and/or beverage is sold to the consumer and where motor vehicle parking
space is provided where such food, frozen dessert or beverage is intended to be
consumed in the motor vehicle parked upon the premises or anywhere on the
premises outside of the building.
   Sec. 7-160(2). Licensee is a person having a city license in full force and
effect issued hereunder for a drive-in restaurant.
   Sec. 7-160(3). Waste material is paper cups, straws, napkins, garbage,
beverages and all other waste matter intended for disposal which, if not placed
in a proper receptacle, tends to create a public nuisance by rendering property
unclean, unsafe and unsightly. The specifically named "waste" set forth above
shall not be exclusive either as to type or kind.
(1953 Code, ch. 13, § 63; Ord. No. 1875, § 1, 12-15-58; Ord. No. 4382, § 2, 8-
4-75)
Sec. 7-161. License required.
No person shall operate or maintain a drive-in restaurant within the city
without first obtaining a license as hereinafter provided from the director of
finance.
(1953 Code, ch. 13, § 64; Ord. No. 1875, § 1, 12-15-58; Ord. No. 4382, § 2, 8-
4-75)
Sec. 7-162. Application for license required; form and contents.
Applications for licenses issued hereunder shall be made upon blank forms
prepared and made available by the director of finance and shall state:
   Sec. 7-162(1). The name, home address and proposed business address of the
applicant;
   Sec. 7-162(2). The number of motor vehicles which the proposed drive-in
restaurant is designed to accommodate
   Sec. 7-162(3). The hours of operation for the proposed drive-in restaurant;
   Sec. 7-162(4). Such other information as is reasonably necessary to
effectuate the purpose of this article and to arrive at a fair determination of
whether the terms of this article have been complied with.
(1953 Code, ch. 13, § 65; Ord. No. 1875, § 1, 12-15-58; Ord. No. 4382, § 2, 8-
4-75)
Sec. 7-163. Plat or drawing to accompany application.
An application hereunder shall be accompanied by a plat or drawing of the
proposed drive-in restaurant showing its location, size, and capacity; the
location and size of entrances and exits; the kind of ground surface of the
premises; the location, size and construction of all structures; the location,
size and construction of surrounding wall, faces, barriers, and parking stalls
or spaces.
(1953 Code, ch. 13, § 65; Ord. No. 1875, § 1, 12-15-58; Ord. No. 4382, § 2, 8-
4-75)
Sec. 7-164. Application fee.
An application hereunder shall be accompanied by an application fee of five
dollars ($5.00).
(1953 Code, ch. 13, § 66; Ord. No. 1875, § 1, 12-15-38; Ord. No. 4382, § 2, 8-
4-75)
Sec. 7-165. Bond or liability insurance required.
In the event a judgment is awarded against any licensee for damages resulting
from negligence in the operation and/or maintenance of a drive-in restaurant by
the licensee, which judgment is not satisfied within ninety (90) days after it
becomes final, then the director of finance may require the licensee to post a
bond, approved as to form by the city attorney, executed by a bond or surety
company authorized to do business in the state in the penal sum of five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00) conditioned upon the payment by the license of any
and all final judgments against the licensee for injuries or damages resulting
to persons or property arising out of negligence in the operation or
maintenance of any drive-in restaurant. Such bond shall run to the city for the
benefit of any person who may receive injuries, and for the benefit of any
person who may claim redress for property damage resulting from negligence in
the operation or maintenance of such drive-in restaurant. Such bond shall
remain in full force and effect for the full period of time for which the
license is effective. The director of finance shall have the authority to
accept, in lieu of a bond, a liability insurance policy, issued by an insurance
company authorized to do business in the state, which conforms to the
requirements of this section.
(1953 Code, ch. 13, § 67; Ord. No. 1875, § 1, 12-15-58; Ord. No. 4382, § 2, 8-
4-75)
Sec. 7-166. Standards for issuing license.
The director of finance shall issue a license hereunder when he finds:
   Sec. 7-166(1). That the applicant has complied with existing health and
safety regulations of public authorities, and that the applicant is of good
moral character and temperate habits;
   Sec. 7-166(2). That conducting a drive-in restaurant at the location
designated during the hours applied for will per se not result in the violation
of any law or ordinance;
   Sec. 7-166(3). That the bond or insurance policy, if required by section
7-165, has been procured, and filed in the office of the director of finance;
   Sec. 7-166(4). That the requirements of this article and of all other
governing laws and ordinances have been satisfied.
   Sec. 7-166(5). In case a license granted under this article to the
applicant, or to any agent or employee of the applicant or a majority
stockholder of the applicant, has been revoked or suspended within two (2)
years prior to the date of the application, a license shall be issued only if
the director of finance finds that the applicant, its officers and agents, and
its principal stockholders are morally responsible, have good reputations and
are capable of operating the proposed drive-in restaurant in a manner
consistent with the public health, safety and good morals.
(1953 Code, ch. 13, § 68; Ord. No. 1875, § 1, 12-15-58; Ord. No. 4382, § 2, 8-
4-75)
Sec. 7-167. Duration, scope, transfer of licenses.
Such license shall remain in effect until suspended or revoked or until the
licensee shall cease to do business at the location specified in the license. A
license shall not be transferable.
(1953 Code, ch. 13, § 68; Ord. No. 1875, § 1, 12-15-58; Ord. No. 4382, § 2, 8-
4-75)
Sec. 7-168. Compliance with article required.
A license shall be issued only after the applicant has fully complied with the
provisions of this article.
(1953 Code, ch. 13, § 69; Ord. No. 1875, § 1, 12-15-58; Ord. No. 4382, § 2, 8-
4-75)
Sec. 7-169. Licensee to maintain quiet and good order.
Every licensee shall use every reasonable effort to maintain quiet and good
order upon the premises licensed as a drive-in restaurant and shall direct any
person or persons known by the licensee or any of its employees or agents to be
engaging in disorderly or immoral conduct or loitering, or in any way violating
section
7-170 to leave the premises; in the event such person or persons refuse to
leave the premises upon such direction, the licensee shall promptly notify the
city police. The licensee shall not permit any loudspeakers or jukeboxes to be
operated on such premises outside of a fully enclosed building between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
(1953 Code, ch. 13, § 70; Ord. No. 1875, § 1, 12-15-58; Ord. No. 4382, § 2, 8-
4-75)
Sec. 7-170. Noise, other disturbances by patrons prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person on the premises of a drive-in restaurant to
race the motor of any motor vehicle, needlessly bring to a sudden start or stop
any motor vehicle, blow any horn, or make or cause to be made any other loud or
unseemly noise, nuisance or disturbance whereby the quiet and good order of the
premises or of the neighborhood is disturbed.
(1953 Code, ch. 13, § 71; Ord. No. 1875, § 1, 12-15-58; Ord. No. 4382, § 2, 8-
4-75)
Sec. 7-171. Refuse, waste to be placed in containers; littering prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, throw or deposit any waste
material upon the outside premises or parking area of a drive-in restaurant or
on any street, alley or adjoining property or in the vicinity of a drive-in
restaurant, except in adequate receptacles provided for that purpose.
(1953 Code, ch. 13, § 72; Ord. No. 1875, § 1, 12-15-58; Ord. No. 4382, § 2, 8-
4-75)
Sec. 7-172. General cleanliness of premises; refuse containers required;
disposal of refuse by licensee.
The licensee shall keep the premises whereon the drive-in restaurant is
located, together with the parking area and that portion of any street or alley
adjoining the drive-in restaurant, free from waste material. The licensee shall
provide the drive-in restaurant with a sufficient number of adequate refuse
containers, which conform to the size and type specified by this Code. Any
incinerator which may be installed shall conform with the provisions of
sections
11-5 through
11-11 of the Tucson Code, and shall not be used until the required permit for
burning and approval of the device required by those sections is secured by the
licensee.
(1953 Code, ch. 13, § 73; Ord. No. 1875, § 1, 12-15-58; Ord. No. 4382, § 2, 8-
4-75)
Sec. 7-173. Sales from windows, other openings.
The sale of food, frozen desserts, beverages, candy and other products from a
window or other opening in a drive-in restaurant shall not be permitted unless
such window or opening is at least ten (10) feet from the property line;
however, the provisions hereof shall not apply to sidewalk vending to
pedestrian traffic.
(1953 Code, ch. 13, § 74; Ord. No. 1875, § 1, 12-15-58; Ord. No. 4382, § 2, 8-
4-75)
Sec. 7-174. Access required.
The licensee shall at all times provide access available to public streets from
not more than two (2) points, nor less than one (1) point, on each abutting
street; in addition, he may provide access at not more than two (2) points on
each abutting public alley. Such means of access shall be kept clear by the
licensee at all times to facilitate departure and entrance of persons in motor
vehicles and to permit entrance and exit of fire apparatus or ambulances in
case of emergency.
(1953 Code, ch. 13, § 75; Ord. No. 1875, § 1, 12-15-58; Ord. No. 4382, § 2, 8-
4-75)
Sec. 7-175. Illumination required.
All of the parking area of any drive-in restaurant shall be adequately
illuminated by electric lights, to a minimum light intensity of two (2)
footcandles of light; but all illumination shall be so arranged by the licensee
as to be directed away from any adjoining residential property. The lights
utilized for illumination shall be so designed and installed as to minimize
glare and to prevent direct beams from invading or traveling to surrounding
residential property or the adjoining and abutting streets.
(1953 Code, ch. 13, § 76; Ord. No. 1875, § 1, 12-15-58; Ord. No. 4382, § 2, 8-
4-75)
Sec. 7-176. Paving or treatment of parking area.
The parking area on the premises of a drive-in restaurant shall be
satisfactorily paved or treated with a dustproof material by the licensee or
owner of the premises so as to avoid creating dust and so as to provide for
adequate drainage of surface water.
(1953 Code, ch. 13, § 77; Ord. No. 1875, § 1, 12-15-58; Ord. No. 4382, § 2, 8-
4-75)
Sec. 7-177. Barrier or walls required.
The licensee or owner of the premises shall furnish and install a wall or
barrier sufficient to prevent the passage of motor vehicles from or to the
licensed premises except at the entrances and exits specified in section
7-174. This required wall or barrier shall be located on the lot lines (except
at openings required by section
7-174) of the premises or in such other location as will physically prevent any
part of a motor vehicle inside the premises from overhanging or encroaching on
any part of a public sidewalk or alley.
(1953 Code, ch. 13, § 78; Ord. No. 1875, § 1, 12-15-58; Ord. No. 4382, § 2, 8-
4-75)
Sec. 7-178. License additional to other licenses.
The licenses required by section
7-161 shall be in addition to all other licenses required by law.
(1953 Code, ch. 13, § 80; Ord. No. 1875, § 1, 12-15-58; Ord. No. 4382, § 2, 8-
4-75)
Sec. 7-179. Revocation of license authorized; grounds.
The director of finance shall have the authority to revoke or suspend a license
issued hereunder when he finds:
   Sec. 7-179(1). That the licensee is operating in violation of this article
or of any other governing law, ordinance or regulation relating to or
regulating the business; and
   Sec. 7-179(2). The licensee has failed or refused to cease and desist from
violation upon five (5) days' notice so to do by the director of finance; or
   Sec. 7-179(3). In the event the licensee has three (3) previous violations
upon which he has received notice and again violated the provisions of this
article, the director of finance may revoke or suspend such license, without
giving previous notice of such violation; but the notice of hearing required by
this article shall be given and the procedure therein specified shall be
followed. Notices required by this article may be served by certified mail
addressed to licensee at the address of the licensed business or by personal
service.
(1953 Code, ch. 13, § 81; Ord. No. 1875, § 1, 12-15-58; Ord. No. 4382, § 2, 8-
4-75)
Sec. 7-180. Procedure for license revocation.
Before revoking any license, the director of finance shall give notice in the
manner provided by section
7-179 to the licensee concerned that a hearing to revoke the license will be
held at a specified place, and at a time not sooner than five (5) days from the
date of such notice. This notice shall clearly and concisely state the grounds
and reasons relied upon for revocation. The director of finance shall hold the
hearing at the time and place specified, unless adjourned by consent of all
parties, and the licensee shall be allowed to appear in person and by counsel,
offer proof, and evidence. A record shall be kept of all the proceedings at
such hearing, and a transcript of all evidence offered shall be made and filed.
No license shall be revoked except when grounds therefor as provided in section
7-179 are satisfactorily established by the proofs offered as shown by the
record of proceedings and transcript of the hearing. The decision of the
director of finance suspending or revoking any license shall be final; but the
licensee may, within twenty (20) days of any such order of suspension or
revocation, appeal said order to the Superior Court of the State of Arizona in
and for the County of Pima. In the event of any such appeal, the matter shall
be heard de novo by the Superior Court. A licensee's right to do business under
the authority of its license shall not be suspended until final determination
of the license revocation or suspension proceedings, provided that the
subsequent conduct of the business shall be in accordance with this article,
pending decision.
(1953 Code, ch. 13, § 82; Ord. No. 1875, § 1, 12-15-58; Ord. No. 4382, § 2, 8-
4-75)
Secs. 7-181--7-200. Reserved.
ARTICLE IX.
SWAP MEETS*
__________
*   Editors Note: Section 1 of Ord. No. 5380, adopted June 1, 1981, repealed
art. IX, §§
7-201--7-205, derived from Ord. No. 4724, § 1, adopted Nov. 14, 1977; and § 2
of Ord. No. 5380 added a new art. IX, §§
7-201-- 7-205.1.
__________
Sec. 7-201. Definitions.
In this article, unless the context otherwise requires:
   (1)   Advertisement means the attempt by publication, dissemination,
solicitation or circulation, oral or written, to induce directly or indirectly
any person to enter into any obligation or acquire any title or interest in any
merchandise, or engage in any sale at a swap meet.
   (2)   Director means the city finance director or his designated agents.
   (3)   Employee means a person employed by a proprietor, from whose wages the
proprietor withholds amounts pursuant to the withholding provisions of state or
federal income tax laws, or a person or an employee of a firm with whom the
proprietor has entered into a written contract of more than thirty (30) days'
duration for the provision of maintenance, cleaning or security services.
   (4)   Merchandise means any new or used objects, wares, goods, commodities,
personalty, and intangibles, real estate, amusements, food concessions, or
services.
   (5)   Person means any natural person or his legal representative,
partnership, domestic or foreign corporation, any company, trust, business
entity, or association, any agent, employee, salesperson, partner, officer,
director, member, stockholder, associate or trustee.
   (6)   Premises means any building, structure, lot or other area at which a
swap meet sale is conducted.
   (7)   Proprietor means any person who rents, sells, donates or otherwise
makes available to swap meet vendors any space within premises owned or
controlled by the proprietor for the purpose of a swap meet sale.
   (8)   Proprietor license means a current and valid license issued by the
city to the proprietor authorizing the use of the premises owned or controlled
by the proprietor, as specified on the proprietor license, for the purpose of a
swap meet sale.
   (9)   Proprietor occupational license tax means those monthly sums payable
to the city by the proprietor, pursuant to chapter
19 of the Tucson Code.
   (10)   Sale means any sale, offer for sale, or attempt to sell any
merchandise, including any exchange, offer for exchange, or attempt to exchange
or barter any merchandise at a swap meet.
   (11)   Swap meet means a place of commercial activity, popularly known as a
swap meet, flea market, park-and-swap, which is:
   (a)   Open to the general public for the purchase of merchandise on the
premises;
   (b)   Available to the general public who wish to sell merchandise on the
premises, whether such sellers or vendors are in the business of vending or are
making causal sales or some combination thereof;
   (c)   Composed of stalls, stands or spaces allotted to vendors, at least one
(1) of whom does not occupy the same allotted space or spaces on an
uninterrupted continuous daily basis.
   (12)   Vendor means any person upon the premises for the purpose of causing
the advertisement of or making a sale at a swap meet.
(Ord. No. 5380, § 2, 6-1-81; Ord. No. 5840, § 1, 8-1-83)
Sec. 7-202. Unlawful practices of swap meet proprietor.
It shall be unlawful for a swap meet proprietor to fail to comply with the
requirements of this article, and in particular:
   (1)   To permit a swap meet upon premises owned or controlled by the
proprietor without being in possession of a proprietor license;
   (2)   To permit any person to engage in the sale of merchandise upon parking
or other areas owned or controlled by the proprietor, whenever such areas or
sites are not specified on the proprietor license;
   (3)   To fail to control the entrance to and exit from the premises of all
vendors and merchandise, by the physical presence and personal supervision on
the premises of the proprietor or his designated agents during the hours of
operation of the swap meet;
   (4)   To fail to pay to the city the proprietor occupational license tax
when due;
   (5)   To fail to comply with the director's rules and regulations
implementing this article;
   (6)   To fail to post on the premises, in a conspicuous place so as to be
clearly seen by the public and the director, a proprietor license;
   (7)   To allow any person other than the proprietor or swap meet employees
to remain on the premises of a swap meet located within six hundred (600) feet
of the boundary of property developed or used for residential purposes between
the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m.;
   (8)   To permit any person to display, offer for sale or trade or to give
away or to make a sale, trade or gift of any animal or fowl on the premises of
a swap meet or adjacent property controlled by a proprietor.
(Ord. No. 5380, § 2, 6-1-81; Ord. No. 5840, § 2, 8-1-83; Ord. No. 6160, § 1, 1-
21-85)
   Editors Note: Section 3 of Ord. No. 6160 reads as follows:
      "The violation of any provision of Sections
7-202 or
7-203 of the Tucson Code as amended in Sections 1 and 2, respectively, of this
ordinance is a misdemeanor and punishable by a fine of not more than three
hundred dollars ($300.00) for any person. Each day such violation continues
shall constitute a separate offense. Absence, revocation or suspension of a
proprietor license as defined in Sec. 7-201(a) of the Tucson Code shall not be
a defense against prosecution."
Sec. 7-202.1. Swap meet proprietor license application.
A proprietor license may be issued by the city upon the prior city approval of
the application of the proprietor on forms supplied by the city for such a
proprietor license and upon prior payment by the proprietor to the city of a
one-time twenty-four dollar ($24.00) proprietor occupational license tax
application fee.
(Ord. No. 7885, § 3, 8-3-92)
Sec. 7-203. Unlawful practices of swap meet vendor.
It shall be unlawful for a swap meet vendor to fail to comply with the
requirements of this article, and in particular:
   (1)   To fail to post at the vendor's assigned sales location on the
premises, in a conspicuous place so as to be clearly seen by the public and the
director, any current, valid license issued by the city to the vendor pursuant
to chapter
19 of the Tucson Code;
   (2)   To engage in sales at locations other than the vendor's sales location
assigned that day by the proprietor;
   (3)   To engage in sales of tobacco, cigars, cigarettes and spirituous
liquor, all as defined in the Arizona Revised Statutes;
   (4)   To display, offer for sale or trade or to give away, or make a sale,
trade or gift of any animal or fowl;
   (5)   To display or offer for sale any firearms, as defined in the Arizona
Revised Statutes, without holding a federal firearms license.
(Ord. No. 5380, § 2, 6-1-81; Ord. No. 6160, § 2, 1-21-85)
   Note: See the editor's note to §
7-202.
Sec. 7-204. Regulations.
For the purpose of this article:
   (1)   Nothing in this article shall exempt a sale made at a swap meet from
taxes payable pursuant to chapter
19 of the Tucson Code.
   (2)   The director shall, by rules and regulations, establish the forms and
records to be maintained by the swap meet proprietor. The forms and records to
be kept and used by the swap meet proprietor shall be preserved by the
proprietor for three (3) years and shall be made available for inspection by
the director and the city police department.
(Ord. No. 5380, § 2, 6-1-81)
Sec. 7-205. Administration.
   (a)   A proprietor license is not transferable and not assignable.
   (b)   The director may refuse to issue a proprietor license for good cause
stated.
   (c)   The director may suspend a proprietor license upon the proprietor's
conviction of any violation of this article, or upon the proprietor's failure
to maintain forms and records as required by the director's rules and
regulations, or upon the director's determination that the proprietor's swap
meet activities are causing:
   (1)   Traffic congestion on the abutting public streets;
   (2)   The accumulation of debris or litter upon the premises;
   (3)   Loud noises, nuisances or disturbances whereby the quiet and good
order of the premises or of the neighborhood is disturbed; or
   (4)   Persons other than the proprietor or swap meet employees are on the
premises of a swap meet located within six hundred (600) feet of the boundary
of property developed or used for residential purposes between the hours of 12:
00 midnight and 6:00 a.m.
   (d)   The director may revoke a proprietor license upon the proprietor's
conviction of any violation of this article within three (3) years of the
proprietor's prior conviction under this article.
   (e)   Before suspending or revoking a proprietor license, the director shall
give the proprietor prior notice, by certified mail addressed to the licensee
at the address of the licensed business or by personal service, that a hearing
to suspend or revoke the license will be held at a specified place, and at a
time not sooner than five (5) days from the date of such notice. This notice
shall clearly and concisely state the grounds and reasons relied upon for
revocation or suspension. The director shall hold the hearing at the time and
place specified, unless adjourned by consent of all parties; and the licensee
shall be allowed to appear in person and by counsel, and offer proof and
evidence. A record shall be kept of all the proceedings at such hearing, and a
transcript of all evidence offered shall be made and filed. No license shall be
suspended or revoked except when grounds therefor, as provided in this section,
are satisfactorily established by the proof offered as shown by the record of
proceedings and transcript of the hearing. The decision of the director
spending or revoking any license shall be final.
   (f)   Proprietor occupational license taxes shall be required pursuant to
chapter
19 of the Tucson Code.
(Ord. No. 5380, § 2, 6-1-81; Ord. No. 5840, § 3, 8-1-83)
Sec. 7-205.1. Penalty.
Wherever in this article any act is prohibited or declared to be unlawful, or
the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be
unlawful, the violation of any such provision of this article is a misdemeanor
punishable by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) for any
person. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Revocation or suspension of a proprietor license shall not be a defense against
prosecution.
(Ord. No. 5380, § 2, 6-1-81)
   Sec. 7-205.1(1). Any other provision of this section notwithstanding, the
violation of section
7-202(7) shall be punishable by a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00), which
fine shall not be suspended.
(Ord. No. 5840, § 4, 8-1-83)
ARTICLE X.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ENTERPRISES AND ESTABLISHMENTS*
__________
*   Cross References: Indecent exposure, §
11-29.
__________
Sec. 7-206. Purpose and intent.
It is the purpose and intent of this article to provide for the orderly
regulation of adult entertainment enterprises and establishments, as defined in
this article, in the interest of public health, safety and welfare, and to
prevent solicitation for acts of prostitution in adult entertainment
enterprises and establishments by providing certain minimum standards and
regulations for adult entertainment enterprises and establishments, and by
providing standards for operators and employees of adult entertainment
enterprises and establishments.
(Ord. No. 4783, § 1, 4-3-78)
Sec. 7-207. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this article, shall be
construed as defined in this section unless in context it appears that a
different meaning is intended:
   Adult arcade means any business wherein a film or videotape viewing device
projects or displays any film or videotape reproduction into an enclosed
viewing area designed for occupancy by no more than five (5) persons, where the
images so displayed are characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or
description of unclothed portions of the body.
   Adult entertainment employee means every owner, partner, manager,
supervisor, clerk, cashier or any person that entertains whether in private or
public, whether paid or not. Employees who are not normally in direct contact
with the public, such as janitorial and maintenance workers, are exempt.
   Adult entertainment enterprise means any business activity wherein is
furnished for a fee or charge or other like consideration, whether in public or
private premises, the opportunity to feel, handle, touch, paint, be in the
presence of, or be entertained by the unclothed body or the unclothed portion
of the body of another person, or to observe, view or photograph any such
activity. The term includes adult motels and adult arcades as defined herein.
   Adult entertainment establishment means any establishment or place of
business where any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation,
joint venture or combination of individuals engages in, conducts, operates,
carries on or permits to be engaged in, conducted, operated or carried on, any
adult entertainment enterprise regardless of whether any other activity is also
conducted on the premises.
   Adult motel means a hotel, motel or similar commercial enterprise which:
   (1)   Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration;
provides patrons with the opportunity to view an unclothed portion of the body
as defined herein of a live person or by closed-circuit television, television
transmissions, films, motion picture, video cassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions; and
   (2)   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than
ten (10) hours; or
   (3)   Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for
a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours.
   On-site manager means whatever adult entertainment employee, manager,
supervisor or other person who is physically present and in control of the
operation of the adult entertainment enterprise.
   Sexual contact means any direct or indirect touching or contact with any
part of the genitals, anus or female breast.
   Unclothed portion of the body means a state of dress in such a manner that
the female nipple and areola (the more darkly pigmented portion of the female
breast encircling the nipple) are not covered by a fully opaque material and/or
the lower part of the torso, consisting of the genitals and/or the anal cleft
or cleavage of the buttocks, is not covered by a fully opaque material.
   Viewing area means any area from which a person may watch a film, video
viewing device or live entertainment.
(Ord. No. 4783, § 1, 4-3-78; Ord. No. 7299, § 3, 10-23-89; Ord. No. 7414, § 1,
5-21-90; Ord. No. 8246, § 1, 4-11-94)
Sec. 7-208. Exempt activities.
The following activities are specifically excluded from the meaning of the term
"adult entertainment enterprise" and are exempt from the application of all
provisions of this article.
   (1)   Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths or physical therapists
who are duly licensed to practice their respective professions in the state;
   (2)   Nurses registered under the laws of the state;
   (3)   Trainers of any amateur, semiprofessional or professional athlete or
athletic team;
   (4)   Barbers and beauticians who are duly licensed under the laws of the
state;
   (5)   Any activity conducted or sponsored by any school district or other
public agency;
   (6)   Any activity conducted by a person pursuant to any license issued by
the state or any agency thereof or political subdivision which licenses,
prescribes standards for and supervises such activity or profession;
   (7)   Portions of performances on theater, concert hall, music hall or
auditorium stages wherein such displays are an integral part of a dramatic or
comedic presentation;
   (8)   Private schools providing a course of instruction in photography or
photography studios which do not provide, for consideration, photography
equipment, models and a studio;
   (9)   Modeling agencies, schools or services, except those which provide
live modeling services, for consideration, in which a patron may obtain an
exclusive modeling exhibition in which he or she is the only observer.
(Ord. No. 4783, § 1, 4-3-78; Ord. No. 7299, § 3, 10-23-89; Ord. No. 7414, § 1,
5-21-90)
Sec. 7-209. Licensing required; expiration; annual renewal; unlawful acts.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person, self-employed or employed by
another, association, partnership, firm or corporation, to open or operate an
adult entertainment enterprise or to conduct business as or to manage an adult
entertainment enterprise without first obtaining and maintaining in effect, an
adult entertainment enterprise license, as provided by this article.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person, self-employed or employed by
another, association, partnership, firm or corporation to employ an adult
entertainment employee that is not currently licensed, as provided by this
article.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any adult entertainment employee to be an
employee of an adult entertainment enterprise without first obtaining, and
maintaining in effect, an adult entertainment employee license as provided by
this article.
   (d)   Adult entertainment employee licenses shall be effective for one (1)
year, expiring at midnight one (1) year from the date of the initial
application, unless a reapplication is filed with the city's director of
finance within thirty (30) days before the expiration date; except as follows:
   (1)   Adult entertainment employee licenses in effect at the time of the
adoption of this ordinance shall expire at midnight one (1) year after the
passage of this ordinance [April 11, 1994], if a reapplication is not filed
with the department upon or before that date.
   (2)   Adult entertainment employees who do not appear in a state of undress
as described in section
7-207(h), do not have to renew their licenses, nor do their licenses expire.
(Ord. No. 4783, § 1, 4-3-78; Ord. No. 5427, § 1, 9-8-81; Ord. No. 7299, § 4,
10-23-89; Ord. No. 7414, § 1, 5-21-90; Ord. No. 8246, § 2, 4-11-94)
Sec. 7-210. License application procedure and fees; renewal procedure and fees;
hearing; appeal.
   (a)   Any person, association, firm, partnership or corporation desiring to
obtain an adult entertainment enterprise license, or a new adult entertainment
employee license or a renewal of same, if required by section
7-209(d), shall apply to the city director of finance, who shall refer each
application to the chief of police for appropriate investigation and refer each
application for an adult entertainment enterprise license to the director of
planning and zoning to verify compliance with Chapter
23 of the Tucson Code.
   (b)   Each application for:
   (1)   An adult entertainment enterprise license shall be accompanied by a
nonrefundable application fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00).
   (2)   A new adult entertainment employee license shall be accompanied by a
nonrefundable application fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
   (3)   A renewal of an adult entertainment employee license, if required by
section
7-209(d), shall be accompanied by a non-refundable application fee of forty
dollars ($40.00).
   (4)   An adult entertainment enterprise license application shall be
accompanied by the bond or proof of insurance required by this article. The
application fee required by this section and the license required by this
article shall be in addition to any business license and fee which may be
required by Chapter
19 of this Code. The granting of a license under this article shall not be
deemed evidence or proof that the licensee has complied with requirements and
provisions of Chapter
19 of this Code.
   (c)   The director of finance shall transmit within two (2) days of their
receipt all completed applications to the chief of police and also to the
director of the planning and zoning department all completed applications for
adult entertainment enterprise licenses. The director of finance shall
immediately issue a temporary license to applicants who have submitted a
completed application, fees and bonds or proof of insurance if required. The
temporary license shall remain in effect until either a permanent license is
issued or denied without appeal by the applicant, or until an appeal of a
license denial to the civil infractions division of the Tucson City Court is
decided. The chief of police shall investigate an application and the
background of the applicant. Based on such investigation, the chief of police
shall recommend to the director of finance approval or denial of a license
within sixty (60) days of receiving a completed application. Unless the chief
of police finds grounds to deny an application under section
7-212, the chief of police shall recommend approval of the application. The
director of planning and zoning shall review the zoning regulations which apply
to the business property to see whether it is in conformity therewith. Based
upon such review and any necessary inspections of the business property, the
director of planning and zoning shall recommend to the director of finance
approval or denial of a license within thirty (30) days of receiving a
completed application. Unless the director of planning and zoning finds grounds
to deny an application under Chapter
23 of this Code the director of planning and zoning shall recommend approval of
the application. The director of finance shall issue said license upon the
recommendation of the chief of police and the director of planning and zoning
or notify the applicant of its denial within five (5) days of the receipt of
the recommendations of the chief of police and the director of planning and
zoning.
   (d)   Should an applicant be denied a license, the applicant may, within
five (5) days of the notice of denial from the director of finance, file a
petition for review before the civil infractions division of the Tucson City
Court. Within five (5) days, the magistrate, special magistrate or special
limited magistrate shall schedule a hearing to be conducted within fifteen (15)
days of the receipt of the petition for review. The magistrate, special
magistrate or special limited magistrate shall notify the parties of the date
in the manner described below in this section. If the applicant fails to appear
as directed, a default judgment will be entered. The hearing shall be held in
an informal manner as to the order of proceeding and presentation of evidence,
with a record made by electronic tape recording or stenographic transcription.
The Arizona Rules of Evidence shall apply. However, the magistrate, special
magistrate or special limited magistrate shall admit evidence over hearsay
objections where the proffered evidence has substantial probative value and
reliability. Copies of records and documents prepared in the ordinary course of
business shall be admitted, but subject to challenge as to weight and
authenticity. The sole basis for the magistrate, special magistrate or special
limited magistrate to overturn the decision of the finance director shall be a
finding of factual error as to the enumerated grounds for denial of the license
contained in section
7-212 or Chapter
23 of this Code. The applicant shall have the burden of proof to show by a
preponderance of the evidence that a factual error exists in the finance
director's decision on those grounds enumerated in section
7-212 or Chapter
23 of this Code. The magistrate, special magistrate or special limited
magistrate shall render a decision within five (5) days of the hearing and
notify all parties as to the outcome by certified mail to the address provided
on the application or to their attorneys.
   (e)   Appeal of the decision of the magistrate, special magistrate or
special limited magistrate under the article shall be by way of special action
to the superior court on the record of the hearing. The appealing party shall
bear the cost of preparing the record for appeal. No appeal shall be taken
later than ten (10) days after entry of the decision by the magistrate, special
magistrate or special limited magistrate unless the decision is mailed, in
which case, no later than fifteen (15) days after entry of the decision.
(Ord. No. 4783, § 1, 4-3-78; Ord. No. 7299, § 5, 10-23-89; Ord. No. 7414, § 1,
5-21-90; Ord. No. 8130, § 3, 10-4-93; Ord. No. 8246, § 3, 4-11-94)
Sec. 7-211. License application procedure; renewal; contents.
   (a)   Each applicant for an adult entertainment enterprise license or an
adult entertainment employee license shall submit an application, verified
under oath; initially, or annually thereafter if required by section
7-209(d), before the end of the last business day prior to the expiration of
the previous license and within thirty (30) days before the expiration of that
previous license, to the city's director of finance; containing the following
information and material:
   (1)   The applicant's full legal name and current residence address;
   (2)   The applicant's residence addresses for the previous five (5) years
and the dates of residence at each;
   (3)   Any other name, including any stage names, by which the applicant has
been known during the previous five (5) years;
   (4)   The address at which the adult entertainment enterprise applicant
desires to do business, and the name under which the business will be
conducted;
   (5)   Written proof that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of
age;
   (6)   The applicant's height, weight and color of hair and eyes;
   (7)   Two (2) passport quality color photographs, taken at the time of
application by the police department;
   (8)   The business, occupation or employment history of the applicant during
the previous five (5) years;
   (9)   All felony or misdemeanor convictions of the applicant within the past
five (5) years involving sexual misconduct, an escort violation, prostitution,
or any of the related offenses enumerated in this Code or in A.R.S. Section 13-
1401 et. seq.; e.g., rape, indecent exposure, child molesting or lewd and
lascivious acts; and any such offense committed outside the State of Arizona
that would have been classified as one of the above offenses if committed
within the State of Arizona.
   (10)   The new applicant's complete fingerprints taken by the Tucson Police
Department, along with written verification from the police department of
having completed being fingerprinted.
   (11)   The name and current residence addresses of each person employed or
intended to be employed by the adult entertainment enterprise;
   (12)   The full name and current mailing address of each of the entity's
partners, members, directors, officers and managers of an application for an
adult entertainment enterprise license for other than an individual.
   (13)   The names, addresses and dates of birth of all persons with a five
(5) percent or greater ownership interest in the adult entertainment
enterprise, except for publicly owned corporations listed with the securities
exchange commission.
   (14)   A sketch or diagram of the applicant's adult entertainment enterprise
showing each room and the configuration of the premises, including a statement
of the total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need
not be professionally prepared but shall be drawn with marked dimensions of the
interior of the premises. If there are any subsequent changes, a new sketch
shall be submitted to the chief of police within ten (10) days after completion
of the changes.
   (b)   If an application for an adult entertainment enterprise license is for
a firm, partnership, association or corporation, the applicant shall be the
individual who is to be in actual management of the enterprise for which a
license is requested, and the information and material required about the
applicant by subsection (a) of this section shall also be required about the
individual in active management of the firm, partnership, association or
corporation in whose name the license is to be issued.
   (c)   Each application for an adult entertainment enterprise license shall
be accompanied by:
   (1)   The application fee required by section
7-210(b)(1) of this article; and
   (2)   Either a surety bond in the amount of ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) or proof of a paid insurance policy covering the enterprise in the
amount of at least five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for at least one
(1) year, which proof shall be renewed annually and the insurance maintained in
effect for as long as the adult entertainment enterprise is licensed. The bond
shall be executed and acknowledged by the licensee as principal and by a
corporation licensed to transact fidelity and surety business in the state as
surety. The bond shall be continuous in form and run concurrently with the
license period, and shall be in favor of the city for the benefit of any person
injured on the premises through any negligence of the principal or the
principal's agent or employee and shall be subject to claim by any person
injured thereby.
   (d)   Each application for an adult entertainment employee license shall be
accompanied by the application fee required by section
7-210(b)(2) or (3) of this article.
   (e)   Applicant background check. The chief shall forward the fingerprints
obtained pursuant to subsection (a)(10), accompanied by the appropriate fees
paid by the applicant, to the appropriate state and federal agencies for the
purpose of conducting a state and federal criminal records check in accordance
with A.R.S. § 41-1750 and Public Law 92-544. The Director of the Arizona
Department of Public Safety may exchange the applicant's fingerprint data with
the Federal Bureau of Investigation. If the chief determines, based on such
background check, that the applicant has a conviction for any offense described
in subsection (a)(9), the chief shall recommend to the director that a license
be denied or not renewed.
(Ord. No. 4783, § 1, 4-3-78; Ord. No. 7299, § 6, 10-23-89; Ord. No. 7414, § 1,
5-21-90; Ord. No. 8246, § 4, 4-11-94; Ord. No. 10270, § 1, 5-2-06; Ord. No.
10866, § 1, 12-21-10; Ord. No. 10910, § 2, 8-9-11)
Sec. 7-212. Grounds for denial of license.
No adult entertainment enterprise license nor adult entertainment employee
license shall be issued or renewed if the applicant:
   (1)   Is not eighteen (18) years of age or older;
   (2)   Made any false statement in the application;
   (3)   While licensed under this article, has had such license revoked within
the previous two (2) years;
   (4)   Has been convicted within the past five (5) years of any felony or
misdemeanor offense involving sexual misconduct, prostitution, an escort
violation, or any of the related offenses enumerated in this Code or in A.R.S.
section 13-1401, et seq.; e.g., rape, indecent exposure, child molesting, or
lewd and lascivious acts; or any such offense committed outside the State of
Arizona that would have been classified as one of the above offenses if
committed within the State of Arizona.
(Ord. No. 4783, § 1, 4-3-78; Ord. No. 5427, § 2, 9-8-81; Ord. No. 7299, § 7,
10-23-89; Ord. No. 7414, § 1, 5-21-90)
Sec. 7-213. Place of business, license nontransferable, available for
inspection, spacing requirements set, exemption.
   (a)   An adult entertainment enterprise licensee shall conduct business only
at the address shown on the license. Each additional place of business shall
require a separate license.
   (b)   An adult entertainment enterprise license issued under this article
shall be nontransferable as to the licensee; however, the director of finance,
upon receipt of a transfer fee of ten dollars ($10.00), shall authorize the
transfer of a license from one location to another, provided the licensee
remains the same and the new location meets the requirements of this article.
   (c)   An adult entertainment employee may work at any properly licensed
adult entertainment enterprise establishment.
   (d)   The licensed premises shall be available for inspection by the police
department, fire department, building safety division, zoning department, state
or county health departments or by the director of finance or authorized
representative at any time the premises are occupied or open for business.
   (e)   The licensed premises and its associated parking area shall not be
located within five hundred (500) feet of a residentially zoned property,
school, church, public park or playground or within one thousand (1,000) feet
of another adult entertainment establishment, to be measured property line to
property line or zone boundary line; except as provided by Chapter
23 of the Tucson Code. Those adult entertainment establishments that are in
existence as of the date this ordinance is adopted and those whose ownership is
subsequently transferred are exempt from this restriction. This exemption does
not apply when a nonconforming use has been discontinued or abandoned for a
period of six (6) months or more. An adult entertainment establishment lawfully
operating as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the
subsequent location of a residentially zoned property, school, church, public
park or playground within five hundred (500) feet of the adult entertainment
establishment.
   (f)   No licensee shall in any manner advertise its services as licensed or
bonded by the city.
(Ord. No. 4783, § 1, 4-3-78; Ord. No. 7299, § 8, 10-23-89; Ord. No. 7414, § 1,
5-21-90; Ord. No. 8246, § 4, 4-11-94)
Sec. 7-214. Licensee records and reports required.
   (a)   Every adult entertainment enterprise licensee shall maintain a current
list of all employees employed by the licensee, showing the legal name; current
stage name; current address; current phone number, if any; date of birth;
current driver's license number, if any; and adult entertainment employee
license number(s) of each employee. In addition, the adult entertainment
enterprise licensee shall maintain a record updated at least every six (6)
months, of the height, weight, hair and eye color, scars, tattoos and a
passport quality photograph measuring two inches by two inches (2" × 2") of
each employee.
   (b)   The records required by subsection (a) of this section shall be kept
available and open for inspection by the police department at any time, the
state or county health departments, or by the director of finance or his
authorized representative at any time the enterprise is open for business.
   (c)   Every adult entertainment enterprise licensee shall report in writing,
by the first of each month, to the Tucson Police Department the name, date of
birth and adult entertainment employee license number(s) of any employee
employed by the licensee whose employment by the licensee has commenced or
terminated, during the previous month.
   (d)   Every adult entertainment enterprise and their on-site managers shall
conspicuously post and maintain on the licensed premises, where employees and
patrons can easily read them, a copy of section
7-217, listing all the unlawful activities prohibited therein.
(Ord. No. 4783, § 1, 4-3-78; Ord. No. 7299, § 9, 10-23-89; Ord. No. 7414, § 1,
5-21-90; Ord. No. 8246, § 4, 4-11-94)
Sec. 7-215. Revocation of license; grounds.
The director of finance shall revoke a license issued under this article when:
   (1)   The licensee is operating in violation of section(s)
7-217 (a), (b), (c)(1-5), (d), (e) and (f).
   (2)   The licensee is operating in violation of section
7-217(c)(6--9) or any provision of this article or of any other ordinance or
regulation relating to or regulating the licensee's business, and has failed or
refused to cease and desist from such violation within five (5) days after
written notice to do so from the director of finance.
   (3)   The licensee or its managing agent has been convicted, since the
license was issued, of a felony or misdemeanor offense involving moral
turpitude, or of any offense involving prostitution or any of the related
offenses enumerated in A.R.S. Section 13-1401 et seq.; rape, indecent exposure,
child molesting, lewd and lascivious acts or any such offense committed outside
the State of Arizona that would have been classified as one of the above
offenses if committed within the State of Arizona.
   (4)   The licensee or its managing agent has made false or misleading
statements of material fact in the application for the license required by this
article, or has entered or given false information in any record or report
required by this article to be kept or made by a licensee.
(Ord. No. 4783, § 1, 4-3-78; Ord. No. 7299, § 9, 10-23-89; Ord. No. 7414, § 1,
5-21-90; Ord. No. 8246, § 4, 4-11-94)
Sec. 7-216. Revocation hearing.
   (a)   The director of finance shall file a written petition for revocation
with the city administrative hearing office, requesting that a time and place
be set for a hearing and specifying the grounds for revocation per section
7-215. Within five (5) days, the hearing officer shall schedule a hearing to be
conducted within fifteen (15) days of the receipt of the petition to revoke.
The hearing officer shall notify the parties in the manner provided in this
article and shall state the grounds relied upon for the proposed revocation.
Should the licensee fall to appear at the hearing, a default judgment of
revocation shall be entered. A record shall be kept of all proceedings,
including proofs offered and a transcript of testimony. No license shall be
revoked unless grounds therefor are established by a preponderance of the
evidence as shown by the record of the hearing. The hearing shall be conducted
in the manner provided for in section
7-210(d). The hearing officer shall provide the licensee and other parties
written notice of the decision within five (5) days, pursuant to subsection (b)
of this section. Revocation of a license shall be effected by the hearing
officer's signing of the written notice of his decision. A licensee's right to
do business under authority of the license shall terminate immediately upon the
giving or mailing to the licensee a copy of the signed decision revoking the
license, except that the revocation may be stayed by the superior court pending
a timely appeal of the decision by special action. Such appeal must be filed
within ten (10) days after the decision to revoke is signed unless the decision
is mailed, in which case, no later than fifteen (15) days after entry of the
decision. The appellee shall bear the cost of preparing the record on appeal.
if an appeal is not timely made, the revocation becomes final and the license
is terminated.
   (b)   Notices required by this article may be served by certified mail to
the licensee's attorney, to the licensee at the address as shown on the
business license or by personal service.
(Ord. No. 4783, § 1, 4-3-78; Ord. No. 7414, § 1, 5-21-90)
Sec. 7-217. Unlawful activities; posting required.
   (a)   Adult entertainment enterprises and their on-site managers shall not
allow an adult entertainment employee to:
   (1)   Perform a private show wherein the adult entertainment employee is
unclothed as defined in section
7-207(h) without a solid, transparent partition separating the performer from
the patron(s).
   (2)   Have sexual contact with any person on the licensed premises.
   (3)   Perform real or simulated sexual acts while on the licensed premises.
   (4)   Have sexual contact with dildos, vibrators or other objects while
viewed by any person on the licensed premises.
   (5)   Touch, stimulate or masturbate any part of their genitals, anus or
female breast or any part of the genitals, anus or female breast of another
adult entertainment employee while viewed by any person as a part of the
entertainment being provided on the licensed premises.
   (b)   Adult entertainment enterprises and their on-site managers shall not
aid, offer, solicit or agree with a patron to allow an adult entertainment
employee to:
   (1)   Perform a private show wherein the adult entertainment employee is
unclothed as defined in section
7-207(h) without a solid, transparent partition separating the performer from
the patron(s).
   (2)   Have sexual contact with any person.
   (3)   Perform real or simulated sexual acts.
   (4)   Have sexual contact with dildos, vibrators or other objects while
viewed by any person.
   (5)   Touch, stimulate or masturbate any part of their genitals, anus or
female breast or any part of the genitals, anus or female breast of another
adult entertainment employee while viewed by any person as a part of the
entertainment.
   (c)   Adult entertainment enterprises and their on-site managers shall:
   (1)   Not allow any materials, devices and novelties for sale to be
displayed so that the items can be seen from outside the premises.
   (2)   Not knowingly permit any person to stimulate or masturbate their
genitals, anus or female breast while on the licensed premises.
   (3)   Not allow more than one (1) person at any time to occupy individually
enclosed booths or small enclosed viewing areas suitable for use by one (1)
person.
   (4)   Not allow the storage, buying, selling or consumption of alcoholic
beverages anywhere on the licensed premises.
   (5)   Not allow any persons to engage in any type of gambling on the
licensed premises.
   (6)   Only allow individual enclosed booths or small enclosed areas suitable
for use in viewing by one (1) person to be on the licensed premises when such
separate rooms, booths or partitioned areas are visible from a continuous main
aisle. Any door, curtain, wall or other partition covering the doorway of a
viewing booth shall end at least thirty (30) inches above the highest floor
level of the booth and provide a view of the occupant from at least the waist
down when seated. There shall be no openings or holes between the viewing
areas, other than doorways.
   (7)   Maintain each licensed premises in a clean and sanitary condition at
all times.
   (8)   Equip and maintain each licensed premises with overhead lighting
fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are
permitted access to an illumination of not less than one (1.0) footcandle as
measured at floor level.
   (9)   Conspicuously post and maintain on the licensed premises, where
employees and patrons can easily see them, a copy of this section,
7-217, listing all the unlawful activities prohibited herein.
   (d)   Adult entertainment enterprises shall not operate when open to the
public without having an on-site manager physically on the premises and in
control of the adult entertainment enterprise.
   (e)   Adult entertainment employees shall not:
   (1)   Perform a private show wherein the adult entertainment employee is
unclothed as defined in section
7-207(h) without a solid, transparent partition separating the performer from
the patron(s).
   (2)   Have sexual contact with any person on the licensed premises.
   (3)   Perform real or simulated sexual acts while on the licensed premises.
   (4)   Have sexual contact with dildos, vibrators or other objects while
being viewed by any person on the licensed premises.
   (5)   Touch, stimulate or masturbate any part of their genitals, anus or
female breast or any part of the genitals, anus or female breast of another
adult entertainment employee while viewed by any person as a part of the
entertainment being provided on the licensed premises.
   (f)   Adult entertainment employees shall not aid, offer, solicit or agree
with a patron to:
   (1)   Perform a private show wherein the adult entertainment employee is
unclothed as defined in section
7-207(h) without a solid, transparent partition separating the performer from
the patron(s).
   (2)   Have sexual contact with any person.
   (3)   Perform real or simulated sexual acts.
   (4)   Have sexual contact with dildos, vibrators or other objects while
being viewed by any person.
   (5)   Touch, stimulate or masturbate any part of their genitals, anus or
female breast or any part of the genitals, anus or female breast of another
adult entertainment employee while viewed by any person as a part of the
entertainment.
   (g)   Patrons of adult entertainment enterprises shall:
   (1)   Not have sexual contact with dildos, vibrators or other objects while
on the licensed premises.
   (2)   Not touch, stimulate or masturbate any part of their genitals, anus or
female breast while on the licensed premises.
   (3)   Only enter into and remain alone in individually enclosed booths or
small enclosed viewing areas suitable for use by one (1) person.
   (4)   Not bring any alcoholic beverages upon the licensed premises.
   (5)   Not engage in any type of gambling while on the licensed premises.
   (h)   Patrons of adult entertainment enterprises shall not aid, offer,
solicit or agree with an adult entertainment employee to:
   (1)   Have sexual contact with dildos, vibrators or other objects.
   (2)   Touch, stimulate or masturbate any part of their genitals, anus or
female breast or any part of the genitals, anus or female breast of another.
(Ord. No. 7299, § 11, 10-23-89; Ord. No. 7414, § 1, 5-21-90; Ord. No. 8246, §
5, 4-11-94)
Sec. 7-218. Minimum mandatory penalties, subsequent convictions.
   (a)   A person convicted of any offense prohibited by sections
7-209(a), (b) and (c);
7-217(a), (c)(2), (e), (f)(2), (g)(1) and (2):
   (1)   For the first time shall be punished by imprisonment for not less than
ten (10) days nor more than six (6) months, and by a fine of not less than two
hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00).
   (2)   For a second time shall be punished by imprisonment for not less than
twenty (20) days nor more than six (6) months, and by a fine of not less than
three hundred dollars ($300.00) nor more than two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00).
   (3)   For a third time shall be punished by imprisonment for not less than
forty (40) days nor more than six (6) months, and by a fine of not less than
five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00).
   (4)   For a fourth time shall be punished by imprisonment for not less than
eighty (80) days nor more than six (6) months, and by a fine of not less than
nine hundred dollars ($900.00) nor more than two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00).
   (5)   For a fifth or subsequent time shall be punished by imprisonment for
not less than one hundred sixty (160) days nor more than six (6) months, and by
a fine of not less than one thousand seven hundred dollars ($1,700.00) nor more
than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
   (b)   A person convicted of any offense prohibited by sections
7-213,
7-214 and
7-217(b), (c)(1) and (3--9), (d), (f)(1) and (3--5), (g)(3--5), and (h):
   (1)   For the first time shall be punished by a fine of not less than three
hundred dollars ($300.00) nor more than two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00).
   (2)   For the second time shall be punished by a fine of not less than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00).
   (3)   For the third time shall be punished by a fine of not less than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) nor more than two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00).
   (4)   For the fourth time shall be punished by a fine of not less than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) nor more than two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00).
   (5)   For the fifth or subsequent time shall be punished by a fine of not
less than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) nor more than two thousand five
hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
   (c)   No judge may grant probation without imposing, or suspend the
imposition of, the minimum jail sentences and fines prescribed herein upon a
person convicted of any offense prohibited in sections
7-209,
7-213,
7-214 and
7-217. In addition, a person convicted of any offense prohibited in sections
7-209,
7-213,
7-214 and
7-217 may be placed on probation for not more than three (3) years. This shall
not be construed to affect, in any way, the imposition of the minimum mandatory
penalties provided herein.
(Ord. No. 7299, § 12, 10-23-89; Ord. No. 7414, § 1, 5-21-90; Ord. No. 8246, §
5, 4-11-94)
ARTICLE XI.
RESERVED*
__________
*   Note: See the editor's note to art. XIII of this chapter, §
7-300.
__________
ARTICLE XII.
ADULT CARE HOMES AND FACILITIES
Sec. 7-219. License for adult care homes and adult care facility required.
No person shall operate an adult care home or adult care facility without first
obtaining an adult care license.
(Ord. No. 6820, § 1, 10-26-87)
Sec. 7-220. Adult care license application; information required.
   (a)   An application for an adult care license shall be filed by the owner
of the adult care home or facility on forms provided by the revenue department.
The information required at the time of application shall include but not be
limited to the following:
   (1)   The name, address and signature of the owner of the adult care home or
facility.
   (2)   The address of the adult care home or facility to be licensed.
   (3)   A copy of the zoning compliance certificate issued by the zoning
administrator for the adult care home or facility to be licensed.
   (b)   The owner of an adult care home or facility shall notify the city
revenue department within thirty (30) days of any change in the name or address
of the owner.
(Ord. No. 6820, § 1, 10-26-87)
Sec. 7-221. Adult care license; inspection required.
Upon application and before issuance or renewal of an adult care license, the
appropriate city departments shall inspect the adult care home or facility to
determine compliance with the provisions of chapters
6 and
23 of the Tucson Code. No adult care license shall be issued or renewed unless
the adult care home or facility is in compliance with the provisions of
chapters
6 and
23 of the Tucson Code. After issuance or renewal of an adult care license, the
owner or manager of each adult care home or facility shall submit to
unannounced inspections of the premises at least once a year.
(Ord. No. 6820, § 1, 10-26-87)
Sec. 7-222. Adult care license; special requirements.
An adult care home or facility for which an adult care license has been issued
must continue to meet the requirements of chapters
6 and
23 of the Tucson Code.
(Ord. No. 6820, § 1, 10-26-87)
Sec. 7-223. Annual fee.
   (a)   Except as provided in subsection (b), every adult care home or
facility licensed by the city shall pay an annual license fee of fifty dollars
($50.00). The license fee shall accompany the application for license. No adult
care license shall be renewed unless the annual fee required for such license
has been paid. All adult care home licenses will expire on December 31 and must
be renewed annually thereafter.
   (b)   When the adult care home or facility has not previously been licensed
by the city, the fee for the first year shall be determined as follows:
   (1)   For licenses issued on or before March 31, the fee is fifty dollars
($50.00).
   (2)   For licenses issued between April 1 and June 30, the fee is thirty-
seven dollars and fifty cents ($37.50).
   (3)   For licenses issued between July 1 and September 30, the fee is
twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
   (4)   For licenses issued between October 1 and December 31, the fee is
twelve dollars and fifty cents ($12.50).
(Ord. No. 6820, § 1, 10-26-87; Ord. No. 9661, § 1, 1-28-02)
Sec. 7-224. Violations declared a civil infraction.
Any violation of the provisions of this article shall be a civil infraction.
(Ord. No. 6820, § 1, 10-26-87)
   Charter References: Violations of Charter and ordinances,
ch. XXV, § 5.
   Cross References: General penalty, §
1-8; administrative hearing office to hear and decide violations deemed to be
civil infractions, §
28-2(2).
Secs. 7-225--7-299. Reserved.
ARTICLE XIII.
STREET FAIRS*
__________
*   Editors Note: Section 2 of Ord. No. 7299, adopted Oct. 23, 1989, renumbered
former §
7-218 as §
7-300, thus implicitly renumbering former art. XI as art. XIII.
__________
Sec. 7-300. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, unless the context plainly requires
otherwise, the following terms or phrases are defined as:
   Event animal means an animal that the street fair sponsor has approved or
permitted for participation in the street fair event.
   Service animal means any guide dog, signal dog, or other animal individually
trained to work or perform tasks for an individual with a disability,
including, but not limited to, guiding individuals with impaired vision,
alerting individuals with impaired hearing to intruders or sounds, providing
minimal protection or rescue work, pulling a wheelchair, or fetching dropped
items. Animals are considered service animals regardless of whether they have
been licensed or certified by a state or local government.
   Street fair means an open-air marketplace event, having a duration not
exceeding five (5) consecutive days, the boundaries of which have been set by
the city for use by street fair vendors selected as set forth in section
7-301 and in which:
   (1)   Public access to the city streets and alleys is curtailed by city
action designating the specific portions of streets and alleys to be utilized
for a specific time for street fair purposes only; and
   (2)   Public access to city sidewalks is curtailed by city action limiting
use of the sidewalks to pedestrian traffic only and prohibiting vending to,
from or upon those sidewalks during the specific time set for the street fair.
   Working animal means a horse or a dog that is used by a law enforcement
agency, that is trained for law enforcement work and that is under the control
of its handler.
(Ord. No. 10789, § 1, 5-18-10)
Sec. 7-301. Street fair vendors.
   (a)   Street fair vendors of food and beverages shall be selected by the
street fair sponsor so as to make available as wide a variety as possible,
subject, however, to reasonable limitation in accord with size of the fair and
applicable provisions of state law and/or city ordinances; however, the city
shall, pursuant to its authority under A.R.S. § 4-203.02, approve no more than
one (1) alcoholic beverage booth for each eight hundred (800) linear feet of
right-of-way occupied by arts and crafts booths.
   (b)   Street fair vendors of products other than food and beverages shall be
selected by the street fair sponsor pursuant to a juried system approved by the
city which is accepted as customary and usual for selecting vendors on the
basis of standards of quality and competence in the creation or production of
types of items being sold by the vendors that have applied in a particular
category.
   (c)   No product, goods, merchandise, food or beverage shall be sold at a
street fair unless the vendor has been selected by the street fair sponsor as
provided in subsections (a) and (b) above and the vendor is licensed as a
street fair vendor pursuant to section
19-41(c)(2) or is subject to the exemption of subsection (d) below.
   (d)   Exemption. Every person who is currently licensed by the city under
any provision of
chapter 19 of the Tucson Code and either (a) is also selected as a street fair
vendor by the street fair sponsor and/or (b) has a permanent place of business
operating within the street fair boundaries conducting its regular and usual
business operations shall not be subject to the prohibitions of subsection (c)
above.
(Ord. No. 6131, § 1, 12-3-84; Ord. No. 7299, § 2, 10-23-89; Ord. No. 7932, § 1,
10-26-92; Ord. No. 9693, § 1, 4-15-02; Ord. No. 10448, § 12, 9-5-07, eff. 1-1-
08; Ord. No. 10789, § 2, 5-18-10)
Sec. 7-302. Animals prohibited; exceptions.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall cause or
allow any animal under that person's control to enter or remain in the
boundaries of a street fair during the time designated for use by the street
fair.
   (b)   The prohibition in subsection (a) only applies when signs providing
reasonable notice of the prohibition are in place at each public entrance to
the street fair.
   (c)   The prohibition described in subsection (a) does not apply to event
animals, service animals, or working animals.
(Ord. No. 10789, § 3, 5-18-10)
Sec. 7-303. Violation; penalties.
   (a)   A violation of any of the provisions of this article is a civil
infraction.
   (b)   A violation of section
7-302 is punishable by community service or fines in an amount not to exceed
two-hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00). The rate of substitution of community
service work for the fine amount shall be calculated at ten dollars ($10.00)
per hour.
(Ord. No. 10789, § 4, 5-18-10)
Secs. 7-304--7-310. Reserved.
ARTICLE XIV.
VENDING MACHINES*
__________
*   Editors Note: Ord. No. 7885, § 1, adopted August 3, 1992, repealed ch. 19,
div. 2, §§ 19-31--19-38.3, relating to vending machines, and § 4 of this
ordinance amended ch.
7 by adding a new art. XIV, relating to vending machines to replace them. The
sections have been renumbered at the discretion of the editor to preserve
continuity of the codification.
__________
Sec. 7-311. License and registration required.
   (a)   It is unlawful for any distributor to distribute, lease or rent to
another for operation, or to service or maintain for another any machine, or to
directly or indirectly retain any legal or equitable interest in a vending
machine sold by him without obtaining a distributor's license.
   (b)   It is unlawful for any distributor to have any vending machine in
operation within the city unless the machine has been registered with the city
and an identification marker or tag provided by the city placed thereon, in
accordance with the provisions of this division.
   (c)   It is unlawful for any owner-operator to place, install, keep or
operate any vending machine in the city unless the machine has been registered
with the city and an identification marker or tag supplied by the city placed
thereon in accordance with the provisions of this division.
(Ord. No. 2650, § 1, 8-13-64; Ord. No. 7885, § 4, 8-3-92)
Sec. 7-312. Gambling devices not permitted.
Nothing in this division shall be construed to authorize, license, or permit
any gambling device whatsoever, or any mechanism that has been judicially
determined to be a gambling device, or is any way contrary to the laws of the
state.
(Ord. No. 2650, § 1, 8-13-64; Ord. No. 7885, § 4, 8-3-92)
Sec. 7-313. Application for license and registration.
   (a)   The application for a distributor's license shall contain the
following information:
   (1)   Name and address of the applicant, age, date and place of birth.
   (2)   If the applicant is a partnership, the names and addresses of all
partners and their age, date and place of birth.
   (3)   If the applicant is a corporation, the name and address of its
officers, directors, and major stockholders, major stockholders to be defined
as any person owning or controlling ten (10) percent or more of the outstanding
stock of the corporation, their age, date and place of birth, and if a foreign
corporation, the name and address of the resident statutory agent. If the
applicant is a corporation which has its stock listed on any recognized stock
exchange, the applicant shall be exempted from the provisions of this paragraph
requiring the names and addresses of the major stockholders.
   (4)   If the applicant is a nonprofit corporation, a list of directors,
detailed statement of its purpose and disposition of its funds.
   (5)   The name of the business and its home address as well as its local
address.
   (6)   A statement of any and all criminal convictions or pending criminal
prosecutions, excepting traffic violations, of or against applicant, the
manager, the distributor, all partners, directors, agents and major
stockholders.
   (7)   A list of all vending machines owned, controlled, displayed, operated,
serviced or maintained, or in which applicant has any interest, and in the
city, showing type of machine, manufacturer's name, serial number, address
where located, name and type of business where located, nature of interest in
the machine.
   (8)   There shall be attached to the application sets of fingerprints of all
applicants.
   (9)   A list of all employees of the applicant, and the addresses of the
employees shall be attached to the application.
   (b)   Registration of machines by owner-operators shall contain the
following information: name and address of owner-operator and all branch
addresses; description of each machine; name of manufacturer and serial number;
from whom obtained; and location if more than one (1) address.
   (c)   Applications and registrations shall be made on forms furnished by the
city, and shall be complete as to the information requested, and shall be
signed by the distributor or owner- operator, under oath or affirmation. Any
false information shall be grounds for revocation of the license.
   (d)   It shall be unlawful to knowingly furnish any false or misleading
information on any application or registration form.
(Ord. No. 2650, § 1, 8-13-64; Ord. No. 7885, § 4, 8-3-92)
Sec. 7-314. Application fee.
The applicant for a distributor's license shall pay, at the time of filing the
original application, a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). This fee is not
refundable.
(Ord. No. 2650, § 1, 8-13-64; Ord. No. 7885, § 4, 8-3-92)
Sec. 7-315. Investigation.
   (a)   Upon receipt of an application for a distributor's license, the proper
city officials shall investigate the applicant.
   (b)   No license shall be issued if any partner of a partnership or the
local manager of a corporation has been convicted of any felony or any offense
against the decency and morals of the community within a five-year period
immediately preceding the filing of an application set forth herein.
   (c)   In the event an application is rejected, the applicant may appeal to
the tax collector within ten (10) days following notice of rejection, whereupon
a time and place for hearing shall be set no later than two (2) weeks from the
receipt of the request by the applicant for a hearing. At such hearing, the
applicant may be represented by counsel and produce witnesses to sustain his
appeal for the right to receive a license.
(Ord. No. 2650, § 1, 8-13-64; Ord. No. 7885, § 4, 8-3-92)
Sec. 7-316. Identification marks and numbers.
   (a)   All machines referred to in this division, and in operation in the
city, shall bear identification marks or tags prepared and furnished by the tax
collector and shall be affixed to such machines so as to be visible at all
times. When the identification marker or tag is assigned to and placed upon a
machine, there shall be made an entry in the company books to this effect.
   (b)   Notice of acquisition or loss of machine locations shall be given to
the city tax collector, such notice to be received by the tax collector within
forty-eight (48) hours of the location change.
   (c)   No machine shall be in operation within the city without city-issued
identification markers or tags placed thereon.
   (d)   All businesses referred to in this article shall maintain a set of
records containing all information required by this article, and these records
shall be made available at the applicant's place of business at any time during
city business hours for inspection by the tax collector or his duly appointed
agents.
(Ord. No. 2650, § 1, 8-13-64; Ord. No. 3193, § 1, 12-2-68; Ord. No. 7885, § 4,
8-3-92)
Sec. 7-317. Seizure of machines.
Any machine which fails to bear the proper identifying marker or number may be
seized and impounded under the direction of the police department. The machine
may be recovered upon compliance with this article, provided this is done
within sixty (60) days following date of impoundment. The city, upon order of
the city magistrate, may dispose of or destroy any machine not claimed nor made
to comply with the provisions of this article within a period of sixty (60)
days.
(Ord. No. 2650, § 1, 8-13-64; Ord. No. 7885, § 4, 8-3-92)
Sec. 7-318. Revocation of license.
Every license may be revoked should the licensee, directly or indirectly,
permit the operation of any machine in violation of any provisions of the
ordinances of the city or the laws of the state. The license may be revoked by
the tax collector following a hearing as prescribed in section
7-315 of this article in addition to the penalties prescribed.
(Ord. No. 2650, § 1, 8-13-64; Ord. No. 7885, § 4, 8-3-92)
Sec. 7-319. Merchandise vending devices exempted.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to devices for the vending of
food, including candy and soft drinks, or which dispense items for one (1)
penny or other device vending services or products not defined herein as a
vending machine.
(Ord. No. 2650, § 1, 8-13-64; Ord. No. 7885, § 4, 8-3-92)
Secs. 7-320--7-349. Reserved.
ARTICLE XV.
DANCE HALLS
Sec. 7-350. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, and unless the context plainly requires
otherwise, the following definitions are adopted:
   Class A dance hall means any dance hall where dancing is permitted for
persons age thirteen (13) through age seventeen (17).
   Class B dance hall means any dance hall where dancing is permitted for
persons age eighteen (18) and over.
   Dance hall means any establishment or location that invites or is open to
persons for the purpose of public dancing.
   License means a permit to operate a dance hall.
   Licensee means a person in whose name a license to operate a dance hall has
been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the
application for a license.
   Person means any natural person and, in addition, a corporation,
partnership, association, or other legal entity.
   Public dancing means any dance that is held and conducted for a profit,
direct or indirect, or requires a monetary payment or contribution from any of
the persons admitted. It includes the premises in which the dancing is
conducted, together with all parking areas, hallways, restrooms, and adjoining
areas on the premises open to the public during the dance and over which the
licensee has the legal right to control access.
(Ord. No. 7831, § 1, 6-1-92; Ord. No. 8040, § 1, 5-3-93; Ord. No. 8322, § 1, 7-
5-94; Ord. No. 9658, § 1, 1-14-02; Ord. No. 10571, § 1, 8-6-08)
Sec. 7-351. License required.
   (a)   No person shall conduct or operate a dance hall unless the person who
is conducting or operating such dance hall has obtained a license in accordance
with the provisions of this article.
   (b)   Exceptions:
   (1)   The requirements of this article shall not apply if the dance is
sponsored, organized, and supervised exclusively by a public, parochial or
private elementary or secondary school, college, or university that teaches
accredited courses of instruction as approved by the Arizona Department of
Education; however, no more than two (2) dance halls may be operated or
conducted at the same location by an individual school, college or university
in any twelve (12) month period under this exception, unless that location is
on property exclusively owned and operated by that school, college or
university.
   (2)   The requirements of this article shall not apply if the dance is
sponsored, organized, and supervised by the federal, state, or local
government.
   (3)   The requirements of this article shall not apply to dance halls whose
patrons are limited solely to persons twenty-one (21) years of age or older and
that are duly licensed liquor establishments operating as such while the
dancing is occurring.
   (c)   It shall be a misdemeanor to operate a dance hall without first
obtaining and maintaining in effect a license as required by this article. A
person convicted of violating this section shall be punished by a fine of not
less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
(Ord. No. 7831, § 1, 6-1-92; Ord. No. 8322, § 1, 7-5-94; Ord. No. 9658, § 2, 1-
14-02; Ord. No. 10571, § 2, 8-6-08)
Sec. 7-352. License application.
   (a)   Any person desiring to obtain a license shall apply to the city
director of finance, on a form provided by the police department. Applications
shall be signed by the applicant and verified under oath.
   (b)   The director of finance shall immediately transmit all completed
applications to the chief of police, the director of the planning department,
the director of the development services center and the chief of the fire
department. The chief of police shall investigate an application and the
background of the applicant and make a recommendation to the director of
finance for approval or denial of a license within fifteen (15) days of
receiving a completed application. The chief of police may condition a
recommendation for approval upon a requirement that the applicant employ a
sufficient number of security personnel to provide crowd control and dispersal,
as provided in section
7-366. The director of planning shall review the zoning regulations which apply
to the proposed location to see whether it is in conformity therewith. Based
upon such review and any necessary inspections of the location, the director of
planning shall recommend to the director of finance approval or denial of a
license within fifteen (15) days of receiving a completed application. The
director of the development services center and the chief of the fire
department shall review the building code and fire code regulations which apply
to the proposed location and the proposed use, including regulations concerning
occupant load, building egress, ventilation and sanitation to see whether it is
in conformity therewith. Based upon such review and any necessary inspections
of the location, the director of the development services center and the chief
of the fire department shall recommend to the director of finance approval or
denial of a license within fifteen (15) days of receiving a completed
application. Should an approval be made by both the development services center
and planning, a temporary change of use will be issued, along with an occupant
load card stating the occupant limit for the event, to the applicant for the
license, provided a license is otherwise approved by the director of finance.
   (c)   The director of finance shall issue a license upon the recommendation
of the chief of police, the director of planning, the director of development
services, and the chief of the fire department, or notify the applicant of its
denial within five (5) days of the receipt of the recommendations of the chief
of police, the director of planning, the director of development services and
the chief of the fire department.
   (d)   Should an applicant be denied a license, the applicant may, within
five (5) days of the notice of denial from the director of finance, file a
petition for review in the city court. Within five (5) days, the special
limited magistrate shall schedule a hearing to be conducted within fifteen (15)
days of the receipt of the petition for review. The special limited magistrate
shall notify parties of the date in the manner described below in this section.
If the applicant fails to appear as directed, a default judgment will be
entered. The hearing shall be held in an informal manner as to the order of
proceeding and presentation of evidence with a record made by electronic tape
recording or stenographic transcription. The Arizona Rules of Evidence shall
apply. However, the special limited magistrate shall admit evidence over
hearsay objections where the proffered evidence has substantial probative value
and reliability. Copies of records and documents prepared in the ordinary
course of business shall be admitted, but subject to challenge as to weight and
authenticity. The sole basis for the special limited magistrate to overturn the
decision of the finance director shall be a finding of factual error as to the
enumerated grounds for denial of license contained in section
7-354 of the Tucson Code. The applicant shall have the burden of proof to show
by a preponderance of the evidence that a factual error exists in the finance
director's decision on those grounds enumerated in section
7-354 of this Code. The special limited magistrate shall render a decision
within five (5) days of the hearing and notify all parties as to the outcome by
certified mail to the address provided on the application or the address of
their attorneys.
   (e)   Appeal of the decision of the special limited magistrate under this
article shall be by way of special action to the superior court on the record
of the hearing. The appealing party shall bear the cost of preparing the record
for appeal. No appeal shall be taken later than ten (10) days after entry of
the special limited magistrate's decision unless the decision is mailed; in
which case, the appeal may be taken no later than fifteen (15) days after entry
of the decision.
(Ord. No. 7831, § 1, 6-1-92; Ord. No. 8130, § 3, 10-4-93; Ord. No. 8322, § 1,
7-5-94; Ord. No. 9658, § 3, 1-14-02)
Sec. 7-353. Types of licenses; fees.
   (a)   Applications for single event licenses shall be accompanied by a non-
refundable application fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00), and shall be filed
at least thirty (30) days in advance of the date of the proposed event. Single
event licenses shall be valid for the period of the event and at the location
specified in the license application. However, such licenses shall not be valid
for any period in excess of twenty-four (24) consecutive hours.
   (b)   Applications for an annual license shall be accompanied by a non-
refundable application fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00), and shall be filed
at least thirty (30) days in advance of the first proposed event. Annual
licenses shall only be valid for the location specified in the license
application. Annual licenses shall be valid for one (1) calendar year from
their date of issuance and must be renewed annually to remain in effect.
   (c)   The application fee and license required by this article shall be in
addition to any business license and fee which may be required by chapter
19 of the Tucson Code. The granting of a license under this section shall not
be deemed evidence or proof that the licensee has complied with the
requirements and provisions of chapter
19 of the Tucson Code.
   (d)   The fee requirements of this section shall be waived if the dance is
sponsored, organized, supervised, conducted and controlled exclusively by a
non-profit, tax-exempt organization recognized by the United States of America
as exempt from federal income taxation pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code,
26 U.S.C., section 501 as now existing or hereafter amended. For the purposes
of this section, "conducted and controlled exclusively" means that the dance is
under the exclusive planning and direction of duly elected or appointed
officers or committees of the tax-exempt organization or institution, and that
after payment of expenses all of the proceeds collected as admission fees or
cover charges go directly to charitable purposes or to the treasury of the tax-
exempt organization or institution.
(Ord. No. 7831, § 1, 6-1-92; Ord. No. 8322, § 1, 7-5-94; Ord. No. 9658, § 4, 1-
14-02)
Sec. 7-354. Grounds for denial of license.
   (a)   No license shall be issued or renewed if the applicant or licensee:
   (1)   Is not eighteen (18) years of age or older;
   (2)   Made any false statement or failed to answer any question in the
application;
   (3)   While licensed under this article, has had such license revoked within
the previous two (2) years;
   (4)   Has been convicted or found responsible of a violation of this article
within one (1) year immediately preceding the application;
   (5)   Has been convicted within the five (5) years preceding the application
of a felony or misdemeanor drug, non-motor vehicle related alcohol, or sex
crime as enumerated in this Code, Arizona Revised Statutes, the United States
Code, or any such offense outside the State of Arizona that would be classified
as one (1) of the above offenses if committed within the State of Arizona.
   (6)   Fails to demonstrate that a sufficient number of security personnel
will be employed to provide crowd and traffic control during the event and
dispersal at the conclusion thereof, including security for parking areas used
for the event, as may be required by the chief of police per section
7-366.
   (b)   No license shall be issued or renewed:
   (1)   If the proposed location of the dance hall is within five hundred
(500) feet of any private residence in the city;
   (2)   If the proposed location is not in conformity with applicable zoning
regulations, as determined by the director of planning per section
7-352(b);
   (3)   If the proposed location is not in conformity with applicable building
code and fire code regulations, including regulations concerning occupant load,
building egress, ventilation and sanitation as determined by the director of
the development services center and the chief of the fire department per
section
7-352(b).
(Ord. No. 7831, § 1, 6-1-92; Ord. No. 8322, § 1, 7-5-94; Ord. No. 9658, § 5, 1-
14-02; Ord. No. 10571, § 3, 8-6-08)
Sec. 7-355. Place of business; license non-transferable, available for
inspection; license posted.
   (a)   A licensee shall conduct business only at the address shown on the
license. Each additional place of business shall require a separate license.
   (b)   All licenses issued under this article shall be nontransferable as to
licensee; however, the director of finance, upon receipt of a transfer fee of
ten dollars ($10.00), shall authorize the transfer of a license from one (1)
location to another, provided the licensee remains the same and the new
location meets the requirements of this article.
   (c)   The police department, fire department, development services center,
planning department, state or county health departments, the director of
finance or authorized representative, or any peace officer may enter and
inspect the licensed premises at any time the premises are occupied or open for
business.
   (d)   The licensee shall post a copy of the license and a copy of the
occupant load card at a clearly visible location at each entrance to the
premises during all hours of operation.
(Ord. No. 7831, § 1, 6-1-92; Ord. No. 8322, § 1, 7-5-94; Ord. No. 9658, § 6, 1-
14-02)
Sec. 7-356. Revocation of license; grounds.
The director of finance shall revoke a license issued under this article when:
   (1)   The licensee is convicted or found responsible for two (2) or more
violations of this article committed within a one (1) year period.
   (2)   A location supervisor or other employee of the licensee is convicted
or found responsible for two (2) or more violations of this article committed
within a one (1) year period. The licensee shall be notified in writing by the
police department whenever a location supervisor or other employee is cited for
a violation of this article. Notice shall be given to the licensee within ten
(10) days of the charge being filed. The provisions of this subsection
regarding license suspension shall not apply in the absence of such
notification.
   (3)   The applicant or licensee has made false or misleading statements of
material fact in the application for the license required by this article, or
has entered or given false information in any record or report required by this
article to be kept or made by a licensee.
   (4)   The licensee has been convicted, since the license was issued, of a
felony or misdemeanor drug, non-motor vehicle related alcohol, or sex crime as
enumerated in this Code, Arizona Revised Statutes or the United States Code, or
any such offense outside the State of Arizona that would have been classified
as one (1) of the above offenses if committed within the State of Arizona.
(Ord. No. 7831, § 1, 6-1-92; Ord. No. 8322, § 1, 7-5-94; Ord. No. 9658, § 7, 1-
14-02)
Sec. 7-357. Revocation hearing.
   (a)   The director of finance, upon notification by the chief of police that
grounds for revocation exist, shall file a written petition for revocation with
the city court, requesting that a time and place be set for a hearing and
specifying the grounds for revocation per section
7-356. Within five (5) days, the special limited magistrate shall schedule a
hearing to be conducted within fifteen (15) days of the receipt of the petition
to revoke. The special limited magistrate shall notify the parties in the
manner provided in this article and shall state the grounds relied upon for the
proposed revocation. Should the licensee fail to appear at the hearing, a
default judgment of revocation shall be entered. A record shall be kept of all
proceedings, including proofs offered and a transcript of testimony. No license
shall be revoked unless grounds therefore are established by a preponderance of
the evidence as shown by the record of the hearing. The hearing shall be
conducted in the manner provided for in section
7-352(d). The special limited magistrate shall provide the licensee and other
parties written notice of the decision within five (5) days, pursuant to
subsection (b) of this section. Revocation of a license shall be effected by
the special limited magistrate's signing of the written notice of the decision.
A licensee's right to do business under authority of the license shall
terminate immediately upon giving or mailing to the licensee a copy of a signed
decision revoking the license; except that the revocation may be stayed by the
superior court pending a timely appeal of the decision by special action. Such
appeal must be filed within ten (10) days after the decision to revoke is
signed unless the decision is mailed, in which case the appeal must be filed no
later than fifteen (15) days after entry of the decision. The appellee shall
bear the cost of preparing the record of appeal. If an appeal is not timely
made, the revocation becomes final and the license is terminated.
   (b)   Notices required by this article may be served by certified mail to
the licensee's attorney, to the licensee at the address as shown on the
business license, or by personal service.
(Ord. No. 7831, § 1, 6-1-92; Ord. No. 8322, § 1, 7-5-94)
Sec. 7-358. Age restrictions.
   (a)   No person conducting or operating a class A dance hall shall permit,
either by act or omission, any person under the age of thirteen (13) or over
the age of seventeen (17) years to enter or remain upon the premises, except a
parent or legal guardian accompanying a person under the age of seventeen (17)
years, and except bona fide employees of the licensee conducting or operating
such dance hall.
   (b)   No person conducting or operating a class B dance hall shall permit,
either by act or omission, any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to
enter or remain upon the premises, except bona fide employees of the licensee
conducting or operating such dance hall.
   (c)   The licensee shall post the age restrictions in a clearly visible
location at each entrance to the premises.
   (d)   Any person who shall by affirmative misrepresentation of age obtain
admission to or permission to remain in any dance hall in violation of this
section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (e)   Any person who knowingly or recklessly permits a person to enter or
remain in any dance hall in violation of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
   (f)   (Reserved)
   (g)   The age restrictions imposed by this section shall not apply to
governmental employees in the performance of their duties.
   (h)   No person shall conduct or operate a Class A and Class B dance hall
simultaneously.
(Ord. No. 7831, § 1, 6-1-92; Ord. No. 8322, § 1, 7-5-94; Ord. No. 9658, § 8, 1-
14-02; Ord. No. 10571, § 4, 8-6-08)
Sec. 7-359. Location supervisors.
A licensee shall designate a person or persons as a location supervisor and
register their names with the chief of police not less than forty-eight (48)
hours prior to the start of business. Registration of the location supervisors
shall be in writing on a form approved and provided by the chief of police. The
licensee shall complete a new registry and provide it to the chief of police
whenever the person or persons so designated change, and must provide the new
registry to the chief of police not less than forty-eight (48) hours prior to
the start of business. Location supervisors shall be at least twenty-one (21)
years of age. At least one (1) location supervisor must be on the premises of
the location during its hours of operation and remain for at least thirty (30)
minutes after the close of business to assure the closing is conducted in an
orderly manner. A copy of the completed registry showing the name of the
supervisor or supervisors on duty shall be maintained on the premises and shall
be provided to any peace officer, or other person authorized to inspect the
premises, upon request.
(Ord. No. 7831, § 1, 6-1-92; Ord. No. 8322, § 1, 7-5-94; Ord. No. 9658, § 9, 1-
14-02)
Sec. 7-360. Notification of hours of operation; prohibited operation during
certain hours.
   (a)   The licensee shall notify the chief of police of the hours of
operation of the dance hall. Notification shall be made through the application
form for those locations having regular hours of operation or for single
events. Locations whose hours of operation are not regular, or who deviate from
the hours stated in the application, shall notify the chief of police of an
intended activity subject to this article not less than forty-eight (48) hours
prior to the start of the activity. Such notification must be made in writing
on a form approved and provided by the chief of police. The licensee shall
operate a dance hall only during those hours specified in the application or
notice to the chief of police.
   (b)   No Class A dance hall shall operate during the hours between 12:00
a.m. (midnight) and 5:00 a.m.
   (c)   No person shall conduct or operate a Class B dance hall less than
twelve (12) hours after the completion of a Class A dance hall at the same
location.
   (d)   A licensed liquor establishment that operates as a dance hall must
comply with sections
11-17 and
11-18 of this Code regarding hours of operation.
(Ord. No. 8322, § 1, 7-5-94; Ord. No. 9658, § 10, 1-14-02)
Sec. 7-361. Liquor establishments; cigarette machines and sales.
   (a)   At locations that are also licensed liquor establishments, all
alcoholic beverages shall be covered or removed from sight during the time the
location is in operation and all liquor signs and advertisements shall be
covered, removed, or turned off.
   (b)   Sales of cigarettes on the licensed premises shall not be made while
the location is in operation. Any cigarette machines on the licensed premises
shall be disabled sufficiently so cigarettes may not be purchased from them
while the location is in operation. This provision shall not apply to Class B
dance halls.
(Ord. No. 7831, § 1, 6-1-92; Ord. No. 8322, § 1, 7-5-94; Ord. No. 9658, § 11,
1-14-02)
Sec. 7-362. Prohibited activities.
Licensees, location supervisors and employees shall not:
   (1)   Allow the buying, selling, or consumption of alcoholic beverages
anywhere on the licensed premises or outside of the licensed premises in areas
over which the licensee has the legal right to control access;
   (2)   Allow intoxicated persons to enter or remain on the licensed premises
or outside of the licensed premises in areas over which the licensee has the
legal right to control access;
   (3)   Allow the buying, selling, or consumption of controlled substances as
defined by federal or state statutes anywhere on the licensed premises or
outside of the licensed premises in areas over which the licensee has the legal
right to control access;
   (4)   Allow persons under the influence of drugs to enter or remain on the
licensed premises or outside of the licensed premises in areas over which the
licensee has the legal right to control access;
   (5)   Allow persons in possession of a deadly weapon, except for persons
authorized by law, to enter or remain on the licensed premises or outside of
the licensed premises in areas over which the licensee has the legal right to
control access after being requested by the licensee to check such weapons. It
shall be mandatory for licensees to make such a request of persons entering the
licensed premises.
(Ord. No. 7831, § 1, 6-1-92; Ord. No. 8322, § 1, 7-5-94; Ord. No. 9658, § 12,
1-14-02)
Sec. 7-363. Additional responsibilities; responsibility for patron conduct.
   (a)   The licensee, location supervisor and/or other employee shall:
   (1)   Observe all laws applicable to noise abatement, particularly those
contained in this Code;
   (2)   Control the conduct of patrons so as to prevent or minimize disorderly
or unlawful conduct by such patrons upon the premises or areas immediately
adjacent thereto over which the licensee has the legal right to control access;
   (3)   Cause the orderly dispersal of persons from the vicinity of the
regulated premises at closing time, and not allow them to congregate on the
premises or areas immediately adjacent thereto over which they have the legal
right to control access in a disorderly fashion.
   (4)   Prevent persons who are not permitted to enter the licensed premises
because of their age, or otherwise, from congregating or loitering outside of
the licensed premises in those areas over which they have the legal right to
control access, except as is reasonably necessary to drop off or pick up a
patron of the dance hall.
   (b)   The licensee, location supervisor and/or other employee shall not
allow the occupant load of a dance hall to exceed the maximum limit stated on
the certificate of occupancy or occupant load card issued by the development
services center.
   (c)   The licensee, location supervisor and/or other employee shall provide
and maintain safe and rapid means of egress from the premises during all hours
of operation, as required by the building and fire codes.
   (d)   The licensee, location supervisor and/or other employee shall maintain
all ventilation and sanitation requirements, as provided by the applicable
building codes, during the operation of the event.
   (e)   The licensee, location supervisor and/or other employee shall take
immediate action to correct any unsafe condition after notice of such a
condition is provided by any person conducting an inspection authorized by
section
7-355(c).
(Ord. No. 7831, § 1, 6-1-92; Ord. No. 8322, § 1, 7-5-94; Ord. No. 9658, § 13,
1-14-02)
Sec. 7-364. Penalty; violation declared a nuisance; assessment of
administrative charge.
   (a)   Whenever in this article any act is prohibited or declared to be
unlawful, or the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is
declared to be unlawful, the violation of any such provision of this article is
a civil infraction unless specifically declared to be a misdemeanor. Each day
such violation continues shall be a separate offense.
   (b)   A violation of any provision of this article that constitutes a civil
infraction is declared to be a public nuisance, and in addition to any other
penalties specified in this article, is punishable in accordance with chapter
8 of this City Code.
   (c)   A person convicted or found responsible of a violation of this chapter
either after trial or pursuant to a plea agreement shall be assessed an
administrative charge to cover all or part of the costs and expenses directly
incurred by the city in the investigation, enforcement and abatement of the
violation. The administrative charge shall be assessed, collected and deposited
in the same manner as the administrative charge for persons convicted of a
violation of A.R.S. § 28-1381 as set forth in section
8-6.6 of this Code, except that the amount of the administrative charge shall
be determined by the court after reviewing evidence provided by the city
documenting the actual costs and expenses directly incurred in the
investigation, enforcement and abatement of the violation. The costs and
expenses incurred by the police when closing down a dance hall operation
pursuant to section
7-366(b) shall be included in the administrative charge. An assessment imposed
pursuant to this section shall not exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for
a single incident.
(Ord. No. 7831, § 1, 6-1-92; Ord. No. 8322, § 1, 7-5-94; Ord. No. 9658, § 14,
1-14-02)
Sec. 7-365. After hours operation.
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to permit the operation of
establishments in violation of sections
11-17 or
11-18.
(Ord. No. 7831, § 1, 6-1-92; Ord. No. 8322, § 1, 7-5-94)
Sec. 7-366. Authority of the chief of police; security; closure of operations.
   (a)   The chief of police is authorized to require the employment of a
sufficient number of security personnel to provide crowd and traffic control
during the event and dispersal at the conclusion thereof. In determining the
security requirements, the chief of police shall consider the following
criteria:
   (1)   The location of the event;
   (2)   The number of patrons expected to attend;
   (3)   The ages of the patrons;
   (4)   The history of complaints, citations and arrests at the location for
excessive noise, unruly or disorderly conduct, criminal damage or vandalism,
drug and alcohol offenses, acts of violence, and other civil or criminal
violations;
   (5)   The event's impact on traffic congestion, both vehicular and
pedestrian, and the need for traffic control;
   (6)   The availability at the time of the event of peace officers to police
and protect lawful participants in the event;
   (7)   Whether the concentration of persons and vehicles at the event will
prevent or impede the response of emergency services, including police
protection, fire protection, or ambulance service;
   (8)   The nature of the surrounding neighborhood and the likelihood of
interference from and to other businesses in the area.
   (9)   The applicant shall be required to provide security personnel for
crowd and traffic control and patron security in any parking areas used for the
event, at a level as determined by the chief of police.
   (b)   The chief of police is authorized to cause a dance hall to close down
operations and disperse all patrons for the remainder of the daily operation
whenever disorderly or unlawful patron conduct presents a clear threat to the
public safety and well-being of the patrons and general public in the vicinity,
or whenever the dance is operating in violation of this Chapter or any other
statute or ordinance, including Title 4 of the Arizona Revised Statutes.
(Ord. No. 9658, § 15, 1-14-02; Ord. No. 10571, § 5, 8-6-08)
Sec. 7-367. Provisions severable.
   It   is hereby declared to be the intention of the mayor and council that
the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and words of this ordinance are
severable, and if any word, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this
ordinance, or its application to any person or circumstance, shall be declared
unconstitutional or invalid for any reason by the valid judgment or decree of
any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity
shall not affect any of the remaining words, clauses, sentences, paragraphs,
and sections of this ordinance, since the ordinance would have been enacted by
the mayor and council without the incorporation in this ordinance of any such
unconstitutional or invalid word, clause, sentence, paragraph or section, and
also shall not affect any constitutional and valid applications of this
ordinance to any other person or circumstance.
(Ord. No. 9658, § 16, 1-14-02)
Secs. 7-368--7-400. Reserved.
ARTICLE XVI.
COMMUNITY SPECIAL EVENTS
Sec. 7-401. Regulated.
   (a)   For the purposes of this section, a community special event means an
open-air, multi-purpose event with a cultural, social or civic purpose, having
a duration not exceeding twenty-four (24) consecutive hours and occurring not
more than once per week or if occurring on consecutive days, for a period of
time not exceeding fifteen (15) days in a calendar year, the boundaries of
which are designated by city action for use by community special event vendors
selected as set forth in subsections (b) and (c) below and in which:
   (1)   Public access to certain city streets, alleys, rights-of-way or city
facilities is curtailed by city action designating specific portions of
streets, alleys, rights-of-way or city facilities to be utilized for a specific
time for community special event purposes; and
   (2)   Public access to city sidewalks is curtailed by city action limiting
use of such sidewalks to pedestrian traffic and other community special events
purposes which do not impede the flow of pedestrian traffic and prohibiting any
vending to, from or upon such sidewalks during the specific time set for the
community special event.
   (b)   Community special event vendors of alcoholic beverages shall be
selected by the community special event sponsor, subject, however, to a
reasonable limitation in accord with the size of the community special event
and applicable portions of state law and/or city ordinances; however, the city
shall, pursuant to its authority under A.R.S. § 4-203.02, approve no more than
one (1) alcoholic beverage booth for each eight hundred (800) feet of right-of-
way occupied by non-alcoholic beverage vendors.
   (c)   Community special event vendors of products other than alcoholic
beverages shall be selected by the community special event sponsor pursuant to
a system which is accepted as customary and usual for selecting vendors in the
community which may include, but is not limited to, lottery or pre-registration
systems.
   (d)   No product, goods, merchandise, service(s), food or beverage shall be
sold at a community special event unless the vendor has been selected by the
community special event sponsor as provided in subsections (b) and (c) above
and the vendor is licensed as a community special event vendor pursuant to
section
19-42(2) or is subject to the exemption of subsection (e) below.
(e)   (1)   Every person who is currently licensed by the city under any
provision of chapter
19 of the Tucson Code and either: (i) is also selected as a community special
event vendor by the community special event sponsor, or (ii) has a permanent
place of business operating within the community special event boundaries and
is conducting its regular and usual business operations shall not be subject to
the prohibitions of (d) above. However, nothing contained in this section shall
operate to permit sidewalk vending to, from or upon such city sidewalks
designated exclusively for pedestrian traffic and other community special event
purposes under subsection (a)(2) above, for the duration of the event.
   (2)   For community special events occurring more than once per week,
regular and usual business operations shall mean those types of products and
services which have been continuously offered at the permanent place of
business within the community special event boundaries for sixty (60) days
preceding the first scheduled day of the special event.
   (f)   In the event the provisions of this section conflict with any other
provisions of this Code, the provisions of this section shall prevail with
respect to any matter relating to community special events.
   (g)   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall have
committed a civil infraction and be subject to the penalties provided for such
infraction.
(Ord. No. 7959, § 1, 12-14-92; Ord. No. 8575, §§ 1--3, 9-18-95; Ord. No. 9693,
§ 2, 4-15-02; Ord. No. 10448, § 13, 9-5-07, eff. 1-1-08)
Secs. 7-402--7-409. Reserved.
ARTICLE XVII.
LATE NIGHT RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS
Sec. 7-410. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
   Chief of police means the Chief of Police of the City of Tucson, or the
chief of police's authorized designee(s).
   Director of development services means the Director of Development Services
of the City of Tucson, or the director's authorized designee(s).
   Exempt establishment means any of the following:
   (1)   An establishment that sells prescription drug items;
   (2)   An establishment that sells spirituous liquor for consumption on the
premises.
   (3)   A restaurant or similar establishment, including a fast food
restaurant, that derives fifty (50) percent or more of its annual gross revenue
solely from the sale of food or beverage items that are intended for
consumption on the premises (including take-out or to-go food or beverage
items).
   (4)   An establishment that is solely or primarily a laundromat;
   (5)   A hotel, motel or other lodging facility;
   (6)   Fully automated retail establishments that have no employees on the
premises.
   Late night retail establishment means a retail establishment that is not an
exempt establishment under this article and that meets all of the following
criteria:
   (1)   During all or any part of the period between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.,
on any or all day(s) of the week:
   a.   Is open for the purpose of sales to the public of any late night retail
item(s); and
   b.   Has one or two employees working on the premises during that period;
   (2)   Derives twenty-five (25) percent or more of its annual gross revenue
from the sale of any late night retail item(s), singly or in combination;
   (3)   Has fewer than five thousand (5,000) square feet of indoor retail
floor space, calculated after excluding storage areas, cash register/clerk
service areas, and any other areas to which the establishment does not normally
grant the public access.
By way of illustration and not of limitation, convenience stores, liquor
stores, self- service gasoline stations, and full-service gasoline stations
that meet the above criteria are late night retail establishments.
   Late night retail item means any of the following:
   (1)   Food or beverage items that are either intended for consumption on the
premises (including take-out or to-go food or beverage items) or that are sold
in their original package or container for home consumption.
   (2)   Spirituous liquor;
   (3)   Cigarettes or other tobacco products;
   (4)   Household products, which shall include, but not necessarily be
limited to, laundry and cleaning supplies, charcoal, lighter fluid, pet food,
paper goods, school supplies, insecticides, batteries, motor oil and light
bulbs;
   (5)   Nonprescription medications, health aids, first aid items, vitamins
and protein supplements;
   (6)   Soaps, cosmetics and grooming items;
   (7)   Newspapers and magazines;
   (8)   Bottled water and ice;
   (9)   Arizona lottery tickets;
   (10)   Motor fuel, including but not necessarily limited to gasoline.
   Spirituous liquor shall have the same meaning it has in Title 4, Arizona
Revised Statutes or any successor provision(s).
(Ord. No. 8066, § 1, 6-14-93)
Sec. 7-411. Required interior safety and security measures; deadline for
compliance.
Effective ninety (90) days from the date of enactment of this article, the
following permanent safety measures shall be required of any late night retail
establishment operating within the city limits of the City of Tucson:
   (1)   All glass on doors, and all glass that lies above thirty-six (36)
inches from the floor of the late night retail establishment and below eighty-
four (84) inches from the floor of the late night retail establishment, shall
be free of all signage, posters, merchandise displays or window coverings. This
requirement shall not apply to non-advertising signs or notices that are:
   a.   Required by any provision(s) of federal, state or local law to be
placed within the areas set forth above; or
   b.   Intended to deter or reduce late night retail establishment crime or
otherwise to promote the safety of employees and the general public.
However, with respect to exception (a), the chief of police may require such
modifications (including but not necessarily limited to repositioning or
reduction in size) as do not conflict with such federal, state or local
provision(s) and will minimize the negative effect of the sign or notice on an
observer's view into the establishment. With respect to exception (b), if the
chief of police finds that the size or placement of any particular sign or
notice unreasonably obstructs or otherwise affects an observer's view into the
establishment, the chief of police may order that the sign or notice be
repositioned, reduced in size, or otherwise modified, or may order its removal.
   (2)   All doors through which the late night retail establishment normally
grants the public access shall be equipped with height markers showing feet and
half-feet measured from the floor.
   (3)   The owner or operator of the late night retail establishment shall
provide and operate an employee safety and crime prevention training program
for its employees.
All employees of the late night retail establishment who enter into employment
subsequent to the ninetieth day from the date of enactment of this article
shall, within thirty (30) days of entering into employment, complete the
training program. All employees of the late night retail establishment who have
entered into employment prior to or on the ninetieth day from the date of
enactment of this article shall complete the training program within one
hundred eighty (180) days from the date of enactment of this article; provided
that, where a late night retail establishment has provided an employee with
safety and crime prevention training within one (1) year prior to the date of
enactment of this article, as demonstrated by written records, the late night
retail establishment shall not be required to repeat the training for that
employee.
   (4)   The late night retail establishment shall be equipped with a minimum
of one (1) properly installed, positioned, operated and maintained security
camera, which shall be capable, under the normal lighting and operating
conditions at the particular establishment, of recording and reproducing a
color photographic image of persons at or near the cash register of sufficient
clarity and recognizability for suspect identification and for introduction in
evidence at a criminal trial or hearing, notwithstanding any enlargement or
other necessary technical processing of the original image.
If a still camera is used, it shall, in addition to meeting the preceding
requirements, be capable of being tripped from the cash register or by other
electronic means and thereafter recording a series of images, and, unless
otherwise specifically approved by the chief of police, shall be appropriately
concealed.
Late night retail establishments shall modify their cash register layout and
display racks, and modify, reduce or supplement their counter or overhead
indoor lighting, as necessary to meet the requirements of this paragraph.
The chief of police is authorized to and shall promulgate rules and regulations
for the implementation of this paragraph, including but not limited to
technical specifications for security cameras, their film or videotape, their
necessary ancillary equipment and accessories, and their maintenance and
operation.
No late night retail establishment shall be in compliance with this article
unless its security camera system also conforms to such rules and regulations.
(Ord. No. 8066, § 1, 6-14-93)
Sec. 7-412. Required exterior lighting; deadline for compliance.
   (a)   All late night retail establishments operating within the city limits
of the City of Tucson shall, under appropriate permit from and inspection by
the department of development services, install, and thereafter operate from
one-half ( 1/2) hour before sunset to one-half ( 1/2) hour after sunrise,
exterior lighting that is in conformity with the following:
   (1)   All applicable City Codes, including the "Tucson/Pima County Outdoor
Lighting Code, 1987 Edition", as adopted in Ordinance No. 6786, or any
successor provision(s); and
   (2)   The Illuminating Engineering Society of North America's
recommendations for Maintained Horizontal Illuminances for the General Parking
and Pedestrian Area of Open Parking Facilities with a Medium Level of Activity,
as specified in the IES Lighting Handbook, Applications Volume (1987) or any
successor provision(s).
   (b)   The exterior lighting required under subsection A shall, at a minimum,
be provided to any outside area that lies either within a 50-foot perimeter
around the late night retail establishment, or within the property line of the
premises owned or leased by the late night retail establishment, whichever is
less.
   (c)   All late night retail establishments shall have exterior lighting that
is in compliance with this section not later than eighteen (18) months from the
date of enactment of this article.
(Ord. No. 8066, § 1, 6-14-93)
Sec. 7-413. Non-compliance unlawful; two or more violations good cause for
revocation of occupational license.
It shall be unlawful for any late night retail establishment to fail to comply
with the requirements of this article. In addition to any other civil or
criminal penalty under Arizona law or this Code, two (2) or more violations of
the requirements of this article shall constitute good cause for revocation of
the late night retail establishment's occupational license pursuant to section
19-19 of the Tucson Code.
(Ord. No. 8066, § 1, 6-14-93)
Sec. 7-414. Promulgation of regulations.
The chief of police and the director of development services are authorized to
and shall promulgate all necessary rules and regulations for the implementation
of this article.
(Ord. No. 8066, § 1, 6-14-93)
Secs. 7-415--7-424. Reserved.
ARTICLE XVIII.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 7-425. Fingerprinting procedures.
   (a)   Each applicant for a license identified in this section that is issued
by the city shall provide to the chief of police fingerprint identification.
The chief of police shall, pursuant to A.R.S. Section 41-1750 and Public Law
92-184, Section 902, forward those fingerprints accompanied by the appropriate
fees, which will be paid by the applicant, to the state department of public
safety and the Federal Bureau of Investigation for the purpose of seeking
criminal history information on such applicants. Such information shall be used
only for the purpose of evaluating the fitness of the applicants applying for
the following types of licenses:
   (1)   Adult entertainment employee
   (2)   Adult entertainment enterprise
   (3)   Escort
   (4)   Escort bureau
   (5)   Fortuneteller
   (6)   Massage establishment
   (7)   Massage therapist
   (8)   Spirituous liquor
   (9)   Youth dance hall
   (b)   The city shall comply with any relevant state and federal rules and
regulations that may relate to the dissemination of such criminal history
information.
(Ord. No. 8131, § 1, 7-425)
ARTICLE XIX.
TOBACCO RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS
Sec. 7-426. Purpose and intent.
It is the purpose and intent of this article to provide for the regulation of
tobacco retail sales, as defined in this article, in order to prevent the
illegal sale of cigarettes, e-cigarettes and other tobacco and nicotine-
containing products to minors and young adults under the age of twenty-one
(21).
The vast majority of smokers begin smoking in their teens or pre-teens. The
health hazards posed by cigarettes and other tobacco products are well
documented. Recent studies show that youth use of electronic smoking devices
such as e-cigarettes continues to increase and is higher than other forms of
tobacco use, which has stymied previous progress in reducing the overall
tobacco use rate for youth.
Arizona Revised Statutes prohibit selling, giving or furnishing tobacco
products to minors and prohibit minors from buying, accepting or receiving
tobacco products. However, the present legislative scheme of prohibiting
tobacco sales and distribution to minors, defined therein as persons under
eighteen (18) years of age, has proven ineffective in preventing tobacco sales
and distribution to minors and preventing minors from buying and obtaining
tobacco products.
Licensing of retailers to sell tobacco to adults has been shown in several
jurisdictions to prevent tobacco sales to minors when the license is issued
under the condition that the licensee will not sell tobacco products to minors.
In addition, retail tobacco licensing laws have been shown in several
jurisdictions to prevent tobacco product sales to minors when the prohibition
against tobacco sales to minors is actively enforced to ensure compliance, and
when violators face criminal and/or civil penalties as well as license
suspension and revocation for violating the prohibition against selling tobacco
products to minors. Licensing tobacco retailers and establishing a minimum
sales age of twenty-one (21) will therefore promote the health, safety and
welfare of the residents of Tucson under twenty-one (21) years of age.
Therefore, the mayor and council find it in the public interest to license
tobacco retailers as provided in this article as a reasonable, proven method of
preventing sales of tobacco products to minors and young adults under the age
of twenty- one (21). The mayor and council further find it is within its police
powers and other express Charter authority to prevent disease and protect
health and safety to implement and enforce the provisions of this ordinance.
(Ord. No. 11703, § 2, 10-22-19)
Sec. 7-427. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this article, shall be
construed as defined in this section unless in context it appears that a
different meaning is intended:
   Department means any department of the City of Tucson that the city manager
designates as responsible for the administration and/or enforcement of this
article, including, but not limited to, the City of Tucson business services
department.
   Electronic smoking device means a device that can be used to deliver
aerosolized or vaporized nicotine to a person who inhales from the device,
including an e-cigarette, e-cigar, e-pipe, vape pen, or e-hookah, and any
component, part, or accessory of such a device, whether or not sold separately.
   Hookah means a type of water pipe used to smoke tobacco or other legal non-
tobacco substances, such as shisha, in which air is heated by charcoal or
burning embers and passed through the tobacco or other substance to form smoke,
and the smoke then passes through a water-filled chamber where it is filtered
and cooled, and then inhaled through a tube and mouthpiece by one or more users
during a smoking session. At the end of a smoking session, the dirty water is
discarded, and the water chamber is refilled for the next user(s). The term
"hookah" may also be referred to as a water pipe, narghile, argileh, goza, or
hubble bubble. The term "shisha" includes any mixture of tobacco leaf and
honey, molasses or dried fruit or any other sweetener.
   Hookah bar means a smoking establishment whose business operation, whether
as its primary use or as an ancillary use, is devoted to the on-premises use of
hookahs. The term "hookah bar" includes but is not limited to establishments
variously known as hookah parlors, hookah cafes, and hookah lounges.
   License means a license required for operating a tobacco retail
establishment under section
7-428(A) of this code.
   Smoke shop means any establishment in which the area used for sales or
display of tobacco products consists of fifteen (15) percent or more of the
total sales area of the space.
   Tobacco product means:
   (1)   Any product made or derived from tobacco or that contains nicotine and
is intended for human consumption or is likely to be consumed, whether smoked,
heated, chewed, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, or ingested by any other means,
including cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, chewing tobacco, shisha, snuff,
snus, and liquid nicotine solution; and
   (2)   Any component, accessory, instrument, or paraphernalia that is used in
the consumption of a tobacco product or that is solely designed for the smoking
or ingesting of tobacco or shisha, including a hookah, water pipe, filter,
rolling papers, pipe, or electronic smoking device; except that:
   (3)   The term "tobacco product" does not include drugs, devices, or
combination products, as those terms are defined in the Federal Food, Drug and
Cosmetic Act, that are authorized for sale by the United States Food and Drug
Administration.
   Tobacco retail establishment means any place of business where tobacco
products are available for sale directly to consumers. The term includes, but
is not limited to grocery stores, tobacco product shops, kiosks, convenience
stores, gasoline service stations, and other businesses where tobacco products
are sold directly to customers.
   Tobacco retailer means any person, partnership, joint venture, society,
club, trustee, trust, organization, association, or corporation who owns,
operates, or manages any tobacco retail establishment. Tobacco retailer does
not mean the non-management employees of any tobacco retail establishment.
(Ord. No. 11703, § 2, 10-22-19; Ord. No. 12057, § 4, 11-14-23; Ord. No. 12133,
§ 1, 11-7-24, eff. 12-8-24)
Sec. 7-428. Tobacco retailing - Generally.
   (a)   No person may sell, furnish, give, or provide tobacco products
directly to consumers within the City of Tucson except on the premises of a
tobacco retail establishment with a valid license.
   (b)   It is the responsibility of the tobacco retailer to be informed of all
laws applicable to tobacco retailing, including those laws affecting the
issuance of a license, and to provide appropriate training to any persons who
interact with customers on its premises. The issuance of a license is not a
determination by the City of Tucson or the Department that the tobacco retail
establishment or tobacco retailer has complied with any laws applicable to
tobacco retailing.
   (c)   During any period that a tobacco retail establishment lacks a valid
license, that tobacco retail establishment and its tobacco retailer must:
      (1)   Not sell, furnish, give, or provide any tobacco product to
consumers at that tobacco retail establishment.
      (2)   Remove all tobacco products from the relevant tobacco retail
establishment's retail area.
      (3)   Remove the license from public view.
      (4)   Display signage, provided by the department, in a conspicuous
manner visible to the general public and within a five (5) foot radius of any
tobacco product point of sale area, indicating that the tobacco retailer does
not possess a current license to sell tobacco products. If multiple tobacco
product point of sale areas exist in a single tobacco retail establishment,
such signage must be displayed in each area.
      (5)   Remove all tobacco advertising that is not permanently affixed to
the tobacco retail establishment's structure.
   (d)   It is a violation of this chapter for any employee of a tobacco retail
establishment or for any tobacco retailer on its premises to violate any local
or state law applicable to tobacco products or tobacco retailing.
   (e)   License application, procedure and fees; annual renewal.
      (1)   Any person, desiring to obtain a tobacco retail license shall apply
to the department. An application for a tobacco retail license shall be filed
no later than ninety (90) days from the effective date of this subsection.
      (2)   The applicant for an annual tobacco retail license shall pay an
annual license fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00). All tobacco retail
licenses shall expire on December 31 of each calendar year and must be renewed
annually. Annual license fees shall only be valid for the location specified in
the license application, a separate license being required for each location at
which tobacco products are sold.
      (3)   The application fee and license required by this article shall be
in addition to any business license and fee which may be required by chapter 19
of the Tucson Code. The granting of a license under this section shall not be
deemed evidence or proof that the licensee has complied with the requirements
and provisions of chapter 19 of the Tucson Code.
(Ord. No. 11703, § 2, 10-22-19; Ord. No. 11720, § 1, 1-7-20)
Sec. 7-429. Accessibility of tobacco products.
   (a)   All tobacco products at any tobacco retail establishment to which
persons under twenty- one (21) years old are permitted entry must be
maintained:
      (1)   Behind a counter in an area accessible only to employees of the
tobacco retail establishment; or
      (2)   In a locked container accessible only to employees of the tobacco
retail establishment; or
      (3)   Otherwise out of physical reach of any consumer and only accessible
to employees of the tobacco retail establishment.
(Ord. No. 11703, § 2, 10-22-19)
Sec. 7-430. Minimum legal sales age for tobacco products.
   (a)   A tobacco retailer and/or any employee at a tobacco retail
establishment shall not sell, furnish, give, or provide any tobacco product to
any person under the age of twenty-one (21).
   (b)   Before selling, furnishing, giving, or providing a tobacco product to
any person who appears to be under the age of thirty (30), a tobacco retailer
or any employee at a tobacco retail establishment must examine an approved form
of identification and verify that the person is at least twenty-one (21) years
of age.
   (c)   For the purposes of this section, the following forms of
identification, if valid, unexpired, and including a picture of the person and
the person's date of birth, are approved for age verification:
      (1)   A driver license or nonoperating identification card issued by any
state or territory of the United States or Canada;
      (2)   A United States Armed Forces identification card;
      (3)   A passport;
      (4)   A resident alien card.
(Ord. No. 11703, § 2, 10-22-19)
Sec. 7-431. Signage.
   (a)   A tobacco retail establishment must post a clearly visible sign
stating "No tobacco products or electronic smoking devices will be sold to
persons under the age of twenty-one (21) at every location where such products
are available for purchase. The tobacco retailer for the tobacco retail
establishment is responsible for compliance with this requirement.
   (b)   The City of Tucson will provide signs at the time of the license
approval or renewal, or upon request.
   (c)   Signs must be no smaller than 4 inches by 6 inches, and include the
appropriate department website and phone number.
   (d)   Failure to comply with this section is a violation under section
7-432 only after the tobacco retail establishment or its tobacco retailer has
failed to correct any deficiency at the department's request.
(Ord. No. 11703, § 2, 10-22-19)
Sec. 7-432. Violation—Penalty.
   (a)   In addition to any other penalties provided under this article, any
person found responsible under this article shall be guilty of a civil
infraction and punished in accordance with the mandatory penalties prescribed
in minor section
1-8(2) and under the procedures outlined in
chapter 8 of this City Code.
   (b)   If any court of competent jurisdiction determines, or the department
finds, that a tobacco retail establishment with a license, or its tobacco
retailer or any of its agents or employees, has violated a local, state, or
federal law regulating tobacco sales or does not comply with this article, the
following penalties also apply:
      (1)   For a first violation at a tobacco retail establishment, the court
or the department will issue the tobacco retailer a fine of five hundred
dollars ($500).
      (2)   For a second violation at a tobacco retail establishment within
thirty-six (36) months of the first violation, the court or the department will
assess a fine of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750) and the tobacco retail
establishment's license shall be suspended for a period of seven (7) days,
during which time the tobacco retail establishment shall be prohibited from
distributing tobacco products.
      (3)   For a third violation at a tobacco retail establishment within
thirty-six (36) months of the first violation, the court or the department will
assess a fine of one thousand dollars ($1000) and the tobacco retail
establishment's license shall be suspended for a period of thirty (30) days,
during which time the tobacco retail establishment shall be prohibited from
distributing tobacco products.
   (4)   For a fourth violation at a tobacco retail establishment within
thirty-six (36) months of the first violation, the court or the department will
assess a fine of one thousand dollars ($1000) and revoke the license for that
tobacco retail establishment. The tobacco retail establishment may not apply
for a new license within twelve (12) months following the revocation pursuant
to this subsection.
      (5)   Any such tobacco retail establishment or its tobacco retailer found
in violation will also be charged a two hundred dollar ($200) fee for a re-
inspection that the department may conduct within three (3) months of the
violation.
   (c)   If any court of competent jurisdiction determines, or the department
finds, that a tobacco retail establishment operating without a valid license,
or its tobacco retailer or any of its agents or employees, has violated a local
or state law regulating tobacco sales or does not comply with this chapter, the
following penalties also apply:
      (1)   For the first violation within a thirty-six (36) month period, the
court or the department will assess a fine of one thousand dollars ($1000).
      (2)   For a second violation within a thirty-six (36) month period, the
court or the department will assess a fine of one thousand five hundred dollars
($1500). The tobacco retail establishment will be ineligible to apply for a
license for six (6) months.
      (3)   For each additional violation within a thirty-six (36) month
period, the court or the department will assess a fine of two thousand five
hundred dollar ($2500) and the tobacco retail establishment may not apply for a
license for thirty-six (36) months.
      (4)   Any tobacco retail establishment operating without a valid license
must also comply with section 7-428 of this chapter.
   (d)   Multiple violations of this article, or of any other local or state
law applicable to tobacco products or tobacco retailing, identified during a
single inspection are counted as a single violation with respect to penalties
imposed under this article.
   (e)   All applicable fees must be paid before a license is issued or
renewed.
   (f)   A tobacco retail establishment or its tobacco retailer or any of its
employees or agents may appeal the penalties imposed by a court of competent
jurisdiction as otherwise provided under Arizona law. A department-issued
suspension of a license for a tobacco retail establishment is subject to
section 7-434 below.
(Ord. 11703, § 2, 10-22-19)
Sec. 7-433.    Applicability of other laws.
The remedies provided by this chapter are cumulative and in addition to any
other remedies available at law or in equity. Nothing in this chapter prohibits
the prosecution of criminal offenses under any applicable law. The department
may enforce this chapter in a civil action, including administrative or
judicial proceedings, civil code enforcement proceedings, and suits for
injunctive relief.
(Ord. 11703, § 2, 10-22-19)
Sec. 7-434. Hearing upon suspension or revocation by the department.
   (a)   The director of the department, upon notification that grounds for
suspension or revocation of a tobacco retail establishment's license by the
department exist, shall file a written petition for suspension or revocation
with the city court, requesting that time and place be set for a hearing and
specifying the grounds for suspension or revocation per this article. Within
five (5) days a magistrate, special magistrate or limited special magistrate
shall schedule a hearing to be conducted within fifteen (15) days of the
receipt of the petition to suspend or revoke. The magistrate, special
magistrate or limited special magistrate shall notify the parties in the manner
provided in this article and shall state the grounds relied upon for the
proposed suspension or revocation. Should the licensee fail to appear at the
hearing, a default judgment of suspension or revocation shall be entered. A
record shall be kept of all proceedings. No license shall be suspended or
revoked unless grounds therefor are established by a preponderance of the
evidence. The hearing shall be held in an informal manner as to the order of
proceeding and presentation of evidence. The Arizona Rules of Evidence shall
not apply. Any evidence offered shall be admitted subject to a determination by
the magistrate, special magistrate, or limited special magistrate that the
offered evidence is relevant and material and has some probative value as to a
fact at issue. The magistrate, special magistrate or limited special magistrate
shall provide the licensee and other parties written notice of the decision
within five (5) days, pursuant to subsection (b) of this section. Suspension or
revocation of a license shall be effected by the magistrate, special magistrate
or limited special magistrate's signing of the written notice of the decision.
A licensee's right to sell tobacco products under authority of the license
shall terminate immediately upon giving or mailing to the licensee a copy of
the signed decision suspending or revoking the license; except that the
suspension or revocation may be stayed by the superior court pending a timely
appeal of the decision by special action. Such appeal must be filed within ten
(10) days after the decision to suspend or revoke is signed unless the decision
is mailed, in which case the appeal must be filed no later than fifteen (15)
days after entry of the decision. The appellee shall bear the cost of preparing
the record of appeal. If an appeal is not timely made, the suspension or
revocation becomes final.
   (b)   Notices required by this section shall be served by certified mail to
the licensee's attorney or to the licensee at the address as shown on the
tobacco retail license, or by personal service.
(Ord. No. 11703, § 2, 10-22-19)
Sec. 7-435.   License for smoke shop required.
   No person shall operate a smoke shop without first obtaining a smoke shop
license.
(Ord. No. 12057, § 4, 11-14-23)
Sec. 7-436.   Smoke shop license application; information required.
   An application for a smoke shop license shall be filed by the owner of the
smoke shop on forms provided by the revenue department. The information
required at the time of application shall include but not be limited to the
following:
   (a)   The name, address and signature of the owner of the smoke shop to be
licensed.
   (b)   The address of the smoke shop to be licensed.
   (c)   A copy of the zoning compliance certificate issued by the zoning
administrator of the smoke shop to be licensed.
   (d)   The owner of the smoke shop shall notify the city revenue department
within thirty (30) days of any changes in the name or address of the owner.
(Ord. No. 12057, § 4, 11-14-23)
Sec. 7-437.   Hookah bars—Special requirements.
   (a)   Purpose. The purpose of these regulations is to differentiate hookah
bars from other tobacco retail establishments, tobacco retail stores, and other
tobacco smoking establishments due to their inherent differences in nature,
function, and effect; and to establish additional minimum standards for the
operation of hookah bars within the City of Tucson in order to minimize adverse
effects on surrounding property and to protect, preserve, maintain and enhance
the public's safety and health.
   (b)   Applicability. These regulations shall apply to all hookah bars as
defined in this article. These regulations are in addition to the tobacco
retail regulations that otherwise apply to hookah bars under state law and this
article.
   (c)   Requirements. In addition to the requirements applicable to other
tobacco retail establishments and tobacco retailers under this article, hookah
bars shall also comply with the below:
      (1)   Hours of operation. A hookah bar shall not be permitted to operate
between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.
      (2)   Minors prohibited. No person under eighteen (18) years of age shall
be permitted to enter, work at, or patronize a hookah bar.
      (3)   Alcoholic beverages prohibited. The sale and/or possession and/or
consumption of alcoholic beverages shall not be permitted at any hookah bar.
      (4)   Intoxicated persons prohibited. Any person obviously under the
influence of any intoxicating drug or beverage shall not be permitted to enter
or remain in a hookah bar.
   (d)   Exemption. The provisions of this Section, including but not limited
to the prohibited hours of operation, do not apply to any hookah bar that is
separately licensed under Title 4 of the Arizona Revised Statutes regulating
the sale of alcoholic beverages.
   (e)   Persons responsible. The persons responsible for compliance with the
requirements of subsection (c) of this section include the person(s) licensed
to operate the establishment as a tobacco retail establishment, whether or not
that person(s) is present at the establishment at the time of the violation;
and any employee of the establishment who is present at the time of the
violation.
   (f)   Penalty. Any violation of the provisions of this section is a class 1
misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 12133, § 2, 11-7-24, eff. 12-8-24)
Secs. 7-438—7-439. Reserved.
ARTICLE XX.
HOTELS*
__________
*   Editors Note: It should be noted that the provisions of this article shall
become effective September 30, 1999.
__________
Sec. 7-440. Definitions.
   (a)   Rent or subrent means the act of permitting a room to be occupied in
exchange for any form of consideration.
   (b)   Hotel is defined in Tucson Code Section
19-1.
(Ord. No. 9240, § 1, 6-21-99)
Sec. 7-441. Guest register required; guest identification required.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, employee or person in
control of any hotel to rent, subrent, or otherwise furnish accommodations
therein to any person without first requiring the person requesting the
accommodations to exhibit a written instrument of identification. The following
written instruments are the only acceptable types of identification:
   (1)   An unexpired drivers license issued by any state of the United States
or Canada, provided such license includes a picture of the licensee;
   (2)   A non-operating identification license issued pursuant to A.R.S.
Section 28-3165;
   (3)   An armed forces identification card;
   (4)   A valid unexpired passport or border crossing identification card
which is issued by a government; or
   (5)   A voter card issued by the government of Mexico and which contains a
photograph of the person and the date of birth.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, employee, or person in
control of any hotel to rent, subrent, or otherwise furnish accommodations
therein to any person without first entering in a register the following
information:
   (1)   The name and address of each guest furnished with accommodations;
   (2)   The correct date and time of day that the accommodations were rented,
subrented, or otherwise furnished to the guest;
   (3)   The room number or other specific description of the accommodations
which were furnished to the guest;
   (4)   The signature of the guest to whom the accommodations were furnished;
and
   (5)   The type of written instrument of identification presented by the
guest to verify his/her name and address, and the number of the identification.
A photocopy of the instrument of identification is sufficient to satisfy this
requirement.
Such register shall be made available for the inspection of any peace officer
at all times upon request.
(Ord. No. 9240, § 1, 6-21-99)
Sec. 7-442. Limitation on consecutive rentals.
If any owner, operator, employee, or person in control of any hotel rents,
subrents, or otherwise furnishes accommodations therein to any person, it shall
be unlawful for that owner, operator, employee, or person in control to rent,
subrent, or otherwise furnish the same accommodations again to any person
within eight (8) hours from the commencement of the previous rental.
(Ord. No. 9240, § 1, 6-21-99)
Sec. 7-443. Notification to licensee of violation by employee.
The person holding a business license issued pursuant to Chapter
19 shall be notified in writing by the police department whenever an employee
of the licensee is cited for a violation of section
7-441 or section
7-442. Notice shall be given to the licensee within ten (10) days of charges
being filed. The provisions of section
7-444 regarding license suspension shall not apply in the absence of such
notification.
(Ord. No. 9240, § 1, 6-21-99)
Sec. 7-444. Suspension of business license; grounds; penalties.
   (a)   The business license issued pursuant to Chapter
19 entitling the licensee to operate any hotel shall be suspended for twenty-
four (24) hours if the licensee or any employee of the licensee violates the
provisions of section
7-441 or section
7-442 on two (2) separate dates within a twelve (12) month period.
   (b)   The business license issued pursuant to Chapter
19 entitling the licensee to operate any hotel shall be suspended for ten (10)
days if the licensee or any employee of the licensee violates the provisions of
section
7-441 or section
7-442 on four (4) separate dates within a twelve (12) month period.
(Ord. No. 9240, § 1, 6-21-99)
Sec. 7-445. Hearing upon suspension.
   (a)   The director of finance, upon notification by the chief of police or
the city attorney that grounds for suspension exist, shall file a written
petition for suspension with the City Court, requesting that a time and place
be set for a hearing and specifying the grounds for suspension per section
7-443. Within five (5) days a magistrate, special magistrate or limited special
magistrate shall schedule a hearing to be conducted within fifteen (15) days of
the receipt of the petition to suspend. The magistrate, special magistrate or
limited special magistrate shall notify the parties in the manner provided in
this section and shall state the grounds relied upon for the proposed
suspension. Should the licensee fail to appear at the hearing, a default
judgment of suspension shall be entered. A record shall be kept of all
proceedings. No license shall be suspended unless grounds therefore are
established by a preponderance of the evidence. The hearing shall be held in an
informal manner as to the order of proceeding and presentation of evidence. The
Arizona Rules of Evidence shall not apply. Any evidence offered shall be
admitted subject to a determination by the magistrate, special magistrate or
limited special magistrate that the offered evidence is relevant and material
and has some probative value as to a fact at issue. The magistrate, special
magistrate or limited special magistrate shall provide the licensee and other
parties written notice of the decision within five (5) days, pursuant to
subsection (b) of this section. The magistrate, special magistrate or limited
special magistrate's signing of the written notice of the decision shall effect
the suspension of a license. A licensee's right to operate a hotel under
authority of the license shall terminate immediately upon giving or mailing to
the licensee a copy of the signed decision suspending the license; except that
the suspension may be stayed by the Superior Court pending a timely appeal of
the decision by Special Action. Such appeal must be filed within ten (10) days
after the decision to suspend is signed unless the decision is mailed, in which
case the appeal must be filed no later than fifteen (15) days after entry of
the decision. The appellee shall bear the cost of preparing the record of
appeal. If an appeal is not timely made, the suspension becomes final.
   (b)   Notices required by this article shall be served by certified mail to
the licensee's attorneys or to the licensee at the address as shown on the
licensee's license, or by personal service.
(Ord. No. 9240, § 1, 6-21-99)
Sec. 7-446. Operating on a suspended license.
It shall be unlawful to operate on a suspended license. Each day the violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 9240, § 1, 6-21-99)
Secs. 7-447--7-448. Reserved.
ARTICLE XXI.
ALARM COMPANIES AND USERS*
__________
   *Editor's Note: It should be noted that § 4 of Ord. No. 9975 states that the
enforcement of the provisions of this article shall be delayed until January 1,
2005. Ord. No. 10967, adopted February 28, 2012 and effective April 1, 2012,
revised the title for article XXI, designated a new division 1, and added a new
division 2 in its entirety.
__________
DIVISION 1. ALARM COMPANY LICENSES
Sec. 7-449. Applicability.
   This article is intended to regulate the activities and responsibilities of
those persons who purchase, lease or rent and those persons who own or conduct
the business of selling, leasing, renting, installing, maintaining, or
monitoring alarm systems, devices or services. It is further intended to
encourage the improvement in reliability of these systems, devices and services
to ensure that police department personnel will not be unduly diverted from
responding to actual criminal activity as a result of responding to false
alarms. This article specifically encompasses burglary, robbery and commercial
panic alarms, both audible and inaudible (silent). Except as otherwise provided
in this article, this article shall not apply to audible alarms affixed to
motor vehicles, audible fire alarms, medical alert devices, and alarm systems
that are operated by the city, county, state, or federal government and
installed on premises which such entity occupies or uses for governmental
purposes. However, such entities shall apply for and obtain a registration for
each alarm system it operates and the registration will be waived.
(Ord. No. 10967, § 2, 2-28-12, eff. 4-1-12)
Sec. 7-450. Definitions.
In this article, unless the context otherwise requires:
   Act of God means an unusual, extraordinary, sudden and unexpected
manifestation of the forces of nature, which cannot be prevented by reasonable
human care, skill or foresight. Such events include tornadoes, floods,
earthquakes, and other similarly violent conditions.
   Alarm administrator means a person designated by the chief of police under
this article to administer, control, and review false alarm reduction efforts
and administer the provisions of this article.
   Alarm agent means any person, whether an employee, independent contractor or
otherwise, who acts on behalf of an alarm business and leases, rents,
maintains, services, repairs or installs alarm systems, other than alarm
systems located on the person's own property or the property of the person's
employer.
   Alarm business means any person that, either individually or through a third
party, engages in the business of providing alarm monitoring services or the
business of selling, leasing, renting, maintaining, repairing or installing
alarm systems, devices or services. Alarm businesses may also monitor alarms.
   Alarm site means each separate physical location which houses an alarm
system. In the instances of an apartment complex or other residential rental
property, both the facility and business itself, as well as each individual
unit that has an individual alarm system, is an alarm site.
   Alarm system means a device or series of devices, including but not limited
to hardwired systems and systems interconnected with a radio frequency method
such as cellular or private radio signals, which emit or transmit a remote or
local audible, visual or electronic signal indicating an alarm condition and
intended to summon a public safety response. Alarm system does not include an
alarm installed in a vehicle or on someone's person unless the vehicle or
personal alarm is permanently located at a site.
   Alarm user means the owner, lessor, or occupant, agent, employee, operator
or manager of property upon which an alarm system is located, as well as a
party or person who actually causes a false alarm.
   Alarm user awareness class means a class conducted for the purpose of
educating alarm users about the responsible use, operation and maintenance of
alarm systems and the problems created by false alarms.
   Audible alarm means a device designed for the detection of an unauthorized
entry on premises and which when activated generates an audible sound on the
premises. For the purposes of this definition, an audible alarm does not
include an alarm installed in a vehicle or on someone's person.
   Common cause means a common technical difficulty or malfunction which causes
an alarm system to generate a series of false alarms, all of which occur within
a twenty-four (24) hour period. The series of false alarms shall be counted as
one (1) false alarm only if the cause of the series of false alarms is repaired
before it generates additional false alarms, documentation of the repair is
provided to the alarm administrator, and during the thirty (30) day period
following the repair, the alarm system generates no additional false alarms
from the documented cause.
   Controlling person means all current officers, managers and directors, and
any person who is a stockholder, member, general or limited partner or owner,
or who holds more than ten (10) percent of the ownership, management rights,
control or claim to the profits of the business. Controlling person does not
include current officers, directors or shareholders of stock in any corporation
that is traded on a national stock exchange.
   Duress alarm means an alarm system signal generated by the entry of a
designated code into an alarm system in order to signal that the alarm user is
being forced to turn off the system and needs law enforcement response.
   Emergency means the commission or attempted commission of a robbery or
burglary, or other crime of violence, or other life/safety issue.
   Enhanced call verification, verify or verification means two (2) documented
attempts by the company monitoring an alarm, or its representative, to contact
the site of the alarm and/or the alarm user by telephone and/or other
electronic means, whether or not actual contact with a person is made, to
determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting law enforcement
dispatch, in an attempt to avoid an unnecessary request for response.
(Excluding a holdup, robbery, panic, or duress alarm activation.)
   False alarm means an alarm signal, sound or message which results in a
response by the police department or fire department where an emergency does
not exist, or which is not caused by or is not the result of a criminal act or
unauthorized entry.
   Holdup alarm means an alarm signal generated by the manual activation of a
device intended to signal a robbery in progress.
   Licensing authority means the city finance department, except that when
referring to reciprocal licenses, it means the city department or the police
department, as applicable, who has the authority to issue licenses pursuant to
the reciprocal alarm licensing ordinance of another city or town.
   Medical alert device means a device designed to help a patient obtain
adequate help during a medical emergency.
   Monitoring/monitored alarm means the process by which a person receives
signals from an alarm system and relays a request for response to the police
department or fire department for the purpose of summoning response to the
alarm site.
   Monitoring company means a person in the business of providing monitoring
services.
   Panic alarm means any device or system designed to be victim activated to
alert others to the existence of an emergency.
   Person means any natural person, employee, company, firm, partnership,
association, corporation, agent, manager, lessor, lessee, operator or entity.
   Primary alarm business license means a license issued by the licensing
authority of a city or town that has adopted the reciprocal alarm licensing
ordinance to an alarm business that has its headquarters, main office,
corporate office or designated branch of the alarm business located within this
state. In the event that an alarm business has its headquarters, main office,
corporate office or designated branch in a city or town that does not require
the licensing of alarm businesses, the alarm business may apply for a primary
alarm business license from any city or town in this state that has adopted the
reciprocal licensing ordinance.
   Proprietor alarm means any alarm or alarm system which is owned by the alarm
user and is not maintained or monitored by an alarm business.
   Proprietor alarm owner means the owner of a proprietor alarm.
   Reciprocal alarm business license means a license issued by the licensing
authority of a city or town that has adopted the reciprocal alarm licensing
ordinance, and in which that alarm business conducts business. This license
shall be issued only to an alarm business that has a valid primary alarm
business license from a similar licensing authority within this state that has
adopted the reciprocal alarm licensing ordinance.
   Responsible party means an individual capable of reaching the alarm site
within sixty (60) minutes and having access to the alarm site, the code to the
alarm system and the authority to accept responsibility for the alarm site.
   Robbery, holdup or panic alarm means a device or system designed to be
victim activated to alert others to the existence of an emergency.
   SIA control panel standard CP-01 means the ANSI (American National Standard
Institute) approved Security Industry Association (SIA) CP-01 control panel
standard, as may be updated from time to time, that details recommended design
features for security system control panels and their associated arming and
disarming devices to reduce the incidence of false alarms. Control panels built
and tested to this standard by Underwriters Laboratory (UL), or other
nationally recognized testing organizations, will be marked to state: "design
evaluated in accordance with SIA CP-01 control panel standard features for
false alarm reduction."
   Verify or verification means two (2) attempts by the company monitoring an
alarm, or its representative, to contact the site of the alarm and/or the alarm
user by telephone and/or other electronic means, whether or not actual contact
with a person is made, to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before
requesting law enforcement dispatch, in an attempt to avoid an unnecessary
request for response.
(Ord. No. 9975, § 1, 5-24-04, eff. 1-1-05; Ord. No. 10967, § 3, 2-28-12, eff.
4-1-12)
Sec. 7-451. License required.
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, operate, engage in or
carry on an alarm business, or to engage in the occupation of alarm agent, or
represent oneself as an alarm agent, without first having obtained such
licenses as are required by this article. A separate license is required for
each business name under which an alarm business conducts business or
advertises. In the event that the finance director has reasonable cause to
believe that an alarm business does not have a valid alarm business license as
required by this article, or that a person is engaged in the alarm business
without a valid alarm business license, the finance director, with the
assistance of the police department, shall issue a warning to the alarm
business stating that it is in violation of the provisions of this article. The
alarm business receiving such a notice shall not engage in the alarm business
until an alarm business license is issued pursuant to this article.
   B.   The administration of this article, including the duty of prescribing
forms, is vested in the finance director. License applications made pursuant to
this article shall be submitted to the finance director, which shall have the
authority to issue, deny, suspend or revoke a license in accordance with the
provisions of this article.
   C.   The license required by this article shall be in addition to any other
licenses or permits required by the city, county or state in order to engage in
business. Persons engaging in activities described in this article shall comply
with all other ordinances and laws, including the city zoning laws, as may be
required to be engaged in the business to be licensed. Failure of any applicant
or licensee, as applicable, to meet the requirements of this subsection shall
be grounds for denial, suspension or revocation of a license.
   D.   All licenses issued pursuant to this article shall be for a period of
one (1) year from the date of issue and shall be renewable annually, one (1)
year from the original date of issue or renewal, as applicable, subject to
renewal pursuant to section
7-456.
   E.   Upon written request and the payment of a ten dollar ($10.00) fee, the
finance director shall issue a duplicate license to a licensee whose license
has been lost, stolen or destroyed.
   F.   It shall be unlawful for an alarm business to use, or to contract with
for purposes of using, the services of an unlicensed alarm business or alarm
agent.
(Ord. No. 9975, § 1, 5-24-04, eff. 1-1-05)
Sec. 7-452. Types of licenses; reciprocity.
   A.   The types of licenses that may be issued pursuant to this article are
as follows.
   1.   Primary alarm business license. A primary alarm business license may be
applied for by an alarm business that is physically located within this city,
in a jurisdiction that has not adopted this reciprocal alarm license ordinance,
or in a jurisdiction outside this state.
   2.   Reciprocal alarm business license. An alarm business, whether
physically located within or outside the state, that has a valid primary alarm
business license issued by a jurisdiction within this state that has adopted
the reciprocal alarm license ordinance, shall be entitled to the issuance of a
reciprocal alarm business license upon compliance with the requirements of this
article.
   3.   Alarm agent license. A person desiring to engage in the business or
occupation of alarm agent shall apply for and receive an alarm agent license
from the jurisdiction that issues the primary alarm business license for the
alarm business for which the alarm agent is or will be working. A person
holding a valid alarm agent license, who desires to work for an alarm business
holding a reciprocal alarm license, does not have to obtain a separate license,
but shall provide a copy of his or her license, upon request, to the
jurisdiction in which the reciprocal license has been issued.
(Ord. No. 9975, § 1, 5-24-04, eff. 1-1-05)
Sec. 7-453. Alarm business license applications; contents.
   A.   All applications for alarm business license made pursuant to this
article shall include the following:
   1.   The name, business address, mailing address and telephone number of the
alarm business. If the applicant is a corporation, general or limited
partnership, limited liability company, or other legal entity, the name of the
applicant shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation,
charter, certificate of limited partnership, articles of organization or other
organizational documents, as applicable, together with the state and date of
incorporation and the names, residence addresses and dates of birth of each
controlling person. If one or more of the partners, members or shareholders of
the applicant is a corporation or other legal entity, the provisions of this
subsection relating to information required of a corporation shall apply.
   2.   In the event that the applicant is a corporation, general or limited
partnership, limited liability company or other legal entity, the applicant
shall designate one of its officers, general partners, or members to act as its
responsible managing officer. Such designated person shall complete and sign
all application forms required of an individual applicant under this article.
The applicant shall provide a copy of the corporation, partnership or limited
liability company formation documents.
   3.   The name of the applicant and each controlling person, any alias or
other name used or by which the applicant or any controlling person has been
previously known, his or her current residence and business addresses,
telephone numbers, including facsimile numbers and e- mail addresses, if
applicable.
   4.   The names and addresses of the alarm agents employed by the alarm
business.
   5.   The residence and business address of the applicant and each
controlling person for the five-year period immediately preceding the date of
filing of the application and the inclusive dates of each such address.
   6.   Proof that the applicant and each controlling person is at least
eighteen (18) years of age, as indicated on a current driver's license with
picture, or other picture identification document issued by a governmental
agency.
   7.   Height, weight, color of eyes and hair and date of birth of the
applicant and each controlling person.
   8.   Two (2) current two-inch by two-inch (2" x 2") photographs of the
applicant and each controlling person.
   9.   The employment history of the applicant and each controlling person for
the five (5) year period immediately preceding the date of the filing of the
application.
   10.   Information as to whether the applicant or any controlling person, or
the business on behalf of which the license is being applied for, has ever been
refused or denied any similar license or permit, or has had any similar permit
or license revoked, canceled or suspended, and the reason or reasons for the
revocation, denial, cancellation or suspension.
   11.   Whether or not the applicant or any controlling person has ever been
convicted of a crime, regardless of whether the conviction was later set aside
or expunged, in any domestic, foreign or military court. "Crime" means any and
all felonies, misdemeanors and serious driving offenses, including driving
under the influence of intoxicating liquor or drugs, reckless driving, driving
on a suspended, revoked, canceled or refused driver license, or any driving
offense for which the possible penalty includes jail time. "Crime" does not
include minor or civil traffic offenses. "Convicted" means having plead guilty
or no contest to a crime, having been found guilty of a crime, or having been
sentenced for a crime, whether incarcerated, placed on probation, fined or
having received a suspended sentence. An applicant or controlling person shall
also answer "yes" to this question, even though he or she has not been
convicted of a crime, if the applicant or controlling person is presently
pending trial or other court proceeding for a crime.
   12.   For initial and renewal applications for primary alarm business
licenses only, one (1) full set of fingerprints on fingerprint cards, or
fingerprint data, as provided in section
7-455 for the applicant and each controlling person. Fingerprints or
fingerprint data must be submitted on fingerprint cards provided or approved by
the licensing jurisdiction, but may be taken by any law enforcement or other
government agency.
   13.   Copies of the State of Arizona Registrar of Contractor's C-11, C-12 or
l-67 license, as applicable, or a copy of the K-67 license for combined
residential and commercial, issued to the alarm business applicant, and a copy
of the state transaction privilege tax license, if applicable.
   14.   A list of all Arizona counties, cities and towns where the applicant
conducts business.
   15.   An express agreement by the alarm business that any and all records of
the alarm business, whether written or recorded, electronically or otherwise,
or in any other form, relating to information required to be supplied to the
police department in case of an alarm, shall be made available within three (3)
business days upon request for inspection by agents of the police department.
   16.   A copy of a valid primary alarm business license if the application is
made for an original or renewal reciprocal alarm business license.
   17.   Such other information, evidence, statements or documents as may be
deemed by the finance director to be reasonably necessary to process and
evaluate the application or renewal.
   B.   Applicants for primary or reciprocal alarm business licenses, or
applicants for renewal of any such licenses, shall notify the finance director,
in writing, of any change in the information contained in the license
application or renewal application. Notification shall be given to the finance
director within fifteen (15) calendar days of the occurrence of the change.
(Ord. No. 9975, § 1, 5-24-04, eff. 1-1-05; Ord. No. 10967, § 4, 2-28-12, eff.
4-1-12)
Sec. 7-454. Alarm agent license applications.
   A.   An alarm agent license application shall include the following
information about the applicant:
   1.   The name of the applicant and any alias or other name, used by or by
which the applicant has been previously known, his or her current residence and
business addresses, telephone numbers, including facsimile numbers, and e-mail
addresses, if applicable.
   2.   The name, business address and business telephone number of the alarm
business where the applicant is or will be employed.
   3.   Proof that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age, as
indicated on a current driver license with picture, or other picture
identification document issued by a governmental agency.
   4.   Height, weight, color of eyes and hair and date of birth of the
applicant.
   5.   Two (2) current two-inch by two-inch (2" x 2") photographs of the
applicant.
   6.   The applicant's employment history for the five (5) year period
immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application.
   7.   Information as to whether, in this city or elsewhere, the applicant has
ever been refused or denied any similar license or permit, or has had any
similar permit or license revoked, canceled, or suspended and the reason or
reasons for the revocation, denial, cancellation or suspension.
   8.   Whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of a crime,
regardless of whether the conviction was later set aside or expunged, in any
domestic, foreign or military court. "Crime" means any and all felonies,
misdemeanors and serious driving offenses, including driving under the
influence of intoxicating liquor or drugs, reckless driving, driving on a
suspended, revoked, canceled or refused driver's license, or any driving
offense for which the possible penalty includes jail time. "Crime" does not
include minor or civil traffic offenses. "Convicted" means having plead guilty
or no contest to a crime, having been found guilty of a crime, or having been
sentenced for a crime, whether incarcerated, placed on probation, fined or
having received a suspended sentence. An applicant shall also answer "yes" to
this question, even though he or she has not been convicted of a crime, if the
applicant is presently pending trial or other court proceeding for a crime.
   9.   One (1) full set of fingerprints on fingerprint cards, or fingerprint
data, as provided in section
7-455. Fingerprints or fingerprint data must be submitted on fingerprint cards
provided or approved by the licensing jurisdiction, but may be taken by any law
enforcement or authorized government agency.
   10.   A list of all Arizona counties, cities or towns where the applicant
conducts business.
   11.   Such other information, evidence, statements or documents as may be
deemed by the finance director to be reasonably necessary to process and
evaluate the application or renewal.
   B.   Applicants for alarm agent licenses, or applicants for renewal of such
licenses, shall notify the finance director, in writing, of any change in the
information contained in the license application or renewal application.
Notification shall be given to the finance director within fifteen (15)
calendar days of the occurrence of the change.
(Ord. No. 9975, § 1, 5-24-04, eff. 1-1-05)
Sec. 7-455. Background investigation; fingerprints.
   A.   As a condition of the issuance of licenses pursuant to this article,
the finance director shall require each applicant and controlling person to
furnish one (1) full set of fingerprints, or fingerprint data, to enable the
police department to conduct a criminal background investigation to determine
the suitability of the applicant or controlling person.
   B.   The finance director shall immediately transmit all completed
applications to the chief of police, who shall investigate an application and
the background of the applicant and make a recommendation to the director for
approval or denial of a license. This recommendation shall be completed within
twenty (20) days of receipt of the application. The police department shall
submit or electronically transmit all completed fingerprint cards to the
department of public safety to conduct a statewide criminal history check. The
applicant or controlling person shall bear the cost of conducting the criminal
background investigation. The cost shall not exceed the actual cost of
obtaining the criminal history information. Criminal history records checks
shall be conducted pursuant to A.R.S. § 41-1750 and Public Law 92-544, as
amended. The department of public safety is authorized to exchange the
submitted fingerprint card information with the Federal Bureau of Investigation
for a National Criminal History Records check.
(Ord. No. 9975, § 1, 5-24-04, eff. 1-1-05)
Sec. 7-456. Fees; display of licenses.
   A.   The following fees are non-refundable, nontransferable, and will not be
prorated.
   1.   Initial license application fee:
   (a)   Primary alarm business . . . . . $200.00
   (b)   Reciprocal alarm business . . . . . 75.00
   (c)   Alarm agent . . . . . 70.00
   2.   License renewal fee:
   (a)   Primary alarm business . . . . . 20.00
   (b)   Reciprocal alarm business . . . . . 10.00
   (c)   Alarm agent . . . . . 20.00
   3.   The current cost of obtaining from the Arizona Department of Public
Safety and the Federal Bureau of Investigation criminal history information.
   4.   Duplicate license fee . . . . . $10.00
   B.   Alarm business licenses shall state whether they are primary alarm
business licenses or reciprocal alarm business licenses. The primary alarm
business license or reciprocal alarm business license, as applicable, shall be
at all times conspicuously displayed at the alarm business's central station or
office.
   C.   Alarm agent licenses shall be carried on the person of an alarm agent
at all times while so employed and the alarm agent shall display the license to
any police officer or authorized representative of this city upon request.
(Ord. No. 9975, § 1, 5-24-04, eff. 1-1-05)
Sec. 7-457. Renewal of license.
   A.   The holder of a primary alarm business license, reciprocal alarm
business license or alarm agent license shall renew the license annually by
submitting a renewal application containing the information listed in section
7-453 or
7-454, as applicable, and paying the required renewal fee and the costs for a
criminal history investigation. The holder of a reciprocal alarm business
license, as a condition of renewal, shall also submit a copy of the approved
primary alarm business license upon which reciprocity is based.
   B.   Applications for license renewal shall be filed with the finance
director not later than ninety (90) days prior to the expiration of the license
currently in effect. Applications for license renewal shall not be accepted
after ninety (90) days prior to the expiration date of the license. In the
event that a license expires without the licensee having submitted a timely
application for renewal, the holder of the expired license must file a new
application for initial license and shall comply with all of the requirements
provided herein for obtaining an initial license.
(Ord. No. 9975, § 1, 5-24-04, eff. 1-1-05)
Sec. 7-458. Issuance; grounds for denial; petition for review.
   A.   The finance director will issue a license provided for by this article
to an applicant, or renew a license, if applicable, when the following
conditions of the applicable licensing provisions have been fully satisfied:
   1.   All application requirements have been met, including any criminal
history background checks and fingerprint requirements.
   2.   All fees have been paid in full.
   3.   No grounds for denial listed in this section exist.
   B.   The finance director shall deny a license or deny the renewal of a
license if, at the time of the filing of an original application or a request
for renewal, the finance director has reasonable grounds to believe that an
applicant, licensee or controlling person:
   1.   Has been previously convicted, in any jurisdiction, of a felony or a
misdemeanor involving fraud, theft, dishonesty, moral turpitude, physical
violence, assault, indecent exposure, illegal use or possession of a deadly
weapon, or a violation of A.R.S. title 13, chapter 34 (drug offenses, including
but not limited to those relating to possession, sale or other conduct
involving marijuana, narcotic drugs, precursor chemicals and prescription
drugs), or offenses committed in another jurisdiction, which if committed in
Arizona would be in violation of A.R.S. title 13, chapter 34, within the five-
year period immediately preceding the filing of an original application or a
request for renewal, whether or not the conviction or convictions have been
expunged from court records pursuant to law.
   2.   Has prepared or filed an application or request for renewal which
contains any false or misleading information, submitted false or misleading
information in support of such application or request, or failed or refused to
make full disclosure of all information required by this article.
   3.   Has had a license relating to alarm businesses or agents, as
applicable, or a license of similar character, issued by another authority,
suspended, canceled or revoked within the five- year period immediately
preceding the date of the filing of the application.
   4.   Has violated a provision of this article, or has committed any act
which, if committed by a licensee, would be grounds for the denial or
revocation of a license pursuant to this article.
   C.   Notice shall be given of any denial of a license application, or a
request for renewal, in writing, either by hand-delivery or by mail, to the
address of record. The notice shall include the reasons for denial of the
license or license renewal.
   D.   Should an applicant be denied a license, the applicant may, within five
(5) days of the notice of denial from the director of finance, file a petition
for review in the city court. The petition for review shall be as set forth in
section
7-460 relating to petitions seeking suspension or revocation of a license, with
the exception that the sole basis for the magistrate, special magistrate or
limited special magistrate to overturn the decision of the finance director
shall be a finding of factual error as to the enumerated grounds for denial of
the license contained in this section.
(Ord. No. 9975, § 1, 5-24-04, eff. 1-1-05)
Sec. 7-459. Suspension or revocation; grounds.
The finance director may suspend or revoke any primary or reciprocal alarm
business or alarm agent license, when the finance director has reasonable
grounds to believe any of the following:
   1.   The licensee, or any controlling person, has violated any of the
grounds for denial of a license.
   2.   The licensee or any controlling person has failed to comply with the
requirements of this article, including failure to provide changes in license
information, as required.
   3.   The licensee has failed to comply with the requirements of this article
relating to alarm business or alarm agent responsibilities, false alarms or
assessments.
   4.   The licensee has failed to maintain in good standing all licenses or
permits which are required pursuant to this article to hold a primary or
reciprocal alarm business license, or alarm agent license, as applicable.
(Ord. No. 9975, § 1, 5-24-04, eff. 1-1-05)
Sec. 7-460. Suspension or revocation procedure; hearing.
   A.   The director of finance, upon notification by the chief of police or
the city attorney that grounds for suspension exist, shall file a written
petition for suspension with the city court, requesting that a time and place
be set for a hearing and specifying the grounds for suspension per section
7-459.
   B.   Within five (5) days of receipt of a petition, a magistrate, special
magistrate or limited special magistrate shall schedule a hearing, which shall
be conducted within fifteen (15) days of the receipt of the petition to suspend
or revoke. The magistrate, special magistrate or limited special magistrate
shall notify the parties in the manner provided in subsection (f) and shall
state the grounds relied upon for the proposed suspension.
   C.   Should the licensee fail to appear at the hearing, a default judgment
of suspension shall be entered.
   D.   A record shall be kept of all proceedings. The Arizona Rules of
Evidence shall not apply. Any evidence offered shall be admitted subject to a
determination by the magistrate, special magistrate or limited special
magistrate that the offered evidence is relevant and material and has some
probative value as to a fact at issue.
   E.   No license shall be suspended unless grounds therefore are established
by a preponderance of the evidence. The magistrate, special magistrate or
limited special magistrate shall provide the licensee and other parties written
notice of the decision within five (5) days, pursuant to subsection (b) of this
section. The magistrate, special magistrate or limited special magistrate's
signing of the written notice of the decision shall effect the suspension of a
license.
   F.   A licensee's right to operate an alarm company or act as an alarm agent
under authority of the license shall terminate immediately upon giving or
mailing to the licensee a copy of the signed decision suspending the license;
except that the suspension may be stayed by the superior court pending a timely
appeal of the decision by special action. Such appeal must be filed within ten
(10) days after the decision to suspend is signed unless the decision is
mailed, in which case the appeal must be filed no late than fifteen (15) days
after entry of the decision. The appellee shall bear the cost of preparing the
record of appeal. If an appeal is not timely made, the suspension becomes
final.
   G.   Notices required by this article shall be served by certified mail to
the licensee's attorneys or to the licensee at the address as shown on the
licensee's license, or by personal service.
(Ord. No. 9975, § 1, 5-24-04, eff. 1-1-05)
Sec. 7-461. Suspension or revocation; notice to reciprocal licensors.
The finance director shall transmit, by facsimile, notice of the suspension or
revocation, when such action is final, to all counties, cities, and towns
listed on the licensee's application. The suspension or revocation of a primary
alarm business license shall result in the same action being taken as to all
reciprocal alarm business licenses which are derived from that primary alarm
business license.
(Ord. No. 9975, § 1, 5-24-04, eff. 1-1-05)
Sec. 7-462. Application after denial, suspension or revocation of license.
No person, association, firm, corporation or other legal entity may apply for
any license required under this article within one (1) year from the denial of
any such license to such applicant, or from the non renewal or revocation of
any such license, unless the cause of such denial, revocation or non-renewal
has been, to the satisfaction of the finance director, removed within such
time. This section shall be inapplicable to denials of applications or renewal
when the reason for denial was for an administrative, technical or otherwise
nonmaterial reason.
(Ord. No. 9975, § 1, 5-24-04, eff. 1-1-05)
Sec. 7-463. Termination and cancellation of license; notice.
   A.   An alarm agent who terminates employment with an alarm business shall
immediately surrender the alarm agent license to the finance director.
   B.   An alarm agent who terminates employment with an alarm business to
change employment to another alarm business licensee shall notify the finance
director of the transfer, in writing, within fifteen (15) calendar days of the
change in employment.
   C.   An alarm business may cancel an alarm business license by filing a
notice of cancellation of the license with the finance director. The notice of
cancellation shall include the effective date of the cancellation. In the event
of the cancellation of a primary alarm business license, notice shall be given
to all jurisdictions in which reciprocal alarm business licenses have been
issued and are active. Reciprocal alarm business licenses shall be canceled as
of the effective date of the cancellation of the primary alarm business
license, unless the licensee requests the license be cancelled sooner.
(Ord. No. 9975, § 1, 5-24-04, eff. 1-1-05)
Sec. 7-464. Violation.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this article,
or to operate or act as an alarm company, monitoring company or alarm agent on
a revoked or suspended license or without a license. Each day the violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 9975, § 1, 5-24-04, eff. 1-1-05)
DIVISION 2. ALARM USER REGISTRATION AND FEES
Sec. 7-465. Alarm administration.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of section 7-451(b), this division shall be
administered in a manner prescribed by the chief of police.
(Ord. No. 10967, § 5, 2-28-12, eff. 4-1-12)
Sec. 7-466. Alarm business duties.
   (a)   Duties. The duties of an alarm business shall be as follows:
   (1)   To install an SIA Control Panel Standard CP-01 alarm system compatible
with the environment, to take reasonable measures to prevent the occurrence of
false alarms; and, if it has agreed to provide maintenance or repair service to
the system, to service the system within seventy-two (72) hours of a request
for service. Shall only install dual-action button holdup devices whenever
installing a push button holdup alarm.
   (2)   To provide written and oral instructions to each of its alarm users
and/or the principal occupants of the buildings or premises protected by an
alarm system in the proper use and operation of the system. Such instruction
will specifically include all necessary instructions in turning the alarm on
and off and in avoiding false alarms.
   (3)   To provide each purchaser and user with a copy of this chapter
relating to alarm user duties, false alarm assessments and an alarm user/
proprietor registration application or web address for online application.
   (4)   The alarm business and the alarm user or proprietor alarm owner shall
complete and sign the alarm user/alarm company information form with alarm user
and the alarm business shall submit the form to the police department within
ten (10) days of commencement of service.
   (5)   Upon leasing, renting, selling or monitoring an alarm system:
   (A)   To conspicuously place on the premises a tag identifying the pertinent
alarm business including the telephone number to call when the alarm has been
activated.
   (B)   To inactivate or cause to be inactivated the audible alarm within
fifteen (15) minutes of the notification of its activation in the event the
primary and alternate cannot be contacted or does not respond.
   (C)   The central receiving station must use enhanced call verification for
every alarm signal except a fire, holdup, robbery, panic, or duress alarm
activation prior to making an alarm dispatch request.
   (D)   To organize its central receiving station to readily and positively
identify the type of alarm, i.e. burglary, robbery or panic, and the location
of the alarm, if there is more than one (1) system; whether the alarm is
audible or silent; the alarm user registration number and the description of
the zone or sensor activated and the name and response time of a responsible
party.
   (E)   To maintain records as to each of these alarm systems, devices or
services which should include the name of the owner or occupant of the
premises, the name and telephone number of the user, a primary person and an
alternate responsible party for responding to the premises when the alarm is
activated, information concerning whether the alarm system includes an audible
alarm and records of any alarm activation for a period of one (1) year from the
date of the activation.
   (F)   To notify the police department of activated alarm systems in the
manner prescribed by the chief of police, including such reasonable information
concerning the alarm system as the chief of police may request. Reasonable
information shall include the names of persons from the activated alarm
location who have contracted with the alarm business and any mailing or
telephonic information for the activated alarm location. The information shall
be made available at any time upon request by the city or police department
representative.
   (G)   To arrange for the alarm user or other responsible party to go to the
premises of an activated alarm system within sixty (60) minutes in order to be
available to assist the police in determining the reason for activation and
securing the premises. In no event shall there be an unreasonable delay in
arriving at the location of the alarm. If the police depart the premises prior
to this requirement being met and the police are unable to determine the reason
for the activation, such activation shall be deemed a false alarm.
   (H)   To notify the alarm user or other responsible party, in the case of a
monitored alarm system, of all alarm activations at the alarm user's premises
within twenty-four (24) hours of activation, not including weekends or
holidays, by telephone, electronic mail, facsimile transmission or written
notice deposited in the united states mail.
   (I)   To notify the alarm user that the user may choose not to register and
forego a police response except for a fire, holdup, robbery, panic, or duress
alarm activation. In such instances, if an dispatch request is made in an
instance other than a fire, holdup, robbery, panic, or duress situation the
alarm user shall be considered to be unregistered and subject to section
7-475(a)(2).
   (6)   The alarm business shall notify the alarm administrator within ten
(10) days in the event the alarm business ceases to lease, rent, maintain
service or monitor any alarm system.
   (7)   Any alarm business that sells an alarm or an alarm system with
monitoring services, or leases, rents, installs, maintains or services an alarm
or alarm system shall be subject to subsections (a)(1) through (a)(6) of this
section.
   (8)   Alarm businesses which monitor but do not sell, lease, rent, install,
service or maintain alarms or alarm systems shall not be subject to subsections
(a)(3) through (a)(6) of this section.
   (9)   Alarm businesses which sell or install alarms or alarm systems but do
not lease, rent, monitor, service or maintain them shall be subject to
subsections (a)(1) through (a)(4).
   (10)   Alarm businesses which do not monitor, maintain, service or install
alarms or alarm systems shall not be subject to subsection (a) of this section,
but shall be responsible for instructing each person who purchases an alarm or
an alarm system in the proper use and operation of the alarm, informing each
alarm user or alarm purchaser to contact the alarm administrator for
information regarding this chapter, advising each alarm user or alarm purchaser
of the requirement of an alarm user registration and providing a copy of this
chapter to each alarm user or alarm purchaser. Such instruction will
specifically include all necessary instructions in turning the alarm on and off
and in avoiding false alarms.
   (11)   Alarm businesses shall provide a list of its customers to the alarm
administrator in the format prescribed by the alarm administrator and shall be
updated by the business on a monthly basis and provided to the alarm
administrator no later than the 5th of each month. Information required of
customers shall consist of their full name, address, and phone number and any
concern or safety consideration present at the alarm site that a law
enforcement officer should be aware of.
   (b)   Penalty. An alarm business which violates any provision of this
section is responsible for a civil infraction and may be fined in an amount not
to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
(Ord. No. 10967, § 5, 2-28-12, eff. 4-1-12)
Sec. 7-467. Alarm user's and proprietor alarm owner duties.
   The duties of an alarm user and proprietor alarm owner shall be as follows:
   (1)   To instruct and inform all persons or personnel, who are authorized to
place the system or device into operation, in the appropriate method of
operation, the provisions of this chapter, and emphasizing the importance of
avoiding false alarms.
   (2)   To apply for an alarm user registration from the alarm administrator
within ten (10) days of commencement of alarm service.
   (3)   To respond to or to make arrangements for a responsible person to
respond to the scene of an activated alarm within sixty (60) minutes of the
alarm activation. The user will be responsible for any costs to secure the
property if the police department has been dispatched.
   (4)   To maintain the alarm or alarm system in good working order and take
reasonable measures to prevent the occurrence of false alarms.
   (5)   An alarm user who violates any provision of this section is
responsible for a civil infraction and may be fined in an amount not to exceed
two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
(Ord. No. 10967, § 5, 2-28-12, eff. 4-1-12)
Sec. 7-468. Activation for unauthorized purposes.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally activate any robbery
alarm for any reason other than to warn of an actual robbery or to
intentionally activate any burglar alarm for any reason other than to warn of
an unauthorized entry into an alarm protected premises or to intentionally
activate any commercial panic alarm for any reason other than to signal a life
threatening or emergency situation requiring law enforcement response. An alarm
user who violates any provision of this section is responsible for a civil
infraction and may be fined in an amount not to exceed two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00).
(Ord. No. 10967, § 5, 2-28-12, eff. 4-1-12)
Sec. 7-469. Shutting off after sounding alarm.
   A person or business that purchases, leases, or rents an audible alarm
system, device or service shall not allow the alarm to sound in excess of
fifteen (15) minutes.
(Ord. No. 10967, § 5, 2-28-12, eff. 4-1-12)
Sec. 7-470. Automatic or prerecorded messages or signals.
   A person shall not use or cause to be used any telephone device or telephone
attachment that automatically selects a public primary telephone trunk line of
the city and then reproduces any prerecorded message or signal.
(Ord. No. 10967, § 5, 2-28-12, eff. 4-1-12)
Sec. 7-471. Confidentiality.
   The information furnished and secured pursuant to this division shall be
confidential and shall not be subject to public inspection consistent with
Arizona public records laws. The city shall take reasonable precautions to
protect the confidentiality of the proprietary records of the alarm businesses.
(Ord. No. 10967, § 5, 2-28-12, eff. 4-1-12)
Sec. 7-472. Government immunity.
   An alarm registration is not intended to, nor will it, create a contract,
duty or obligation, either expressed or implied, of response. Any and all
liability and consequential damage resulting from the failure to respond to a
notification is disclaimed and governmental immunity as provided by law is
retained. By applying for an alarm registration, the alarm user acknowledges
that the police department response may be influenced by factors such as the
availability of police units, priority of calls, weather conditions, traffic
conditions, emergency conditions, staffing levels, and prior response history.
(Ord. No. 10967, § 5, 2-28-12, eff. 4-1-12)
Sec. 7-473. Grace period.
   Newly installed and reinstalled alarm systems shall not be subject to the
provisions of this division relating to the counting and assessment of false
alarms for a period of thirty (30) days from the date the alarm system becomes
operational. The grace period shall apply only if the alarm business or
proprietor alarm owner notifies the alarm administrator in writing within ten
(10) days of the completion of installation or reinstallation. The written
notice shall specify the date the system was installed or reinstalled. For
reinstalled alarm systems, the notice shall also describe the nature and extent
of the reinstallation.
(Ord. No. 10967, § 5, 2-28-12, eff. 4-1-12)
Sec. 7-474. Alarm user registration.
   (a)   An alarm user shall not operate, or cause to be operated, an alarm
system at its alarm site without a valid alarm registration. Operating an alarm
while an alarm registration is suspended is deemed to be operating an alarm
without an alarm registration if the alarm administrator or police officer has
made reasonable effort to notify the alarm user of excessive false alarms.
   (b)   Each alarm user and proprietor alarm owner shall apply for and receive
an alarm user registration from the alarm administrator. An alarm user
registration shall be kept within the premises protected by the alarm and shall
be available for inspection by the police department. A separate registration
is required for each address or separate units.
   (c)   An alarm registration application and fee shall be submitted within
ten (10) calendar days of the installation date of a new alarm system or alarm
system takeover. Alarm user registration will be on forms or by electronic
means approved by the alarm administrator and are valid for three hundred
sixty-five (365) days unless suspended pursuant to section
7-477. It is the responsibility of the alarm user to submit an application
prior to the registration expiration date. Failure to renew will be classified
as use of a non-registered alarm system and citations and penalties shall be
assessed without waiver.
   (d)   The fee for an alarm registration or an alarm registration renewal
shall be twenty dollars ($20.00).
   (e)   If an alarm user has multiple alarm systems at one location, an alarm
user registration is required for each system. For the purposes of this
division:
   (1)   The owner of an apartment complex or other residential rental property
that has an existing alarm system shall be deemed to be the alarm user. Each
unit shall be considered a separate address. The common areas of offices of the
apartment complex will be considered one address.
   (2)   The tenant of an apartment or other residential rental property who
installs, purchases, or rents an alarm system or initiates monitoring services
shall be deemed to be the alarm user and must apply for an alarm user
registration.
   (f)   Upon receipt of a completed alarm user registration application and
the alarm registration fee, the alarm administrator shall register the
applicant unless the applicant has:
   (1)   Failed to pay an assessment under section
7-475; or
   (2)   Had an alarm registration for the alarm site suspended or revoked and
the violation causing the suspension or revocation has not been corrected.
   (g)   Each alarm user registration application must include the following
information:
   (1)   The name, complete address (including apt/suite number), and telephone
numbers of the person who will be the registration holder and be responsible
for the proper maintenance and operation of the alarm system and payment of
fees assessed under this article;
   (2)   The classification of the alarm site as either residential (includes
apartment, condominium, mobile home, or other multifamily dwelling) or
commercial;
   (3)   For each alarm system located at the alarm site, the classification of
the alarm system (i.e. burglary, holdup, duress, panic alarms or other) and for
each classification whether such alarm is audible or silent;
   (4)   Mailing address, if different from the address of the alarm site;
   (5)   Any dangerous or special conditions present at the alarm site;
   (6)   Names and telephone numbers of at least two (2) individuals who are
able and have agreed to receive notification of an alarm system activation at
any time, respond to the alarm site within sixty (60) minutes when requested,
and upon request can grant access to the alarm site and deactivate the alarm
system if necessary;
   (7)   Type of business conducted at a commercial alarm site;
   (8)   Signed certification from the alarm user stating the following:
   (A)   The date of installation, conversion or takeover of the alarm system,
whichever is applicable;
   (B)   The name, address, and telephone number of the alarm business or
companies performing the alarm system installation, conversion or takeover and
of the alarm business responsible for providing repair service to the alarm
system;
   (C)   That a set of written operating instructions for the alarm system,
including written guidelines on how to avoid false alarms, have been left with
the applicant by the alarm business; and
   (D)   That the alarm business has trained the applicant in proper use of the
alarm system, including instructions on how to avoid false alarms.
   (h)   Any false statement of a material fact made by an applicant for the
purpose of obtaining an alarm registration shall be sufficient cause for
refusal to issue a registration.
   (i)   An alarm registration may not be transferred to another person or
alarm site. An alarm user shall inform the alarm administrator of any change
that alters any of the information listed on the alarm registration application
within five (5) business days of such change.
   (j)   All assessments and fees owned by an applicant must be paid before an
alarm registration may be issued or renewed.
   (k)   Alarm systems that are operated by the city, county, state, or federal
government and installed on premises that such entity occupies or uses for
governmental purposes are not subject to this division. However, such entities
shall apply for and obtain a registration for each alarm system it operates and
the registration fee shall be waived. Any government entity having excessive
alarms may be subject to the alarm user awareness class or suspension of
response.
(Ord. No. 10967, § 5, 2-28-12, eff. 4-1-12)
Sec. 7-475. Excessive false alarms/failure to register.
   (a)   It is found that two (2) or more false alarms within a three hundred
sixty-five (365) day period is excessive and constitutes a public nuisance. A
fee for false alarms within a three hundred sixty-five (365) day period shall
be assessed as follows:
   (1)   If the alarm site has a properly registered alarm user:
   (A)   For the first false alarm, whether a burglary alarm or a panic,
holdup, or duress alarm activation there shall be no assessment;
   (B)   For the second false alarm whether a burglary alarm or a panic,
holdup, or duress alarm activation the assessment shall be one hundred dollars
($100.00) but is eligible to be waived under subsection (g) if the alarm user
completes an alarm user awareness class within ninety (90) days of receipt of
the invoice;
   (C)   For the third through seventh burglary false alarms the assessment
shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) except that for a panic, holdup, or
duress false alarm the assessment shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00);
   (D)   For all subsequent false alarms after the seventh burglary false
alarm, the assessment shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00) except that for a
panic, holdup, or duress false alarm the assessment shall be three hundred
dollars ($300.00) and police response may be suspended after the seventh false
alarm regardless of alarm type.
   (2)   If the alarm site does not have a properly registered alarm user:
   (A)   The assessment for the first false alarm shall be the same as
specified in paragraph (1)(b), but shall be waived if the person applies for
and obtains an alarm user registration within ten (10) days of receipt of the
invoice and completes an alarm user awareness class within ninety (90) days of
receipt of the invoice.
   (B)   The assessment for the second through seventh burglary false alarms
and panic, holdup, or duress false alarms shall be the same as specified in
paragraph (1)(c); and
   (C)   For all subsequent false alarms after the seventh burglary false alarm
and panic, holdup, or duress false alarm, the assessment shall be shall be the
same as specified in paragraph (1)(d) and police response may be suspended
after the seventh false alarm regardless of alarm type.
   (b)   Fees shall be paid within thirty (30) days from the date of the
invoice.
   (c)   Operating an alarm without an alarm registration is subject to a one
hundred dollar ($100.00) service fee, in addition to the assessments provided
for in subsection (a) for each false alarm activation to partially recover the
costs of the police response.
   (d)   Failure to pay any fee within ninety (90) days of its due date may
result in the immediate suspension of the alarm registration and police
response.
   (e)   An alarm user at an alarm site with ten (10) or more false alarms
within a three hundred sixty-five (365) day period is guilty of a class 1
misdemeanor and shall discontinue operation of the alarm system. Failure to do
so may result in the immediate suspension of the alarm registration and police
response.
   (f)   The three hundred sixty-five (365) day period specified in section (a)
shall begin upon submission of a completed registration application.
   (g)   The completion of the alarm user awareness class will result in the
waiver of one hundred dollars ($100.00) in assessment fees and may be applied
to any false alarm occurrence within the three hundred sixty-five (365) day
period.
   (h)   If the alarm user presents a written agreement with their alarm
business that the business must contact the user prior to notifying police and
can produce evidence that a false alarm was the result of the business not
contacting the user, the assessment shall be waived.
(Ord. No. 10967, § 5, 2-28-12, eff. 4-1-12)
Sec. 7-476. Assessment petition.
   (a)   If the alarm administrator assesses a fee under section
7-475 or denies the issuance, renewal, or reinstatement of an alarm
registration, the alarm administrator shall send written notice of the action
and a statement of the right to an appeal to either the affected applicant or
alarm user or proprietor alarm owner.
   (b)   The alarm user or proprietor alarm owner may appeal an assessment of a
fee or the suspension of an alarm registration by setting forth in writing the
reasons for the appeal to the alarm. The appeal must be filed with the
administrator within ten (10) business days after receipt of the assessment or
notice of suspension.
   (c)   The alarm administrator shall, within five (5) business days of a
notice of appeal, provide the finance director with notice of the appeal. The
finance director shall forward the appeal to the zoning examiner who shall,
within a period of thirty (30) days from receipt of the notice of appeal from
the alarm administrator, hear the appeal and the facts as presented by the
appellant and the alarm administrator, affording both parties a reasonable and
equal amount of time for the presentation of facts, evidence, and the
questioning and cross-examination of witnesses. The hearing shall be conducted
in an informal manner and the Arizona rules of evidence shall not apply. Within
ten (10) business days of the hearing, the hearing officer shall render a
final, written decision affirming or reversing the decision of the alarm
administrator.
   (d)   Filing of a notice of appeal shall stay the action by the alarm
administrator suspending an alarm permit or requiring payment of the
assessment, until the hearing officer has rendered a decision. If a request for
an appeal to the finance director is not made within the required ten (10)
business day period, the action of the alarm administrator is final.
   (e)   The alarm administrator may adjust the count of false alarms based on
reasonable evidence including but not limited to: (1) a false alarm was caused
by an act of god; (2) a false alarm was caused by action of the telephone
company; (3) a false alarm was caused by a power outage lasting longer than
four (4) hours; and/or (4) the alarm dispatch request was not a false alarm.
(Ord. No. 10967, § 5, 2-28-12, eff. 4-1-12)
Sec. 7-477. Suspension of response.
   (a)   The alarm administrator may suspend law enforcement response to an
alarm site by suspending the alarm registration if it is determined that:
   (1)   The alarm user has seven (7) or more false alarms in a three hundred
sixty-five (365) day period;
   (2)   There is a statement of a material fact known to be false in the
registration application;
   (3)   The alarm user has failed to make timely payment of an assessment
under section
7-475; or
   (4)   The alarm user has failed to submit a written certification from an
alarm business, that complies with the requirements of this article, stating
that the alarm system has been inspected and repaired (if necessary) and/or
additional training has been conducted by the alarm business.
   (b)   Unless there is separate indication that there is a crime in progress,
the alarm administrator may refuse response to an alarm dispatch request at an
alarm site for which the alarm registration is suspended.
   (c)   A person commits a civil offense if he or she operates an alarm system
during the period in which the alarm registration is suspended and may be fined
in an amount not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
   (d)   A monitoring company commits a civil offense if it continues alarm
dispatch requests to an alarm site after notification by the alarm
administrator that the registration has been suspended and may be fined in an
amount not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
   (e)   If the alarm registration is reinstated pursuant to section
7-478, the alarm administrator may suspend police response to the alarm site by
again suspending the alarm registration if it is determined that two (2) false
alarms have occurred within sixty (60) days after the reinstatement date.
(Ord. No. 10967, § 5, 2-28-12, eff. 4-1-12)
Sec. 7-478. Reinstatement.
   (a)   A person or entity whose alarm user registration has been suspended
may, at the discretion of the alarm administrator, have the alarm user
registration reinstated if the person:
   (1)   Pays, or otherwise resolves, all outstanding citations and
assessments; and
   (2)   Provides satisfactory evidence to the alarm administrator that the
alarm system has been inspected and repaired (if necessary) by the alarm
business; and/or that additional training in the proper use of the alarm system
was provided by the alarm business for all alarm users.
   (b)   In addition, the alarm administrator may require one (1) or more of
the following as a condition to reinstatement:
   (1)   Proof that an employee of the alarm business caused the false alarm;
   (2)   Completion of the alarm user awareness class as provided under sec.
7-479;
   (3)   Upgrade the alarm control panel to meet ANSI/SIA Control Panel
Standard CP-01;
   (4)   A written statement from an independent inspector that the alarm
system has been inspected and is in good working order;
   (5)   Confirmation that all motion detectors, glass break detectors, or
robbery/panic buttons are "dual technology" or dual action type;
   (6)   Confirmation that the alarm business will not make an alarm dispatch
request unless the need for law enforcement is confirmed by audio or video
verification; and
   (7)   Confirmation that the alarm business will not make an alarm dispatch
request unless the need for law enforcement is confirmed by a person at the
alarm site.
(Ord. No. 10967, § 5, 2-28-12, eff. 4-1-12)
Sec. 7-479. Alarm user awareness class.
   The chief of police may create and implement an alarm user awareness class
and may request the assistance of the area alarm association member companies
to assist in developing and implementing the class. The class shall be offered
free of charge and inform alarm users of the problems created by false alarms
and instruct alarm users how to help reduce false alarms.
(Ord. No. 10967, § 5, 2-28-12, eff. 4-1-12)
ARTICLE XXII.
MERCHANTS' DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
Sec. 7-480. Requiring merchants to make certain disclosures related to the sale
of motorized skateboards and motorized play vehicles; penalty.
   A.   It is unlawful for a merchant to sell motorized skateboards or
motorized play vehicles without making the disclosures required by this
section.
   B.   Any merchant who sells motorized skateboards or motorized play vehicles
within the city limits of Tucson shall:
   1.   Post, in a prominent place at each location where motorized skateboards
or motorized play vehicles are on display, a notice to the effect that
operation of motorized skateboards and motorized play vehicles is prohibited:
   (a)   On any public sidewalk, roadway, or any other part of a highway or on
any bikeway, bicycle path or trail, equestrian trail, or shared-use path in the
city limits of Tucson; and
   (b)   On any private property of another without the written permission of
the owner, the person entitled to immediate possession of the property, or the
authorized agent of either.
   2.   Provide a copy of such notice to each purchaser of a motorized
skateboard or motorized play vehicle, either before or in connection with the
purchase.
   C.   The definitions of "motorized skateboard" and "motorized play vehicle"
contained in section
20-30 of this code shall also apply to this section.
   D.   Violation declared civil infraction violation. Unless otherwise
specifically stated in this chapter, any violation of this section is
punishable as a civil infraction violation pursuant to chapter
8 of this Code.
(Ord. No. 9962, § 2, 5-10-04, eff. 1-1-05)
Sec. 7-481. Requiring merchants to make certain disclosures related to the sale
of motorized bicycles or tricycles; penalty.
   (a)   It is unlawful for a merchant to sell motorized bicycles or tricycles
without making the disclosures required by this section.
   (b)   Any merchant who sells motorized bicycles or tricycles within the City
Limits of Tucson shall:
   (1)   Post, in a prominent place at each location where motorized bicycles
or tricycles are on display, a notice to the effect that operation of motorized
bicycle or tricycle is prohibited:
   a.   For persons under sixteen (16) years of age.
   b.   On any public sidewalks, multi-use path, and shared use path and on any
designated pedestrian path in any public park.
   c.   For persons under eighteen (18) years of age unless the person is
wearing a properly fitted and fastened bicycle helmet which meets the current
standards of the American National Standards Institute for protective headgear.
   d.   At night unless the motorized bicycle or tricycle has a lamp and red
rear reflector.
   (2)   Provide a copy of such notice to each purchaser of a motorized bicycle
or tricycle, either before or in connection with the purchase.
   (3)   The notice also shall advise that a motorized bicycle or tricycle
operated in excess of nineteen (19) miles per hour is regulated by state law
and must comply with state law requirements.
   (c)   As used in this section, "motorized bicycle or tricycle" shall have
the same meaning as it has under section
5-5 of this Code.
   (d)   Violation declared civil infraction violation. Unless otherwise
specifically stated in this chapter, any violation of this section is
punishable as a civil infraction violation pursuant to chapter
8 of this Code.
(Ord. No. 10321, § 2, 9-19-06)
Secs. 7-482--7-489. Reserved.
ARTICLE XXIII.
ICE CREAM TRUCK VENDORS*
__________
*   Editors Note: Ord. No. 10244, § 2, adopted Jan. 24, 2006, amended § 3 of
Ordinance No. 10236 to read as follows:
   (a)   Except as provided in Subsection (b), Sections 1 and 2 are not
effective until June 1, 2006.
   (b)   Between April 1, 2006, and June 1, 2006, the Director of the
Department of Finance may accept applications for and issue or deny the
licenses authorized by Section 1 and collect the occupational license fees
authorized by Section 2.
   (c)   Any license issued pursuant to Section 1 between April 1, 2006, and
June 1, 2006, shall be effective as of the date it is issued. Any business
license issued to an individual for the operation of an ice cream truck prior
to April 1, 2006, shall expire on April 1, 2006.
__________
Sec. 7-490. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms are defined as follows:
   (1)   "Chief" means the Chief of the Tucson Police Department or the chief's
designee.
   (2)   "Director" means the director of the department of finance or the
director's designee.
   (3)   "Ice cream" means any frozen dairy or water-based food product.
   (4)   "Ice cream truck" means any motor vehicle used for ice cream truck
vending.
   (5)   "Ice cream truck vending" means the selling, displaying, or offering
to sell ice cream or any other prepackaged food product from an ice cream truck
on a street in a residential area or in a city park. Except for activities
licensed to occur in city parks, such term does not include an activity
licensed pursuant to another provision of the Tucson Code or the selling,
displaying, or offering to sell ice cream or other prepackaged food product
from a motor vehicle where ice cream or other prepackaged food products are not
the primary products offered or displayed for sale.
   (6)   "Ice cream truck vendor" or "vendor" means any person who owns or
operates an ice cream truck.
   (7)   "Residential area" means any street where over fifty (50) percent of
the front footage of either side of the block is devoted to single-family and
multiple-family dwellings, dormitories, or mobile homes.
   (8)   "Street" means any public road, highway, avenue, boulevard, alley, or
lane within the city.
(Ord. No. 10236, § 1, 12-20-05, eff. 6-1-06)
Sec. 7-491. License requirements and application procedures.
   (a)   In general. It shall be unlawful for a person to operate as an ice
cream truck vendor in a residential area or a city park unless such person has
received an ice cream truck vendor license from the director.
   (b)   License application. Any person desiring to obtain or renew an ice
cream truck vendor's license shall file an application with the director. Such
initial or renewal application shall contain the following information:
   (1)   The full legal name, date of birth, and residence address of the
applicant.
   (2)   A valid identification issued by any government that includes a
photograph of the applicant.
   (3)   The year, make, model, and color of the motor vehicle the applicant
intends on using as an ice cream truck.
   (4)   A copy of a valid registration certificate issued by the Arizona
Division of Motor Vehicles for the ice cream truck identified in paragraph (b)
(3).
   (5)   If employed by a business or other person, the name and address of
such business or person.
   (6)   Any conviction of the applicant or vendor for any of the following:
   a.   Any misdemeanor or felony within the previous five (5) years if the
offense involved sexual misconduct, prostitution, or any of the offenses
enumerated in Chapter 14, Title 13, Arizona Revised Statutes (Sexual Offenses)
or Tucson Code §
11-28 and any such offense committed outside the State of Arizona that would
have been classified as one of the above offenses if committed within the State
of Arizona; or
   b.   Any felony at any time if the offense required registration as a sex
offender under the laws of Arizona or of any other state, commonwealth, or
possession of the United States.
   (7)   The applicant's complete fingerprints taken by the Tucson Police
Department, along with written verification from the police department of
having completed being fingerprinted.
   (8)   Proof of valid insurance for the ice cream truck identified in
paragraph (b)(3).
   (9)   Payment of the occupational license tax required by section
19-45.
   (c)   Term of license. The license issued pursuant to subsection (b) shall
be valid for one year from the date of its issuance.
   (d)   Lost and expired licenses. The fee to replace a lost valid license
shall be ten dollars ($10.00). If a vendor's license expires prior to filing
for renewal, such vendor must reapply for a license and pay any applicable fee
or tax.
   (e)   Applicant background check. The chief shall forward the fingerprints
obtained pursuant to paragraph (b)(7), accompanied by the appropriate fees paid
by the applicant, to the appropriate state and federal agencies for the purpose
of conducting a state and federal criminal records check in accordance with
A.R.S. § 41-1750 and Public Law 92-544. The Director of the Arizona Department
of Public Safety may exchange the applicant's fingerprint data with the Federal
Bureau of Investigation. If the chief determines, based on such background
check, that the applicant has a conviction for any offense described in
subsection (b)(6), the chief shall recommend to the director that a vendor
license be denied or not renewed; otherwise the chief shall recommend that such
license be issued or renewed.
   (f)   License issuance/renewal or denial. The director shall issue an ice
cream truck vendor license, or renew such license, upon filing of an
application meeting the requirements of subsection (b) and the affirmative
recommendation of the chief. If the chief has not made a recommendation to the
director within forty-five (45) days after receiving the applicant's
fingerprints, the director may consider the application without reference to
such a recommendation. If any requirement of subsection (b) is not met or if
the chief recommends denial, the director shall deny the applicant a vendor's
license or the renewal of such license. If a license is denied or not renewed,
the applicant or vendor may appeal pursuant to section
7-492.
(Ord. No. 10236, § 1, 12-20-05, eff. 6-1-06; Ord. No. 10244, § 1, 1-24-06, eff.
6-1-06; Ord. No. 10448, § 14, 9-5-07, eff. 1-1-08)
Sec. 7-492. Appeal procedures.
   (a)   In general. An applicant for an ice cream truck vendor's license, or a
vendor seeking renewal thereof, who has been denied a license by the director
may appeal such denial as provided in subsection (b).
   (b)   Appeal requirements. The director shall provide written notice of
denial or nonrenewal to the applicant or vendor stating the grounds thereof and
the procedures to appeal the decision. The notice may be personally served or
mailed, return receipt requested, to the address provided on the application.
The applicant for a license, or a vendor seeking renewal thereof, may file an
appeal of the director's decision in Tucson City Court, but such appeal must be
filed within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the notice or from the date the
notice is returned to the director as undeliverable. A hearing shall be
scheduled upon receipt of the filing of the appeal before a magistrate or
special limited magistrate.
   (c)   Hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing, if the magistrate or
special limited magistrate finds that the grounds for the denial or nonrenewal
have been established by a preponderance of the evidence, the magistrate shall
uphold the director's decision. Either the city or the applicant or vendor may
appeal the ruling to the Pima County Superior Court in accordance with the
Superior Court Rules of Appellate Procedure-Civil. If the director's decision
is upheld and the vendor or applicant appeals to the Superior Court, such
person may not operate unless and until such time as the court orders the
license issued or otherwise authorizes the person to operate.
(Ord. No. 10236, § 1, 12-20-05, eff. 6-1-06)
Sec. 7-493. Display of license.
The director shall issue a license to the applicant who shall conspicuously
display such license on or within the applicant's ice cream truck. A law
enforcement officer may detain an individual operating an ice cream truck in a
residential area or city park who is actively engaged in offering for sale the
food products located thereon for the limited purpose of determining the status
of the individual's license issued under this article.
(Ord. No. 10236, § 1, 12-20-05, eff. 6-1-06)
Sec. 7-494. Penalties.
Any person who commits, causes, permits, facilitates, or aids or abets any
violation of, or who fails to perform any act or duty required by this article
is guilty of a class one misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 10236, § 1, 12-20-05, eff. 6-1-06)
Sec. 7-495. Separate license required to operate in city parks and other city
property.
The license issued pursuant to section
7-491 does not permit an ice cream truck vendor to operate in a city park or
other city property (except city right of way in residential areas) unless such
vendor also has a license issued by the director of the department having
control over such park or other city property.
(Ord. No. 10236, § 1, 12-20-05, eff. 6-1-06)
Secs. 7-496--7-500. Reserved.
ARTICLE XXIV.
LESSORS OF COMMERCIAL REAL PROPERTY DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
Sec. 7-501. Definitions.
As used in this article, the term "non-residential commercial real property"
shall mean any real property zoned for or intended to be used primarily for
commercial activities.
(Ord. No. 10562, § 1, 7-8-08, eff. 10-15-08)
Sec. 7-502. Disclosure required.
   (a)   It is unlawful for any person to enter as lessor into a lease of non-
residential commercial real property to which the article applies without
making the disclosures required by this section.
   (b)   Any lessor under a lease to which this article applies must make the
following disclosure to the prospective lessee prior to the execution of the
lease agreement. A statement advising the prospective lessee to contact the
city's Development Services Department (DSD) prior to the execution of the
lease agreement to determine whether the property may be occupied for lessee's
intended use.
   (c)   Acknowledgement of the disclosure statement must be signed by the
lessor or lessor's agent and the lessee and retained by the lessor or lessor's
agent for the duration of the lease.
(Ord. No. 10562, § 1, 7-8-08, eff. 10-15-08)
Sec. 7-503. Exemptions.
The requirements of this article shall not apply to the following:
   (1)   A lease of residential real property.
   (2)   A lease pursuant to which the lessor performs the construction work
for lessee's initial occupancy.
   (3)   A lease of the storage spaces at a self-service storage facility,
which is defined as any real property used for renting or leasing individual
storage spaces in which the occupants themselves customarily store and remove
their own personal property on a self-service basis.
   (4)   A lease for a space within a building where the building or the space
already has a certificate of occupancy and the lessee's intended use of the
space is identical according to the Tucson Land Use Code and the building code
to the use permitted by the certificate of occupancy.
(Ord. No. 10562, § 1, 7-8-08, eff. 10-15-08)
Sec. 7-504. Violation declared a civil infraction.
Unless otherwise specifically stated in this chapter, any violation of this
article is punishable as a civil infraction pursuant to chapter
8 of this Code.
(Ord. No. 10562, § 1, 7-8-08, eff. 10-15-08)
ARTICLE XXV.
PET STORES AND PET DEALERS
Sec. 7-505. Pet stores and pet dealers; definitions; prohibitions on dog and
cat purchases; recordkeeping; and penalties.
   (a)   Definitions: For the purposes of this article:
      (1)   "Pet dealer" means a person who owns or operates a pet store.
      (2)   "Pet store" means a commercial establishment that engages in a for-
profit business of selling at retail cats, dogs or other animals, but does not
include commercial livestock operations and commercial livestock auction
markets. Pet store does not mean a publicly operated pound or a private,
charitable not-for-profit humane society or any animal adoption activity that a
pound or humane society conducts off site at any pet store or other commercial
enterprise.
   (b)   A pet store or pet dealer may not obtain a dog or cat for resale or
sell or offer for sale any dog or cat obtained from a person who is required to
be licensed by the pet dealer regulations of the United States department of
agriculture under the animal welfare act (7 United States Code §§ 2131 through
2159) if any of the following applies:
      (1)   The person is not currently licensed by the United States
department of agriculture under the animal welfare act (7 United States Code §§
2131 through 2159).
      (2)   Within two (2) years before obtaining the dog or cat the person
commits a direct violation of any of the pet dealer regulations of the United
States department of agriculture under the animal welfare act (7 United States
Code §§ 2131 through 2159).
      (3)   The person receives an indirect no access violation on each of the
two (2) most recent inspection reports issued by the United States department
of agriculture under the animal welfare act (7 United States Code §§ 2131
through 2159).
      (4)   The person commits three (3) or more indirect violations of the pet
dealer regulations of the United States department of agriculture during the
two (2) year period before obtaining the dog or cat for violations relating to
the health or welfare of the animal and the violations were not administrative
in nature. The indirect violations described in this paragraph do not include a
violation described in paragraph (3) of this subsection.
   (c)   A pet store or pet dealer may not obtain a dog or cat for resale or
sell or offer for sale any dog or cat obtained from a person who directly or
indirectly obtained a dog or cat from a person described in subsection (b) of
this section. A pet store or pet dealer is presumed to have acted in good faith
and to have satisfied its obligation to ascertain whether a person meets the
criteria described in subsection (b) of this section if, when placing an order
to obtain a dog or cat for sale or resale, the pet store or pet dealer conducts
a search for inspection reports of the breeder on the animal care information
system search tool maintained by the United States department of agriculture.
   (d)   Notwithstanding subsections (b) and (c) of this section, a pet store
or pet dealer may obtain a dog or cat for resale or sell or offer for sale any
dog or cat obtained from a publicly operated pound or a private, charitable
nonprofit humane society or from any animal adoption activity conducted by a
pound or humane society.
   (e)   A pet dealer shall maintain records verifying its compliance with this
section and with A.R.S. Section 44-1799.10 for at least two (2) years after
obtaining the dog or cat to be sold or offered for sale. Records maintained
pursuant to this subsection shall be open to inspection on request by a
municipal or county peace officer or enforcement official.
   (f)   A pet dealer shall display the source of any dog or cat offered for
sale by providing the name of the breeder of the animal, the United States
department of agriculture license number of the breeder if the animal is from a
breeder that is licensed by the United States department of agriculture and the
United States department of agriculture website where information about the
breeder may be obtained. The pet dealer shall display the information described
in this subsection on both of the following:
      (1)   The cage or enclosure for each animal.
      (2)   All printed or electronic marketing materials about a specific dog
or cat that has been obtained by the pet dealer and that is being offered for
sale.
   (g)   Penalties: Violations of this article shall be a civil infraction. In
an action brought by the City of Tucson or by its enforcement agent to enforce
the provisions of subsections (e) and/or (f) of this Section, the pet dealer or
pet store is subject to a civil penalty of not more than one thousand dollars
($1,000) per violation. In an action brought by the City of Tucson or by its
enforcement agent to enforce the provisions of subsections (b) and/or (c) of
this section, a pet store or pet dealer who knowingly obtains a dog or cat for
sale or resale in violation of Arizona Revised Statutes § 44-1799.10,
subsection A or B or the provisions of subsections (b) and/or (c) of this
section; or who should have known the dog or cat was obtained for sale or
resale in violation of § 44-1799.10, subsection A or B or subsections (b) and/
or (c) of this section, the pet store or pet dealer is subject to the following
penalties:
      (1)   For a first violation, a civil penalty of not more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000) per violation.
      (2)   For a second violation within a five (5) year period, a civil
penalty of not more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500) per
violation.
      (3)   For a third or subsequent violation within a five (5) year period:
         a.   A civil penalty of not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000)
per violation.
         b.   An order entered by the court enjoining the pet store or pet
dealer from selling or offering for sale, for up to three (3) years, a dog or
cat obtained from any person other than a publicly operated pound or a private,
charitable nonprofit humane society or from any animal adoption activity
conducted by a pound or humane society.
   (h)   In an action brought to enforce Arizona Revised Statutes § 44-1799.10,
subsection A or B, or subsections (b) and/or (c) of this section:
   (1)   A violation is a subsequent violation if it occurs within a five (5)
year period after a final judgment or order that the pet store or pet dealer
knowingly violated Arizona Revised Statutes § 44-1799.10, subsection A or B, or
subsections (b) and/or (c) of this section, or should have known of the
violation.
   (2)   In addition to any other defense that may be raised, a pet store or
pet dealer is presumed to have acted in good faith and to have satisfied its
obligation to ascertain whether a person meets the criteria described in § 44-
1799.10, subsection A and subsection B or subsections (b) and/or (c) of this
section if, when placing an order to obtain a dog or cat for sale or resale,
the pet store or pet dealer conducts a search for inspection on the animal care
information system search tool maintained by the United States department of
agriculture.
   (3)   Each order placed by a pet store or pet dealer to obtain a dog or cat
for sale or resale shall be considered a single act, regardless of the number
of dogs or cats obtained in the order.
(Ord. No. 11741, § 1, 3-17-20)
Secs. 7-506 – 7-509. Reserved.
ARTICLE XXVI. THIRD-PARTY RESTAURANT DELIVERY SERVICES
Sec. 7-510. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms are defined as follows:
   "Commission fee" means a fee charged by a third party restaurant delivery
service, for providing a restaurant with a service that delivers food from the
restaurant to customers. The term includes all fees for this service, whether
characterized as a "delivery fee," "service fee," "surcharge fee," "small order
fee," or otherwise, and includes fees charged for processing the online order.
The term does not include a fee that the third party restaurant delivery
service charges the restaurant for additional marketing services, such as
prioritizing the restaurant in searches or search results.
   "Declared emergency" means the period of time during which a state of
emergency or local emergency has been declared by the Governor of the State of
Arizona and/or by the Mayor of the City of Tucson, and such declaration remains
in effect; and during which restrictions or limitations on the dine-in
operations of restaurants are in effect in connection with those declarations.
   "Online order" means an order placed through a platform provided by a third-
party restaurant delivery service for delivery within the City of Tucson.
   "Purchase price" means the menu price of an online order; but excludes
taxes, gratuities, and any other fees that make up the total cost to the
customer of an online order.
   "Restaurant" means any business activity where articles of food, drink or
condiment are customarily prepared or served to patrons for consumption on or
off the premises.
   "Third-party restaurant delivery service" means any website, mobile
application, or other internet or online service that offers or arranges for
the sale of food and beverages prepared by, and the same-day delivery or same-
day pick-up of food and beverages from, twenty (20) or more restaurants located
in the City of Tucson that are owned and operated by different persons.
(Ord. No. 11787, § 1, 10-6-20)
Sec. 7-511. Advertisement of services or delivery for non-partnered restaurants
prohibited.
Effective January 1, 2021 and continuing thereafter, a third-party restaurant
delivery service shall not engage in either of the following activities without
first obtaining an agreement with that restaurant expressly authorizing the
third-party restaurant delivery service to do so:
   (1)   arrange for the delivery of an online order or any food or beverage
order from that restaurant, and/or
   (2)   list, display or use the likeness, trademark or any intellectual
property of that restaurant.
(Ord. No. 11787, § 1, 10-6-20)
Sec. 7-512. Commission fees not to exceed 15% during time of declared
emergency; exclusion of certain restaurants.
   (a)   Effective October 15, 2020, and continuing until the termination of
the declared emergency, it is unlawful for a third-party restaurant delivery
service to charge a restaurant a commission fee per online order for the use of
its services that is more than fifteen percent (15%) of the purchase price of
the online order.
   (b)   The provisions of subsection (a) above do not apply to restaurants
that are part of a chain having five (5) or more locations operating in the
city and doing business under the same name and offering for sale substantially
the same menu items.
(Ord. No. 11787, § 1, 10-6-20)
Sec. 7-513. Penalties.
Any violation of the provisions of this article constitutes a civil infraction,
and shall be punished by the imposition of a civil penalty of an amount not
exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation.
(Ord. No. 11787, § 1, 10-6-20)
ARTICLE XXVII. TOWING CARRIERS
Sec. 7-514.   Definitions.
   Sec. 7-514(a). Business hours are 8:00 a.m. - 6:00 p.m. Monday through
Friday and 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 p.m. on Saturday.
   Sec. 7-514(b). Parking area means one or more spaces not affiliated with a
single-family residence, intended for temporary public motor vehicle parking.
   Sec. 7-514(c). Property owner means a person who owns private property,
including the authorized representative of the property owner.
   Sec. 7-514(d). Tow includes transport by any means.
   Sec. 7-514(e). Towing carrier means any person who tows, or attempts to tow,
motor vehicles from private property in the city, for compensation of any kind.
   Sec. 7-514(f). Vehicle owner means the person who owns a motor vehicle,
including the vehicle operator and authorized agent of the vehicle owner.
(Ord. No. 12055, § 1, 11-14-23; Ord. No. 12099, § 1, 6-4-24)
Sec. 7-515.    Applicability.
Sections
7-514 through
7-528 apply to a towing carrier operating in the city, and all transactions
related to a tow that originates in the city, regardless of the impound lot
location. Police- and fire-directed tows, as well as city-directed tows from
city property, shall be exempt from this article.
(Ord. No. 12055, § 1, 11-14-23)
Sec. 7-516.   Private parking areas-generally.
No person shall park a vehicle on any private property without the express or
implied consent of the property owner. The property owner of any private
parking area is deemed to have given consent to unrestricted parking by the
general public in such parking area unless parking restrictions are otherwise
posted in accordance with Section
7-517.
(Ord. No. 12055, § 1, 11-14-23)
Sec. 7-517.   Required signs.
   (a)   To tow a motor vehicle from a private parking area, the following
signs are required.
   (b)   The signs shall contain the following information:
   (1)   Warning-Private Property;
   (2)   Parking violators towed at owner's expense;
   (3)   Maximum cost to the violator, including storage fees and any other
charges that could result from the disposition of a vehicle parked in violation
of parking restrictions;
   (4)   Towing carrier phone number and address where vehicle can be located;
and
   (5)   A reference to Tucson Code, Sections
7-514 through
7-528.
   (c)   The signs shall be located to put drivers on notice that the area
restricts public parking:
   (1)   At each entrance to the private parking area, including each entrance
to a multi-level parking garage and each entrance to a multi-family residential
development where parking is not contiguous; and
   (2)   In surface private parking areas to be clearly visible and readable
from any point in the private parking area.
   (d)   The size and height of signs shall be:
   (1)   At each entrance to a private parking area:
   (A)   Minimum size: twelve (12) inches by eighteen (18) inches.
   (B)   Height range above the ground: minimum height of three (3) feet and
maximum height of six (6) feet.
   (2)   Within surface private parking areas:
   (A)   Minimum size: nine (9) inches by twelve (12) inches.
   (B)   Height range above the ground: minimum height of three (3) feet and
maximum height of ten (10) feet.
   (e)   The minimum height range above the ground is measured from the bottom
of the sign. The maximum height range above the ground is measured from the top
of the sign.
   (f)   All signs shall:
   (1)   Be red and white or blue and white, except as provided below for
property owners' associations;
   (2)   Be rigid and inflexible, and include those made of metal, sturdy
plastic, or other material that resists bending;
   (3)   Be flat; and
   (4)   Be fade resistant and weather resistant.
   (g)   Signs located on private parking areas owned by a property owners'
association in an area containing private streets shall conform to the
requirements of subsection (f) above, except that the signs may have
contrasting colors other than red and white or blue and white.
   (h)   Signs at each entrance to a private parking area shall be reflective.
   (i)   Signs shall be updated within 90 days of any changes in circumstances
or the law.
   (j)   Signs are required to conform to this section six months after the
effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived.
   (k)   Additional signs regarding towing from private parking areas are
permitted in conformance with the Tucson Code, including no parking signs, if
the information on the signs does not conflict with the information required by
subsection (b) above.
(Ord. No. 12055, § 1, 11-14-23)
Sec. 7-518.   Exemption from sign requirements.
   Signs are not required to tow a motor vehicle left in a private parking area
for more than seventy-two (72) consecutive hours. However, the Tucson Police
Department shall be notified as specified in Section
7-521.
(Ord. No. 12055, § 1, 11-14-23)
Sec. 7-519.   Permission to tow required.
   (a)   A person towing a motor vehicle from private property, including
private parking areas, must have permission from the vehicle owner, or written
permission from the property owner or the property owner's authorized
representative, as follows:
   (1)   The property owner shall sign each towing order at the time of the
towing, or
   (2)   The property owner shall enter into a written contract authorizing
towing, with the following provisions:
   (A)   The property owner's name, representative's name, and phone numbers;
   (B)   The towing carrier's name, owner's or designee's name, and phone
numbers, including a phone answered twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7)
days a week;
   (C)   The date of the contract;
   (D)   The term of the contract does not exceed one (1) year; and
   (E)   The contract is not transferable between property owners or between
towing carriers.
   (b)   When an authorized representative acts on behalf of the property
owner, the representative shall show the written authorization, upon request,
to a law enforcement officer. If requested, the towing carrier shall provide a
copy of the written authorization to the law enforcement officer within one day
(not including weekends or city holidays) of the request.
   (c)   A person towing a motor vehicle shall not act as the property owner's
representative.
   (d)   The person towing a motor vehicle under this section shall show a copy
of the current written contract, upon request, to a law enforcement officer. If
requested, the towing carrier shall provide a copy of the current written
contract to the law enforcement officer within one day (not including weekends
or city holidays) of the request.
(Ord. No. 12055, § 1, 11-14-23)
Sec. 7-520.   Photographic evidence of parking violation required.
   Prior to mechanically connecting a vehicle to a tow truck, the towing
carrier shall document, through the use of date- and time-stamped digital
photography or digital video, the precise nature of the violation of the
private property parking regulations. The photographic evidence shall include
images of the vehicle that also contain the sign pursuant to Section
7-517, if applicable; images of the entire vehicle taken from each of the four
corners of the vehicle; and the license plate or vehicle identification number
(VIN). The towing carrier shall provide all images to the claimant, if
requested.
(Ord. No. 12055, § 1, 11-14-23)
Sec. 7-521.   Notice to Police Department required.
   (a)   Any person towing a motor vehicle from private property without
permission from the vehicle owner shall notify the Tucson Police Department
within one hour of mechanically connecting a vehicle to a tow truck.
   (b)   The person towing the motor vehicle shall provide the Tucson Police
Department with the following information:
   (1)   The name and address of the vehicle owner, if known;
   (2)   The motor vehicle license number, vehicle identification number (VIN),
and description;
   (3)   The reason the motor vehicle was towed;
   (4)   The street address of the impound lot where the motor vehicle will be
taken;
   (5)   The name of the person that has or will tow the motor vehicle; and
   (6)   The towing carrier's name, address, and phone number(s), including a
phone answered twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week.
(Ord. No. 12055, § 1, 11-14-23)
Sec. 7-522.   Staging prohibited.
   A towing carrier is only authorized to tow a motor vehicle from the parked
location directly to a property owned or leased by that towing carrier for the
storage of vehicles.
(Ord. No. 12055, § 1, 11-14-23)
Sec. 7-523.   Reasonable care required.
   (a)   A towing carrier shall exercise reasonable care when mechanically
connecting a vehicle to a tow truck.
   (b)   A towing carrier shall exercise reasonable care when transporting a
vehicle from the parked location to the towing carrier's permanent impound lot.
   (c)   A towing carrier shall exercise reasonable care to keep the towed
vehicle and its contents safe and secure at all times, which shall include
appropriate permanent fencing.
(Ord. No. 12055, § 1, 11-14-23)
Sec. 7-524.   Release of motor vehicles.
   (a)   A motor vehicle towed pursuant to this article shall be immediately
released to a claimant upon the production of a government issued photo
identification and at least one of the following:
   (1)   A valid certificate of title in the claimant's name.
   (2)   Proof of current vehicle registration in the claimant's name, not
including a restricted use three (3) day permit.
   (3)   A repossession affidavit, a hold harmless liability release from legal
claims, and, if applicable, a proof of lien on the vehicle.
   (4)   An insurance company release pursuant to A.R.S. § 28-4847.
   (5)   A certified motor vehicle record.
   (6)   Proof of a bona fide security interest or other financial interest in
the vehicle that exists at the time of the tow.
   (7)   A notarized letter by the vehicle owner allowing the claimant to
retrieve the vehicle on the owner's behalf.
   (b)   A person in possession of a motor vehicle towed without the vehicle
owner's permission shall assist a claimant, by retrieving ownership documents,
including any of the documentation listed in subsection (a) above from the
towed motor vehicle or by accompanying them while they retrieve documents from
a towed motor vehicle, without charge.
   (c)   A person in possession of a motor vehicle towed without the vehicle
owner's permission shall allow a claimant, with valid proof of ownership or
authorization, immediate access to the towed motor vehicle, upon request, to
assess the vehicle's condition and to retrieve personal property, without
charge.
   (d)   A person in possession of a motor vehicle towed without the vehicle
owner's permission may require a claimant:
   (1)   To provide a current address and phone number for billing.
   (2)   To sign an invoice for the motor vehicle claimed. However, the invoice
shall only contain the following:
   (A)   The letterhead, name, and address of the towing carrier;
   (B)   The name and address of the claimant;
   (C)   The date and time when the motor vehicle was claimed;
   (D)   A description, including the license number, of the claimed motor
vehicle; and
   (E)   A statement of the unpaid balance, if any.
   (e)   A person in possession of a motor vehicle towed without the vehicle
owner's permission shall provide the claimant with information regarding
billing and collection procedures. This information shall not contain any
promissory note language.
   (f)   A person in possession of a motor vehicle towed without the vehicle
owner's permission shall accept cash and credit and debit card payments for all
fees. No person in possession of a motor vehicle towed without the vehicle
owner's permission shall require exact change to release the vehicle.
   (g)   No person shall release any motor vehicle after having been advised by
any law enforcement agency that the vehicle has been reported as stolen unless
otherwise advised by law enforcement.
(Ord. No. 12055, § 1, 11-14-23)
Sec. 7-525.   Maximum charge for towing.
   (a)   All services performed under this article shall be invoiced and paid
in accordance with the maximum allowable DPS contract rate schedule for a metro
area. Rates shall be set at the current rates as of the date of the tow.
   (b)   No charge shall be incurred for storage during the first calendar day
in which the vehicle(s) is picked up. A calendar day is defined as midnight to
midnight. After the first calendar day, the towing carrier may charge a storage
fee in accordance with this article; provided, however, that the towing carrier
must be available to release the vehicle during business hours (as defined in
Section
7-525), either as part of their normal business operations or upon request by a
claimant. If the towing carrier was not available to release during these
times, no storage fee may be charged for that calendar day.
   (c)   The towing carrier must be able to release the vehicle within two
hours of the claimant's request to retrieve the vehicle when this request is
made at least two hours before the end of business hours, as defined in Section
7-525.
   (d)   For the purpose of determining after-hours charges, after-hours shall
be the hours outside of business hours, as defined in Section
7-525.
(Ord. No. 12055, § 1, 11-14-23; Ord. No. 12099, § 2, 6-4-24)
Sec. 7-526.   No charge for incomplete service call.
   (a)   When towing from private property without the vehicle owner's
permission, if the vehicle owner or driver returns to the motor vehicle before
the following occur, the attempt to remove the motor vehicle is an incomplete
service call.
   (1)   The motor vehicle is fully secured on the tow truck;
   (2)   The motor vehicle is removed from the immediate area where it was
parked; and
   (3)   The tow truck enters a public street.
   (b)   The person or towing carrier shall release the motor vehicle subject
to an incomplete service call upon a person's claiming lawful possession of the
motor vehicle and producing the keys to the motor vehicle. No payment or other
proof of ownership or control shall be required before release.
   (c)   The person or towing carrier shall release the motor vehicle subject
to an incomplete service call without charge.
(Ord. No. 12055, § 1, 11-14-23)
Sec. 7-527.   Violations.
   (a)   No person shall tow a motor vehicle from a private parking area
without the vehicle owner's permission, as required by Section
7-519, unless the property is properly posted with signs that conform to
Section
7-517 and photographic evidence of the parking violation is obtained consistent
with Section
7-520.
   (b)   No property owner of any private parking area shall permit towing
unless the property is properly posted with signs that conform to Section
7-517.
   (c)   No property owner of any private parking area without signs that
conform to Section
7-517 shall permit towing, except:
   (1)   On direction from the vehicle owner;
   (2)   On direction from a city police officer, police aide, or firefighter;
or
   (3)   As exempted by Section
7-518.
   (d)   No person shall tow a motor vehicle from private property that is not
a private parking area without the vehicle owner's permission, except:
   (1)   On direction from the property owner as required by Section
7-519; or
   (2)   On direction from a city police officer, police aide, or firefighter.
   (e)   Tows performed without subsequent notice to police, consistent with
Section
7-521, shall be a violation of this article.
   (f)   No person shall drop, store, or hold a towed motor vehicle at any
place between the parked location and the towing carrier's permanent impound
lot, as required by Section
7-522.
   (g)   No person shall fail to exercise reasonable care when towing or
storing a motor vehicle, as required by Section
7-523.
   (h)   No person shall fail to release a motor vehicle towed without the
vehicle owner's permission immediately after the claimant has produced the
documentation required in Section
7-524.
   (i)   No person releasing a motor vehicle after its being towed without the
vehicle owner's permission shall require as a condition of release any
documentation different from that permitted in Section
7-524.
   (j)   No person releasing a motor vehicle under this article shall charge
more than the maximum charges permitted in Sections
7-525 and
7-526 or more than the maximum charges posted in the parking area signs,
whichever is less.
   (k)   No person releasing a motor vehicle under this article shall hold the
vehicle as security for payment of the charges.
   (l)   Ignorance of any violation under this section shall not be a defense
in any prosecution brought under this article.
(Ord. No. 12055, § 1, 11-14-23)
Sec. 7-528.   Penalties.
   (a)   An act in violation of Section
7-527 is punishable as a class 1 misdemeanor.
   (b)   Fines for violations of this article include a maximum of one thousand
dollars ($1,000) and up to six (6) months in jail or thirty- six (36) months of
probation.
   (c)   In addition to the penalties above, a violation of Sections
7-518 through
7-526 shall result in a fine equal to the greater of
   (1)   The maximum charge for towing; or
   (2)   The actual charge collected by the towing carrier.
   (d)   The fines imposed from subsections (b) plus (c) above shall not exceed
two thousand five hundred ($2,500).
(Ord. No. 12055, § 1, 11-14-23)
Chapter 7A
CABLE COMMUNICATIONS*
__________
*   Editors Note: Ordinance No. 8937, § 1, adopted September 2, 1997, repealed
chapter
7A. Section 2 of the same ordinance added a new chapter
7A to read as herein set out. Formerly, such chapter pertained to similar
provisions and derived from Ord. No. 5221, § 1, 10-6-80; Ord. No. 5290, § 1, 1-
5-81; Ord. No. 5293, §§ 1, 2, 1-12-81; Ord. No. 5530, § 1, 3-15-82; Ord. No.
5815, § 1, 7-5-83; Ord. No. 6057, §§ 1, 2, 7-2-84; Ord. No. 6729, § 1, 6-15-87;
Ord. No. 8153, § 1, 11-1-93.
   State Law References: Cable television systems, A.R.S. § 9-505 et seq.
__________
Sec.
7A-1.   Short title.
Sec.
7A-2.   Definitions.
Sec.
7A-3.   Findings and purpose.
Sec.
7A-4.   License agreement.
Sec.
7A-5.   Policy of innovation.
Sec.
7A-6.   Time is of the essence.
Sec.
7A-7.   License required.
Sec.
7A-8.   Grant of authority.
Sec.
7A-9.   Local regulatory framework.
Sec.
7A-10.   Reserved.
Sec.
7A-11.   Geographic coverage of the system.
Sec.
7A-12.   Interconnection.
Sec.
7A-13.   Conditions of rights-of-way occupancy.
Sec.
7A-14.   Use, rental or lease of utility poles and facilities.
Sec.
7A-15.   Cable system design.
Sec.
7A-16.   Reserved.
Sec.
7A-17.   Privacy.
Sec.
7A-18.   Reserved.
Sec.
7A-19.   Construction and technical standards.
Sec.
7A-20.   Customer service standards.
Sec.
7A-21.   Rates.
Sec.
7A-22.   Reports.
Sec.
7A-23.   Performance evaluation sessions.
Sec.
7A-24.   Renewal, revocation, or forfeiture of license.
Sec.
7A-25.   Continuity of service.
Sec.
7A-26.   Purchase of system by city.
Sec.
7A-27.   Foreclosure and receivership.
Sec.
7A-28.   Transfers and assignments.
Sec.
7A-29.   Subscriber antennas.
Sec.
7A-30.   Indemnification and disputes regarding issuance of license.
Sec.
7A-31.   Insurance.
Sec.
7A-32.   Bonding.
Sec.
7A-33.   Security fund.
Sec.
7A-34.   License fee.
Sec.
7A-35.   Rights reserved to the city.
Sec.
7A-36.   Nondiscrimination and equal employment opportunity.
Sec.
7A-37.   Selection of licensee.
Sec.
7A-38.   Cost of consultant.
Sec.
7A-39.   Theft of service and tampering.
Sec.
7A-40.   Damages.
Sec.
7A-41.   Penalties.
Sec.
7A-42.   Severability.
Sec. 7A-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the City of Tucson Cable Code.
(Ord. No. 8937, § 2, 9-2-97)
Sec. 7A-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with
the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the
plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number
include the plural number. The word "shall" is mandatory and "may" is
permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning.
   Applicant means a person, as defined in this section, who submits a proposal
to provide cable service to the city.
   Basic service means any service tier which includes the retransmission of
local television broadcast signals.
   Cable channel means a frequency band capable of carrying at least one (1)
standard color video signal; but the use of a channel is not limited to
carrying a video signal.
   Cable operator means any person or group of persons (A) who provides cable
service over a cable system and directly or through one (1) or more affiliates
owns a significant interest in such cable systems, or (B) who otherwise
controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and
operation of such a cable system.
   Cable service means (A) the one-way transmission to subscribers of (i) video
programming, or (ii) other programming service, and (B) subscriber interaction,
if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or
other programming service.
   Cable system means a facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission
paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that
is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which
is provided to multiple subscribers within the City of Tucson. But, such term
does not include (A) a facility that serves only to retransmit the television
signals of one (1) or more television broadcast stations; (B) a facility that
serves subscribers without using any public rights-of-way; (C) a facility of a
common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of
subchapter II of 47 U.S.C.A. subchapter V, except that such facility shall be
considered a cable system to the extent such facility is used in the
transmission of video programming directly to subscribers, unless the extent of
such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services; (D) an open video
system certified by the FCC; or (E) any facilities of any electric utility used
solely for operating its electric utility system.
   City is the City of Tucson, a municipal corporation of the State of Arizona.
   City property means and includes all real property owned by the city, other
than rights-of- way, and all property held in a proprietary capacity by the
city, which is not subject to licensing as provided in this chapter.
   Converter means an electronic device and any associated channel selector
which converts signals to a format which permits a subscriber to receive the
signals transmitted via the cable system.
   FCC means the Federal Communications Commission or any legally designated
successor.
   Gross revenues means all cash, credits, property of any kind or nature, or
other consideration derived from the operation of the cable system to provide
cable services by the licensee; any cable operator of the cable system; or only
to the extent necessary to prevent evasion, their affiliates, subsidiaries,
parent and any person in which the licensee has a financial interest, that are
not cable operators but that are performing the normal functions and
responsibilities of a cable operator. This definition is intended to be read to
reach as broadly as possible to encompass all revenues, subject to only to the
limitations imposed by federal law. Therefore, "gross revenues" would include,
by way of example but not limitation, the following:
   (a)   Basic subscriber service monthly fees;
   (b)   Optional service monthly fees;
   (c)   Installation and reconnection fees;
   (d)   Leased channel fees;
   (e)   Converter rentals;
   (f)   Production equipment and personnel fees;
   (g)   Advertising revenues;
   (h)   The sale, exchange or cablecast of any programming developed on or for
community service channels or institutional users;
   (i)   All recoveries of bad debts previously written off and revenues from
the sale or assignment of bad debts; and
   (j)   All sales of subscriber names and addresses.
This sum shall be the basis for computing the fee imposed pursuant to Tucson
Cable Code, Section
7A-34. Gross revenues shall not include any taxes on services furnished by
licensee which are imposed upon any subscriber or user by the state, city or
other governmental unit and collected by licensee on behalf of said
governmental unit (a license fee is not such a tax).
   Licensee means a person who, in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter executes a license agreement with the city for the nonexclusive
privilege to erect, construct, operate, maintain or dismantle a cable system in
the city.
   Mayor and council means the governing body of the city.
   Minority shall mean citizens or lawful permanent residents of the United
States, defined for the purposes of this article to include Asian, Black,
Hispanic and Native American men and women. Bona fide minority group
memberships shall be established on the basis of the individual's claim that he
or she is a minority and is so regarded by that particular minority community.
   Person includes any individual, partnership, association, corporation, legal
entity or organization of any kind. Whenever used in any clause prescribing a
penalty, the term "person" as applied to partnerships or associations includes
partners or members thereof, and if applied to corporations, the officers
thereof. "Person" shall not include a municipal corporation unless otherwise
indicated.
   Proposal means an applicant's formal written response to the city's request
for proposals or any other application to provide cable services submitted to
the city pursuant to this chapter.
   Public, educational or government or PEG use means the use of the cable
system by members of the public, educational institutions and representatives
of governments to transmit information to subscribers generally or to specific
recipients via channels designated for such use in a license agreement over
licensee-provided channels.
   Rights-of-way. The term "rights-of-way" refers to city rights-of-way,
alleys, roads, easements, and other city-owned property primarily dedicated to,
designed for or actually and customarily used for vehicular or pedestrian
travel or any easement the licensee is authorized to use by federal law. It
does not include city-owned real estate utilized primarily for any purpose
other than vehicular or pedestrian travel. This exclusion includes without
limitation, sidewalks, parking, and ingress/egress areas appurtenant to such
other use.
   Subscriber means a municipal corporation or person who lawfully receives any
signal or service provided or distributed by a cable system licensee.
   Two-way capability means the ability to receive and transmit signals from a
subscriber terminal to other points in the system.
   User means a municipal corporation or person utilizing PEG or institutional
network channels, including all related facilities for purposes of production
and/or transmission of electronic or other signals as opposed to utilization
solely as a subscriber.
(Ord. No. 8937, § 2, 9-2-97)
Sec. 7A-3. Findings and purpose.
   (1)   The mayor and council find that the city's rights-of-way constitute
valuable public property,
   (a)   Having been acquired and maintained by the city over many years at
taxpayer expense;
   (b)   Being capable of providing rights-of-way uniquely valuable to private
companies for providing cable services;
   (c)   Constituting public investments for which the taxpayers are entitled
to a fair monetary return on the city's past and future investment in the
city's infrastructure; and
   (d)   Comprising significant assets which should be managed fairly and
appropriately to enhance the public safety and economy.
   (2)   Therefore, this chapter is intended:
   (a)   To regulate the erection, construction, reconstruction, installation,
operation, maintenance, dismantling, testing, repair and use of the cable
system in, upon, along, across, above, over or under or in any manner connected
with the rights-of-way, public ways or public places within the jurisdiction of
the city, as now or in the future may exist;
   (b)   To provide for the payment of certain fees and other valuable
considerations to the city to regulate the construction and operation, use and
development of the cable system within the city;
   (c)   To provide conditions under which the cable system will serve present
and future needs of government, public institutions, commercial enterprises,
lawful public and private organizations, and the citizens and general public of
the city;
   (d)   To provide remedies and prescribe penalties for violations of this
chapter;
   (e)   To permit and manage reasonable access to the public ways of the city
for cable purposes on a competitively neutral basis;
   (f)   To conserve the limited physical capacity of the rights-of-way held in
the public trust by the city;
   (g)   To assure that the city's current and ongoing costs of granting and
regulating private access to and use of the rights-of-way are fully paid by the
persons seeking such access and causing such costs;
   (h)   To secure fair and reasonable compensation to the city and the
residents of the city for permitting private use of the rights-of-way;
   (i)   To assure that all cable companies providing facilities or services
within the city comply with the ordinances, rules, and regulations of the city;
   (j)   To assure that the city can continue to fairly and responsibly protect
the public health, safety, and welfare;
   (k)   To enable the city to discharge its public trust consistent with
rapidly evolving federal and state regulatory policies, industry competition,
and technological development.
(Ord. No. 8937, § 2, 9-2-97)
Sec. 7A-4. License agreement.
   (1)   Issuance of licenses subject to agreement; conflicts with agreements
and ordinance. Within sixty (60) days after written notification of the award
of a license by the city, a selected applicant shall execute a license
agreement which shall set forth the terms and provisions of the license.
   (2)   Relationship of license and license agreement to laws. Each license
issued by the city is subject to, and licensee must exercise all rights granted
to it in accordance with, its license agreement and applicable law, including
this chapter. This chapter is not a contract with any licensee and may be
amended.
   (3)   Nature of license agreements. Each license agreement is a contract,
subject to the city's exercise of its police and other powers. A license
agreement shall not confer any rights upon the licensee or limitations upon the
city other than as expressly provided therein. Subject to the exercise of the
city's police and other powers, in the case of any conflict between the express
terms of a license agreement and the express terms of this chapter, the license
agreement shall govern. A licensee, by entering into a license agreement, does
not waive its rights to challenge the lawfulness of any particular enactment
after the date the license is issued, including on the grounds that a
particular enactment is an unconstitutional impairment of contractual rights.
(Ord. No. 8937, § 2, 9-2-97)
Sec. 7A-5. Policy of innovation.
Recognizing the fluid and expanding state of the development of communications
technology and uses, it is the policy of the city to strongly encourage
experimentation and innovation in the development of cable system technology
uses, services, programming and techniques that will be of general benefit to
the community; provided that all such experiments and innovations shall be
subject to the rules of the FCC and any other federal, state and city laws and
regulations.
(Ord. No. 8937, § 2, 9-2-97)
Sec. 7A-6. Time is of the essence.
Whenever this chapter or the license agreement sets forth any time for any act
to be performed by the licensee, such time shall be deemed of the essence; and
the licensee's failure to perform within the time allotted shall, in all cases,
be sufficient grounds for the city to invoke the remedies available under the
terms and conditions of this chapter and the license agreement.
(Ord. No. 8937, § 2, 9-2-97)
Sec. 7A-7. License required.
   (1)   License required. No person shall construct, install, maintain or
operate a cable system within, along or under any rights-of-way in the city, or
any other public property in the city, unless a license has first been granted
by the mayor and council pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and unless
the license agreement is in full force and effect. Nothing in this chapter
shall be deemed to require the granting of any license when in the opinion of
the city it would not be in the public interest to do so.
   (2)   License nonexclusive. Any license granted pursuant to this chapter by
the city shall not be exclusive, and the city specifically reserves the right
to grant other licenses to any persons or to authorize itself to provide cable
services without a license at any time and in any area of the city if the city
determines that it is in the public interest to do so.
   (3)   License binding. All provisions of this chapter and any license
agreement shall be binding upon the licensee, its successors, lessees, or
assignees.
(Ord. No. 8937, § 2, 9-2-97)
Sec. 7A-8. Grant of authority.
   (1)   Length of license. Any license granted by the city pursuant to this
chapter shall commence upon execution of the license agreement by the licensee
and the city and shall be for a period specified by the license. All licenses
shall be subject to periodic review by the city to evaluate whether the cable
system's technology is meeting the community's needs and interests. Any license
shall also provide that following such review, the city may require a licensee
to make any changes necessary to reasonably upgrade the cable system's
technological capabilities. The city may expressly waive such requirement in
the event it determines that the cable system reasonably meets the city's
technological needs and interests. In no event shall any license exceed a term
of fifteen (15) years, subject to the conditions and restrictions as provided
in this chapter. A license agreement may be renewed pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter and federal law. No privilege or exemption shall be inferred
from the granting of any license unless it is specifically prescribed.
   (2)   No right of property. The granting of any license pursuant to this
chapter shall be a privilege and shall not impart to the licensee any right of
property in any city rights-of-way or other city property.
(Ord. No. 8937, § 2, 9-2-97)
Sec. 7A-9. Local regulatory framework.
   (1)   Continuing regulatory jurisdiction. The mayor and council shall have
continuing regulatory jurisdiction and supervision over the operation of any
license granted pursuant to this chapter. However, it is recognized that the
daily administrative, supervisory and enforcement responsibilities of the
provisions of this chapter and the license agreement shall be delegated and
entrusted to the city manager, or his designee, as hereafter provided.
   (2)   The city manager shall have the following responsibilities and
authority:
   (a)   Interpret, administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter and
the license agreement;
   (b)   Represent the city in all matters pertaining to the implementation of
the provisions of this chapter and the license agreement;
   (c)   Resolve disputes or disagreements between subscribers, users,
potential subscribers and users, and the licensee as to matters involving an
interpretation of this chapter or the license agreement, or other matters
subject to the city's jurisdiction, but only in the event that such parties are
unable first to resolve their dispute; provided that, nothing in this section
is meant to waive any rights a licensee may have to appeal the city's
resolution of a dispute.
   (d)   Review and audit reports and other documents submitted to the city as
required by this chapter or other law, so as to ensure that the necessary
reports are completed and fulfilled pursuant to the terms of this chapter;
   (e)   Assure that all records, rules and charges pertinent to the system are
made available for inspection at reasonable hours upon reasonable notice
consistent with the license agreement and applicable law;
   (f)   Confer with licensees, assist in coordination among licensees, and
enforce requirements under applicable law and license agreements for
interconnections among cable systems and other systems;
   (g)   Consistent with this chapter, establish and administer sanctions as
authorized by the mayor and council to ensure compliance with this chapter;
   (h)   Advise the mayor and council on matters which may constitute grounds
for termination or revocation of the license agreement in accordance with this
chapter and a license;
   (i)   Advise the mayor and council on proposed transfers of the system;
   (j)   Consistent with this chapter, promulgate regulations regarding the
construction, reconstruction, operation, maintenance, dismantling, testing or
use of the system as necessary;
   (k)   Ensure that the licensee makes any public access channel available to
all residents of the city on a nondiscriminatory basis;
   (l)   Ensure that the operation of any public access channel is free of
program censorship and control to the extent permitted by law;
   (m)   Perform any other duties assigned under the provisions of this chapter
or other legislation which may hereafter be enacted by the mayor and council or
such other related duties as the mayor and council may direct.
(Ord. No. 8937, § 2, 9-2-97)
Sec. 7A-10. Reserved.
Sec. 7A-11. Geographic coverage of the system.
   (1)   The city may issue a nonexclusive license for any or all portions of
the city's jurisdictional limits as delineated in the request for proposals.
Upon the annexation of any additional land area by the city, the annexed area
shall thereafter be subject to all the terms of this chapter and the license
agreement immediately upon notification to the licensee of the annexation by
the city.
   (2)   A licensee shall construct and operate its cable system so as to
provide service to all parts of its license area as provided in the license
agreement and having a density of at least fifteen (15) residential dwelling
units per street half-mile of system or where eight (8) residential dwelling
units per street half-mile agree to subscribe to cable service for at least one
(1) year. In addition, all areas which reach such density at any time during
the license term shall be provided service upon reaching the minimum density.
   (3)   Where the density is less than that specified above, the licensee
shall inform persons requesting service of the possibility of paying for
installation or a line extension and shall offer to provide them with a free
written estimate of the cost, which shall be provided within fifteen (15)
working days of such a request. The charge for installation or extension for
each person requesting service shall not exceed a pro rata share of the actual
cost of extending the service. If, for example, the density in an area were
three (3) residential units per half mile, licensee would pay one-fifth ( 1/5)
of the costs of the extension and persons agreeing to take service would pay
the remaining four-fifths.
   (4)   Any residential dwelling unit located within one-hundred and twenty-
five (125) feet of the closer of (a) the nearest edge of the public right-of-
way or (b) the nearest tap on a licensee's system shall be connected to the
cable system at no charge other than the standard installation charge (plus
extension charges, if any, that would apply under section
7A11(2)-(3)). In determining what is the drop length from the "nearest edge of
the right-of-way," the drop length will be measured to the nearest edge of the
right-of-way directly adjoining the premises of the subscriber, in the
direction in which the licensee's plant is located (or is to be located, in a
case involving a line extension). The licensee shall, upon request by any
potential subscriber residing in the city beyond the 125-foot limit, extend
service to such subscriber provided that the subscriber shall pay the net
additional drop costs.
All measurements must be made in a manner most favorable to the person
requesting service.
   (5)   Under normal operating conditions, if licensee cannot perform
installations within the times specified in applicable customer service
standards, the subscriber may request and is entitled to receive a credit equal
to the charge for a standard installation. For any installation that is not a
free installation or a standard installation, the licensee shall provide the
subscriber with a written estimate of all charges within seven days of a
request by the subscriber. Failure to comply will subject licensee to
appropriate enforcement actions. This section does not apply to the
introduction of new products and services when licensee is utilizing a phased
introduction.
   (6)   In all cases where new developments and subdivisions are to be
constructed to be served in whole or in part by underground power and telephone
utilities, the owner or developer of such areas shall provide reasonable notice
to the licensee of the availability of trenches, backfill and specifications of
all necessary substructures in order that the licensee may install all
necessary electronic cable facilities. In no event shall such undergrounding be
at any cost or expense to the city.
   (7)   Subject to the other provisions of this section
7A-11, cable service shall be made available upon request to all individual
residential dwellings, multiple-unit residential dwellings, condominiums,
cooperative buildings, townhouses, institutions, organizations, businesses and
all other structures within the designated license area.
   (8)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit a person from requiring that
cable system facilities conform to laws and regulations and reasonable
conditions necessary to protect safety, functioning, appearance and value of
premises or the convenience and safety of persons and property.
   (9)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit a person from requiring the
licensee to agree to indemnify or compensate the owner for damages or from
liability for damages caused by the installation, operation, maintenance or
removal of system facilities by the licensee.
(Ord. No. 8937, § 2, 9-2-97)
Sec. 7A-12. Interconnection.
   (1)   New licensees shall interconnect their system with any or all other
systems located in the city or within the county for PEG and I-Net purposes
upon the directive of the city. For existing licensees, the interconnect
requirements shall be determined through the license renewal process under this
chapter, subject to federal law. Interconnection of systems may be done by
direct cable connection, microwave link, satellite or other appropriate
methods. Interconnection may be required for one or several channels of the
system, including but not limited to PEG channels.
   (2)   Upon receiving the directive by the city to interconnect, the licensee
shall immediately initiate negotiations with the other affected system or
systems in order that costs may be shared equally by the systems for both the
construction and operation of the interconnection link.
   (3)   Each licensee shall cooperate with any city-county interconnection
authority, the provisions of any city-county intergovernmental agreements,
regional interconnection authority or state or federal regulatory agency which
may be established for the purpose of regulating, facilitating, financing or
otherwise providing for the interconnection of cable systems within and beyond
the boundaries of the city. A licensee may be granted reasonable extensions of
time to interconnect, or the city may suspend any order it may have issued to
interconnect upon petition by the licensee to the city if the city finds that
the licensee has negotiated in good faith and has failed to obtain agreement
from the system of the proposed interconnection, or has demonstrated that
interconnection is technically unfeasible. Nothing in this section
7A-12(3) creates an obligation to physically interconnect with another system
where that obligation does not arise under a license agreement or other
applicable law.
   (4)   Any connection whatsoever of the licensee's system with any other
system shall not relieve the licensee of any of its obligations under this
chapter or the license agreement.
   (5)   Once the city directs a licensee to interconnect, the licensee is
under an obligation to interconnect promptly. The licensee shall have sixty
(60) days to reach an agreement on the terms of interconnection, and to submit
that agreement to the city. In the event that the parties to the agreement fail
to submit that agreement, either may submit its interconnection proposal to the
city. The city, after public hearing, may establish the interconnection
requirements, and the parties shall promptly interconnect in accordance with
the city's direction. However, nothing in this section prevents either party
from appealing the city's order to a court of competent jurisdiction if the
party believes that it is unreasonable.
(Ord. No. 8937, § 2, 9-2-97)
Sec. 7A-13. Conditions of rights-of-way occupancy.
   (1)   A licensee shall first obtain the written approval of the city
engineer prior to commencing construction on the rights-of-way and public
places of the city. Approval shall be in accordance with relevant Charter and
Code provisions and administrative regulations, which approval shall not be
unreasonably withheld. The licensee shall notify the city at least ten (10)
days prior to the commencement of any construction in any rights-of-way.
   (2)   The licensee shall not open or disturb the surface of any rights-of-
way or public place for any purpose without first having obtained a permit to
do so in the manner provided by law. All excavation shall be coordinated with
other utility excavation or construction so as to minimize disruption to the
public.
   (3)   Use of existing poles or conduits.
   (a)   The licensee shall utilize existing poles, conduits and other
facilities whenever possible and shall not construct or install any new,
different or additional poles, conduits or other facilities whether on public
property or on privately-owned property until the written approval of the city
is obtained. No location or any pole or wire-holding structure of the licensee
shall be a vested interest, and such poles or structures shall be removed or
modified by the licensee at its own expense whenever the city determines that
the public convenience would be enhanced thereby.
   (b)   The facilities of the licensee shall be installed underground in those
areas of the city where existing telephone and electric services are both
underground at the time of construction by the licensee. In areas where either
telephone or electric utility facilities are installed aerially at the time of
system construction, the licensee may install its facilities aerially; however,
at such time as the existing aerial facilities are placed underground, the
licensee shall likewise place its facilities underground at sole cost to the
licensee.
   (4)   All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment
erected by the licensee shall be located so as to cause minimum interference
with the unencumbered use of rights-of-way and other public places and minimum
interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who
adjoin any of the rights-of-way and public places.
   (5)   In case of disturbance or damage caused by the licensee to any rights-
of-way or public place, the licensee shall, at its own cost and expense and in
the manner approved by the city, replace and restore such rights-of-way or
public place in as good or better a condition as before the work performed by
the licensee which caused such disturbance or damage.
   (6)   At any time during the period of the license, the licensee shall, at
its own expense, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate or remove
any of its property when, in the opinion of the city, (i) the same is required
by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, rights- of-way vacation,
freeway or rights-of-way construction, alteration to or establishment of any
rights-of-way or any facility within the rights-of-way, sidewalk, or other
public place, including but not limited to, installation of sewers, drains,
waterlines, power lines, traffic signal lines or transportation facilities; or
(ii) a city project or activity makes disconnection, removal, or relocation
necessary or less expensive for the city.
   (7)   The licensee shall, on request of any person holding a permit to move
a building, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the movement of such
buildings. The expense of such temporary removal or raising or lowering of
wires shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the licensee shall
have the authority to require such payment in advance. The licensee shall be
given not less than five (5) days advance notice to arrange such temporary wire
alterations.
   (8)   Whenever, in case of fire or other emergency, it becomes necessary in
the judgment of the city manager, police chief, fire chief, or their delegates,
to remove or damage any of the licensee's facilities, no charge shall be made
by the licensee against the city for restoration, repair or damages.
   (9)   The licensee shall have the authority to trim trees on public rights-
of-way at its own expense as may be necessary to protect its wires and
facilities, subject to supervision and direction by the city. Trimming of trees
on private property shall require consent of the property owner. Any trimming
of trees by the licensee in the rights-of-way and public ways shall be subject
to such regulation as the city manager or other authorized official may
establish to protect the public health, safety and convenience.
   (10)   Protection of facilities. Nothing contained in this section shall
relieve any person from liability arising out of the failure to exercise
reasonable care to avoid damaging the licensee's facilities while performing
any work connected with grading, regrading or changing the line of any rights-
of- way or public place or the construction or reconstruction of any sewer or
water system.
   (11)   Installation records. Each licensee shall keep accurate installation
records of the location of all facilities in the rights-of-way and public ways
and furnish them to the city upon request. A licensee shall cooperate with the
city to furnish such information in an electronic mapping format compatible
with the then-current city electronic mapping format. Upon completion of new or
relocation construction of underground facilities in the rights-of-way and
public ways, the licensee shall provide the city with installation records in
an electronic format compatible with the then-current city electronic mapping
format showing the location of the underground and above ground facilities.
   (12)   If, during the design process for public improvements the city
discovers a potential conflict with proposed construction, the licensee shall
either: (a) locate and, if necessary, expose its facilities in conflict or (b)
use a location service under contract with the city to locate or expose its
facilities. Each licensee is obligated to furnish the location information in a
timely manner, but in no case longer than thirty (30) days.
   (13)   The city reserves the prior and superior right to lay, construct,
erect, install, use, operate, repair, replace, remove, relocate, regrade,
widen, realign, or maintain any rights-of-way and public ways, aerial, surface,
or subsurface improvement, including but not limited to water mains, traffic
control conduits, cable and devices, sanitary or storm sewers, subways,
tunnels, bridges, viaducts, or any other public construction within the rights-
of-way of the city limits.
   (14)   When the city uses its prior superior right to the rights-of-way and
public ways, the licensee shall move its property that is located in the
rights-of-way and public ways, at its own cost, to such a location as the city
directs. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event the public project is paid
for totally or in part by non-public funds, then the licensee's costs of moving
its property shall be borne by the source of the non-public funds in the same
ratio as the non-public funds bear to the total project costs.
   (15)   If, during the course of a project, the city determines licensee's
facilities are in conflict, the following shall apply:
   (a)   Prior to city Notice to Proceed to Contractor: The licensee shall,
within a reasonable time, but in no event exceeding three (3) months, remove or
relocate the conflicting facility. This time period shall begin running upon
receipt by the licensee of written notice from the city. However, if both the
city and the licensee agree, the time frame may be extended based on the
requirements of the project.
   (b)   Subsequent to city Notice to Proceed to Contractor: The city and the
licensee will immediately begin the coordination necessary to remove or
relocate the facility. Removal or relocation is to begin no later than seventy-
two (72) hours, if practicable, after written notification from the city of the
conflict.
   (16)   The licensee agrees to obtain a permit as required by the city prior
to removing, abandoning, relocating or reconstructing, if necessary, any
portion of its facilities. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city understands
and acknowledges there may be instances when the licensee is required to make
repairs, in compliance with federal or state laws, that are of an emergency
nature. The licensee will notify the city prior to such repairs, if
practicable, and will obtain the necessary permits in a reasonable time after
notification to the city.
   (17)   If, in the installation, use or maintenance of its facilities, the
licensee damages or disturbs the surface or subsurface of any rights-of-way or
public ways or adjoining public property or the public improvement located
thereon, therein, or thereunder, the licensee shall promptly, at its own
expense, and in a manner acceptable to the city, restore, repair or replace the
property thereon, therein, or thereunder, in as good a condition as before such
damage or disturbance. If such restoration, repair or replacement is not
completed within a reasonable time, or such repair or replacement does not meet
the city's reasonable standards, the city shall have the right to perform the
necessary restoration, repair, or replacement, either through its own forces or
through a hired contractor, and the licensee agrees to reimburse the city for
its expenses in so doing within thirty (30) days after its receipt of the
city's invoice therefor.
   (18)   If licensee's relocation effort so delays construction of a public
project causing the city to be liable for delay damages, the licensee shall
reimburse the city for those damages attributable to the delay created by the
licensee. In the event the licensee should dispute the amount of damages
attributable to the licensee, the matter shall be referred to the city engineer
for a decision. In the event that licensee disagrees with the city engineer's
decision, the matter shall be submitted to the city manager or the city
manager's designee for determination, whose decision shall be final and binding
upon licensee as a matter of city review, but nothing herein waives any right
of appeal to the courts.
   (19)   In the event the city becomes aware of a potential delay involving
the licensee's facilities, the city shall promptly notify the licensee of this
potential delay.
   (20)   The installation, use and maintenance of the licensee's facilities
within the rights- of-way and public ways authorized herein shall be in such a
manner as not to interfere with the city's placement, construction, use and
maintenance of its rights-of-way and public ways, rights- of-way lighting,
water pipes, drains, sewers, traffic signal systems or other city systems that
have been, or may be, installed, maintained, used or authorized by the city.
   (21)   The licensee agrees not to install, maintain or use any of its
facilities in such a manner as to damage or interfere with any existing
facilities of another utility located within the rights-of-way and public ways
of the city and agrees to relocate its facilities, if necessary, to accommodate
another facility relocation. Nothing in this section 7A-13(21) is meant to
limit any rights a licensee may have under applicable law to be compensated for
the cost of relocating its facilities from the utility that is requesting the
relocation.
   (22)   Reimbursement paid through the permitting process is separate, and in
addition to, any other fees included in the license. The licensee, at the time
of or prior to submitting construction plans, shall provide the city with a
description of the type of service to be provided by the licensee in sufficient
detail for the city to determine compliance with the license and applicable
law.
   (23)   The city may issue reasonable policy guidelines to all licensees to
establish procedures for determining how to control issuance of engineering
permits to multiple licensees for the use of the same rights-of-way for their
facilities. The licensee shall cooperate with the city in establishing such
policy and comply with the procedures established by the city manager or his
designee to coordinate the issuance of multiple engineering permits in the same
right-of-way segments.
   (24)   To maximize public and employee safety, to minimize visual clutter of
aerial plant, and to minimize the amount of trenching and excavation in and
along city rights-of-way and sidewalks for underground plant, licensee shall
make every commercially reasonable effort to co-locate compatible facilities
within the rights-of-way subject to the engineering requirements of the owners
of utility poles and other facilities.
(Ord. No. 8937, § 2, 9-2-97)
Sec. 7A-14. Use, rental or lease of utility poles and facilities.
Each licensee assumes all responsibility for gaining permission from any
electric, gas or telephone utility in the city for the use, rental or lease of
poles, underground conduits and other structures and facilities for the purpose
of extending, carrying or laying the licensee's wires, cables, electronic
conductors and other facilities and appurtenances necessary or desirable in
conjunction with the establishment and operation of the system. Copies of all
agreements for use of poles, conduits, or other utility facilities must be
provided to the city manager within thirty (30) days of a request therefor by
the city.
(Ord. No. 8937, § 2, 9-2-97)
Sec. 7A-15. Cable system design.
It is the intent of the city that the cable system provide the broadest range
of services possible. In this regard, the requirements stated in this section
are intended only as minimum specifications for the system and final
determination of system design for licensees will be made through the initial
licensing or renewal process. The city may increase or otherwise alter the
requirements in an RFP for a license. Applicants are strongly encouraged to
offer the city, through the proposal process, the broadest range of services,
facilities, equipment, technical assistance and other related considerations as
technologically and economically feasible. Neither the specifications of the
minimums in subsections (1) through (7) nor the final terms of a license
agreement shall be interpreted to waive any rights or obligations of the
licensee or the city under 47 U.S.C. § 546.
   (1)   Channel capacity. The licensee shall construct, at a minimum, a system
that provides a minimum capacity of 550 MHz and that is designed in a way so
that it can deliver the channels in manner reasonably responsive to customer
demand. The system shall be designed so that the number of channels may be
increased as supply and demand for additional channel utilization exceeds the
number initially activated and so that the capacity of the cable system may be
increased without substantial reconstruction of the cable system.
   (2)   System configuration. The licensee shall design and construct the
system in such a manner as to provide maximum utilization flexibility for both
subscribers and users.
   (3)   Emergency override. Except as inconsistent with FCC regulations, the
system shall include an emergency alert capability which shall permit the mayor
or the mayor's designate to override the audio on all television channels and
FM signals simultaneously, in the case of public emergencies as determined by
the mayor. The licensee shall also designate a video channel which will be used
for emergency broadcasts, which designation shall be included in the license
agreement.
   (4)   Standby power. The licensee shall maintain in constant readiness
equipment capable of providing standby power for the cable system as consistent
with sound engineering practices given the licensee's system design.
   (a)   Such equipment shall be constructed so as to revert automatically to a
standby mode when alternating current power returns.
   (b)   Licensee shall comply with all utility and other safety regulations to
prevent the alternate power supply from powering a "dead" utility line so as to
prevent injury to any person.
   (5)   Two-way capability. Maximum two-way interactive service capability as
reasonably justified in light of the needs and interests of the community and
the costs thereof, considering projected advances in technology shall be
designed into the system at its inception.
   (6)   PEG channels. In addition to the other services proposed by
applicants, the city shall place significant emphasis on the provision of PEG
channels, facilities and related considerations. Such areas include but are not
limited to the following: channel(s) for government usage, educational usage
(public and nonprofit schools, colleges and universities), public access, and
local origination. Applicants are strongly encouraged to investigate the needs
and desires of potential users and to offer such community services as are
technologically and economically feasible. Both internal institutional
communications and connection to subscribers is encouraged where appropriate.
In this regard, applicants should also consider and respond to the request for
proposals in the area relating to institutional networks.
The licensee shall not take any actions that would discourage or prevent
maximum utilization of all PEG channels provided, and shall cooperate with the
city and managers of PEG channels to ensure that subscribers are aware of the
channels, can access them easily, and, to the extent that a licensee (or some
entity acting on a licensee's behalf) is involved in publicizing licensee's
other channels or channel schedules, that the PEG channels and channel
schedules are similarly publicized.
   (7)   Facilities and management. In regard to the community service
provisions referred to in this section, applicants are strongly encouraged to
consider and provide studio facilities, production equipment, technical
assistance and other facilities and equipment to enable the city and its
residents to fully utilize the system as not only an entertainment medium, but
as an intracommunity communications and education medium. Such services,
facilities, production equipment, origination points, hours of availability
where appropriate, costs and all other necessary information relating to
community service shall be as proposed by applicants and as provided for in the
license agreement. Specific operational details and responsibilities, including
the city's right to designate management organizations to operate various
community service channels and facilities (a right specifically reserved herein
by the city), shall be provided for in the license agreement and a separate
agreement between the licensee, the city and any management organizations
designated by the city for this purpose.
   (8)   Public use connections. At a minimum, the licensee shall offer to
provide, without charge, one (1) outlet of services to a conveniently
accessible point in each public, private and parochial school, nonprofit
college and university and each fire station, police station, public library
branch, city neighborhood community center, public park and such other
facilities used for municipal purposes as may be designated by the city. A
license agreement may specify the particular conditions under which the outlets
will be provided.
   (9)   Institutional network. Each licensee either shall provide an
institutional network for educational and government use, or shall provide an
appropriate contribution for construction of an institutional network, which
contribution shall be specified in the license agreement.
   (10)   Reception. The system shall be capable of and shall produce a picture
upon any subscriber's television receiver in black and white or color that is
undistorted and free from ghost images, is without noticeable picture
degradation or other forms of interference attributable to the performance of
the system, and accompanied by undistorted sound. This requires that equipment
be installed at the headend to allow the licensee to receive or cablecast
signals in substantially the form received, without substantial alteration or
deterioration (for example, the headend should include equipment that will
transmit color video signals received at the headend in color). Equipment must
be installed so that all closed captioning programming received by the cable
system shall include the closed caption signal so long as the closed captioned
signal is provided consistent with FCC standards. Equipment must be installed
so that all local signals received in stereo or with secondary audio tracks
(broadcast and PEG) are retransmitted in those same formats. In the case of AM/
FM radio transmission, the above specifications, where applicable, shall apply.
(Ord. No. 8937, § 2, 9-2-97)
Sec. 7A-16. Reserved.
Sec. 7A-17. Privacy.
   (1)   As used in this section, "valid authorization" shall mean an
authorization valid under federal or state law.
   (2)   The licensee shall strictly observe and protect the rights of privacy
and property rights of subscribers and users at all times. Individual
subscriber preferences of any kind, viewing habits, political, social or
economic philosophies, beliefs, creeds, religions or names, addresses or
telephone numbers shall not be revealed to any person, governmental unit,
police department or investigating agency unless upon the authority of a court
of law or upon prior voluntary valid authorization of the subscriber, which
shall not in any event be required as a condition of receiving service.
   (3)   The licensee may release the number of its subscribers but only as a
total number and as a percentage of the potential subscribers throughout the
city. When indicating the number of subscribers viewing a particular channel at
a particular time, the licensee shall indicate only the total number of
subscribers viewing during the relevant time and the percentage of all
subscribers which they represent, but never the identity of a particular
subscriber.
   (4)   The licensee may maintain such information as is necessary to bill
subscribers for the purchase of any system service.
   (5)   Neither the licensee nor any other person shall initiate in any form
the discovery of any information on or about a subscriber's premises without
prior valid authorization from the subscriber potentially affected.
   (6)   A subscriber may at any time revoke any authorization previously made,
by delivering to the licensee in writing by mail or otherwise, his/her decision
to so revoke. Any such revocation shall be effective upon receipt by the
licensee.
   (7)   No monitoring of any subscriber terminal shall take place without
specific prior valid authorization by the user of the terminal in question;
however, the licensee may conduct systemwide or individually addressed "sweeps"
for the purpose of verifying system integrity. In no event shall aural or
visual monitoring of any kind take place without a clear indication to the
subscriber that such monitoring is taking place. The licensee shall not
initiate a subscriber response mechanism without the city manager's making a
finding that the system can operate effectively and yet give absolute
protection against any invasion of privacy.
   (8)   The licensee shall not tabulate any test results, nor permit the use
of the system for such tabulation, which would reveal the commercial product
preferences or opinions of subscribers, members of their families or their
invitees, licensees or employees without prior valid authorization of the
subscriber.
   (9)   Each compilation, publication, tabulation or other dissemination of
each piece of information made or permitted to be made in violation of this
section shall be considered a separate violation.
(Ord. No. 8937, § 2, 9-2-97)
Sec. 7A-18. Reserved.
Sec. 7A-19. Construction and technical standards.
   (1)   Compliance with construction codes.
   (a)   Construction practices shall be in accordance with all applicable
provisions of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 and any amendments
thereto as well as all applicable laws, rules and regulations of the state and
the city, including but not limited to requirements of the city in regard to
various electrical wiring necessary to the operation of city functions,
including but not limited to traffic-control signalization, right-of-way
lighting, fire lines and communications lines.
   (b)   All installation of electronic equipment shall be of a permanent
nature, durable and installed in accordance with the applicable provisions of
the current editions of the National Electrical Safety Code as published by the
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, the National Electrical Code
of the National Fire Protection Association, and all state and local codes
where applicable.
   (c)   Antenna supporting structures (towers) shall be painted, lighted,
erected and maintained in accordance with all applicable rules and regulations
of the United States Department of Transportation and all other applicable
laws, rules and regulations of the state and the city.
   (2)   Performance standards. The system shall be installed, maintained and
operated in accordance with the highest accepted standards of the industry. The
licensee shall design and construct the system so as to meet the following
minimum standards:
   (a)   The cable system should be capable of continuous twenty-four-hour
daily operation without severe material degradation of signal except during
extremely inclement weather, and immediately following extraordinary storms
which adversely affect utility services or which damage major system
components.
   (b)   The cable system should be capable of operating over an outdoor
temperature range of 0 degrees F to +135 degrees F and over variation in supply
voltages from 105 to 130 volts AC without catastrophic failure or irreversible
performance changes.
   (3)   Technical standards. Except as otherwise provided in federal law, each
cable system shall be designed, installed and operated so as to comply with all
applicable technical standards, codes, and regulations as promulgated by the
FCC and other federal, state and local authorities. In this regard, 47 C.F.R.
section 76.60, relating to technical standards (including but not limited to
performance monitoring and measurements), shall apply in full and is hereby
incorporated herein by this reference, except as preempted by federal law. All
other applicable state or city laws, rules or regulations relating to technical
standards and operation of the system as may be enacted or promulgated from
time to time shall apply and govern the installation and operation of the
system to the extent such laws, rules or regulations are not preempted by
federal regulation.
(Ord. No. 8937, § 2, 9-2-97)
Sec. 7A-20. Customer service standards.
   (1)   Definitions.
   (a)   Normal business hours shall be a minimum of fifty (50) hours Monday
through Friday, and four (4) hours on Saturday.
   (b)   Normal operating conditions include those service conditions which are
within the control of the licensee. These include, but are not limited to,
special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak or
seasonal demand periods, and maintenance or upgrade of the cable system.
Conditions which are not within the control of the licensee include, but are
not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone
network outages, and severe weather out of the ordinary for the area.
   (c)   Service interruption means the loss of picture or sound on one or more
channels. The definition of service interruption affects the timing of when the
licensee must respond to a service problem.
   (2)   Office and phone service.
   (a)   The licensee shall maintain an office in the city which shall be open
and staffed during normal business hours. The licensee shall have a locally
listed telephone number and be so operated that complaints and requests for
repairs or adjustments may be received twenty-four (24) hours per day, each day
of the year. Licensee's personnel at the local office shall, at a minimum, be
able to provide immediate billing information, provide for equipment pick-up
and drop-off, and customer service information.
   (b)   Trained company representatives will be available to respond to
telephone inquiries from 7 a.m. to 8 p.m. Monday through Saturday. Between 8
p.m. and 7 a.m. Monday through Saturday, the access line may be answered by a
service or an automated response system, including an answering machine.
Inquiries received by licensee's answering service or automated response system
must be responded to by a trained company representative on the next business
day.
   (c)   Under normal operating conditions, telephone answer time by a customer
representative, including wait time, shall not exceed thirty (30) seconds from
when the connection is made. If the call needs to be transferred, transfer time
shall not exceed thirty (30) seconds. Callers will receive a busy signal less
than three (3) percent of the time. Calls will be lost or abandoned less than
three (3) percent of the time. These standards shall be met no less than ninety
(90) percent of the time, measured on a quarterly basis.
Failure to meet these standards shall subject licensee to appropriate
enforcement actions.
   (d)   Customer service center and bill payment locations will be open at
least during normal business hours and will be conveniently located. A licensee
may use an agent such as a bank or other business to receive bill payment from
cable customers during and outside of normal business hours. Such an
arrangement, however, will not relieve the licensee of its obligation to have
its own bill payment location open at least during normal business hours. The
account of a customer who remits payment at any authorized bill payment
location will be credited by licensee no later than the beginning of the
following business day.
   (e)   Licensee shall notify the city manager or his designee as promptly as
possible, by any available means including accessing telephones away from
licensee's premises, whenever there is a total interruption of telephone
service which affects licensee's subscriber service phone lines.
   (3)   Notification requirements.
   (a)   The licensee shall provide written information on each of the
following areas at the time of installation of service; at least annually to
all subscribers; and at any time upon request of a subscriber or potential
subscriber. A current version of the information will be provided to the city
upon request, and automatically whenever the material provided to subscribers
or potential subscribers changes. The notice provided must provide information
specific to Tucson. However, nothing prevents the company from complying with
this section by sending a national notice and a separate notice that provides
detail concerning local procedures, so long as the two are consistent.
   (i)   Products and services offered;
   (ii)   Prices and options for programming services and conditions of
subscription to programming and other services. In order that subscribers are
fully apprised of the charges they may incur, licensee shall note that
advertised rates are subject to additional taxes and fees;
   (iii)   Installation and service maintenance policies, including, when
applicable, information regarding the subscriber's home wiring rights and
information describing ownership of internal wiring during the period service
is provided;
   (iv)   Instructions on how to use the cable service;
   (v)   Channel positions of programming carried on the system;
   (vi)   Billing and complaint procedures, including address and telephone
number of the city's cable office. Such notification shall be either a separate
document which may be included with a billing statement or included on the
portion of the monthly bill that is to be retained by the subscriber;
   (vii)   The availability of a parental control device;
   (viii)   Licensee's practices and procedures for protecting against
invasions of privacy;
   (ix)   The address and telephone number of licensee's office to which
complaints may be reported;
   (x)   When applicable, licensee's community unit identifier as specified by
the FCC;
   (xi)   The manner in which the licensee will provide notice of any rate or
service changes; and
   (xii)   Subscribers' rights to obtain refunds or credits from the licensee
and the steps that must be taken to obtain the refunds and credits.
   (b)   At any time a subscriber's services are changed due to action by
licensee, licensee shall send the following notice:
   (i)   Products and services offered;
   (ii)   Prices and options for programming services and conditions of
subscription to programming and other services. In order that subscribers are
fully apprised of the charges they may incur, licensee shall note that
advertised rates are subject to additional taxes and fees;
   (iii)   Channel positions of programming carried on the system;
   (iv)   Subscribers' rights to downgrade or to disconnect.
   (c)   Customers will be notified of any changes in rates, programming
services, or channel positions as soon as possible in writing unless otherwise
expressly provided by federal law. Notice must be given to subscribers a
minimum of thirty (30) days in advance of such changes if the change is within
the control of the licensee. In addition, the licensee shall notify subscribers
thirty (30) days in advance of any significant changes in the other information
required by the preceding paragraph in writing. Notices of changes of
programming services and/or channel locations shall include a concise
description of the new programming service and the specific channel position of
that programming service. In addition, should the channel position be affected
by the introduction of a new service, such information must also be included in
the notice.
The city shall be notified of any change in rates, programming services,
channel position or policy at least forty-five (45) days in advance of such
change by letter delivered to the telecommunications administrator, except
where such notification is impossible because the change is beyond the control
of licensee or any affiliate, in which case the notice must be given as quickly
as possible. As part of this notice, licensee will tell the city how notice
will be provided to subscribers and provide a copy of the notice that will be
given to subscribers, or if the precise notice is not available, licensee will
provide the text of the notice. For informational purposes only, a listing of
licensee closings or holidays will be provided to the city annually, by no
later than January 1 of each year.
   (d)   Notice to subscribers must be reasonable.
   (e)   Notice of termination. Every notice of termination of service shall
include all of the following information:
   (i)   The name and address of the subscriber whose account is delinquent;
   (ii)   Current account balance;
   (iii)   The date by which payment is required in order to avoid termination
of service; and
   (iv)   The telephone number of a representative of licensee who can provide
additional information and handle complaints or initiate an investigation
concerning the service and charges in question.
   (f)   Special notice procedures
   (i)   At any time a person subscribes to any service, the person must be
specifically informed whether there will be a charge to drop the service.
   (ii)   If there is any charge for terminating a promotional or free product
or service, the charge must be disclosed in writing prior to connection of the
service or provision of the product.
   (iii)   At the time a person schedules a service call or installation,
licensee shall inform the person that the person is entitled to refunds or
credits if the licensee's personnel misses the appointment without the consent
of the person.
   (g)   Missed appointments. Under normal operating conditions, if licensee
does not arrive for installations or service calls by appointment within the
scheduled four-hour time frame agreed to by the person, the person may request
within thirty (30) days of the missed appointment and is entitled to receive a
twenty dollars ($20.00) credit in addition to providing the installation,
service and products as promised to the customer at the time the call was first
scheduled (for example, if the company had agreed to provide the install for
free, it would be obligated to provide the twenty dollars ($20.00) credit and
provide free installation). Failure to comply will subject licensee to
appropriate enforcement action.
   (4)   Service calls and response time. Under normal operating conditions,
each of the following standards will be met no less than ninety-five (95)
percent of the time, as measured on a quarterly basis:
   (a)   Installations to locations that are located within one hundred and
twenty-five (125) feet of the existing distribution system will be performed
within seven (7) business days after an order has been placed. Installations to
locations that are located more than 125 feet away from, but within three
hundred (300) feet of the existing distribution system will be performed within
fourteen (14) days after an order has been placed.
   (b)   Where a request for service can be satisfied without a service call,
the request must be satisfied within three (3) business days from the date of
request.
   (c)   For installations to locations that are more than three hundred (300)
feet from the existing distribution system, service must be provided within
thirty (30) days of the date the person requesting service agrees to pay the
charges associated with the installation. Nothing in this section
7A-20 permits a licensee to charge for extending service in an area where the
licensee is required to provide service pursuant to section
7A-11. Installations on new construction entitled to service under a license
agreement or this ordinance shall be completed within ninety (90) days of the
date of occupancy.
   (d)   The "appointment window" alternatives for installations, service
calls, and other installation activities will be either a specific time or, at
maximum, a four-hour time block during normal business hours. The licensee may
schedule service calls and other installation activities outside of normal
business hours for the express convenience of the customer.
   (e)   Licensee may not cancel an appointment with a person after the close
of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment without the
person's consent.
   (f)   If licensee's representative is running late for an appointment with a
subscriber and will not be able to keep the appointment as scheduled, licensee
will make an effort to contact the person directly. If, however, the person is
unavailable at the time the contact attempt is made, licensee will attempt a
second contact at least one more time during the previously agreed upon
appointment window. The appointment will be rescheduled, as necessary, at a
time which is convenient for the customer. This later contact is an independent
obligation and will not necessarily excuse a missed appointment. Contacting the
person will not negate any applicable requirement for a credit.
   (g)   Excluding conditions beyond the control of the licensee, the licensee
will begin working on "service interruptions" promptly and in no event later
than twenty-four (24) hours after the interruption becomes known to the
licensee. The licensee must begin actions to correct other service problems the
next business day after notification of the service problem. Merely
acknowledging the existence of the problem does not satisfy this requirement.
   (h)   Service interruptions must be corrected within thirty-six (36) hours
of the time that the interruption becomes known to the licensee.
   (i)   Other problems must be solved within ninety-six (96) hours of the time
that the problems become known to the licensee.
   (5)   Disconnect charges; time for disconnection. Licensee shall be
prohibited from levying a disconnect charge upon any subscriber who wishes to
stop subscribing to licensee's service. For purposes of billing, a request for
disconnection shall be effective immediately upon the subscriber's oral or
written request, and the subscriber may not be billed for any service provided
after the request, and is entitled to refunds on any prepaid period. However,
in the case of special promotions, a subscriber is not entitled to a refund of
prepayment amounts if the subscriber was fully and clearly informed in writing
prior to taking the service that prepaid amounts would not be returned. Nothing
prevents a licensee from establishing reasonable charges to disconnect the
service of persons who fail to pay their bills.
   (6)   Refunds, credits and rebates. In addition to such refunds, credits and
rebates provided for in the foregoing sections, subscribers shall be entitled
to a refund, rebate or credit in each of the following circumstances:
   (a)   In the case of any failure to notify a subscriber of a rate increase
that is implemented before the notice is corrected, the subscriber shall be
entitled to service at the old, lower rate until notice is provided as required
herein; provided that, if the licensee is not notified that the notice was
defective within thirty (30) days of the date the increase was implemented, the
old, lower rate will apply only for the first full monthly billing cycle;
   (b)   In the case of any failure to provide other required notices, where
the licensee implements the change before the notice violation is corrected:
   (i)   Where the change involves a change in services but not in charges,
subscribers as to whom the notice was defective will be provided a credit
equivalent to free basic service for one month upon the subscriber's request; a
complaint from the subscriber related to the notice will be deemed to be a
request for the credit;
   (ii)   Where the change involves a charge (e.g., a late fee), any
incremental increase in the charge, or in the case of a new charge, the entire
charge, shall be waived until the notice is corrected;
   (7)   Unscheduled service interruptions, notifications and sanctions.
   (a)   The licensee may interrupt system service after 7:00 a.m. and before
1:00 a.m. only upon necessary cause for the shortest time possible and only
after publishing notice of such service interruption, except for emergency
situations. Services may be interrupted between 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. for
routine testing, maintenance and repair, without notification, provided that
all such interruptions are limited to the shortest possible time. Except for
conditions not within the licensee's control, or for authorized and scheduled
interruptions, in the event of an aggregate of more than two (2) hours of
service interruptions or six (6) distinct service interruptions within a
twenty-four-hour period, the licensee shall provide a rebate for the twenty-
four-hour period to any customer that calls and reports the outage or that
requests a rebate.
   (b)   Subject to the preceding paragraph, except for acts of God, and except
in circumstances where prior approval has been obtained from the city, in the
event that there is repeated, unscheduled interruption of service to any
subscriber or user, the licensee shall, upon request, rebate a percentage of
the monthly fee to affected subscribers or users as follows:
   (i)   Three (3) daily rebates within any 30-day period: Twenty-five (25)
percent of the monthly fee in lieu of the required daily rebate in paragraph
(a) of this section;
   (ii)   Four (4) or more daily rebates within any 30-day period: One hundred
(100) percent rebate of the monthly fee in lieu of the required daily rebate in
subsection (b)(i) of this section;
   (iii)   Twenty-four(24) consecutive hours: Five (5) percent rebate of the
monthly fee;
   (iv)   Twenty-four (24) to forty-eight (48) consecutive hours: Fifteen (15)
percent rebate of the monthly fee;
   (v)   Forty-eight (48) to seventy-two (72) consecutive hours: Twenty-five
(25) percent rebate of the monthly fee;
   (vi)   Greater than seventy-two (72) consecutive hours: One hundred (100)
percent rebate of the monthly fee.
   (8)   Bills and billing disputes.
   (a)   Bills will be clear, concise and understandable. Bills must be fully
itemized, with itemizations including, but not limited to, basic and premium
service charges and equipment charges. Bills will also clearly delineate all
activity during the billing period, including optional charges, rebates and
credits. In case of a billing dispute, the licensee must respond to a written
complaint to a subscriber within thirty (30) days. If, on bills, licensee
chooses to itemize as a separate line item license fees and/or other
governmentally imposed fees attributable to the total bill, such fees must be
shown in accordance with any applicable law concerning licensee's ability to
itemize such fees.
   (b)   Refund checks or rebates will be issued promptly, but no later than
either (i) the customer's next billing cycle following resolution of the
request or thirty (30) days whichever is earlier, or (ii) a return of the
equipment supplied by the cable operator if service is terminated. Credits for
service will be issued no later than the customer's next billing cycle
following the determination that a credit is warranted.
   (c)   A specific due date at least ten (10) business days from the date of
mailing shall be indicated on every subscriber bill. This provision applies
only to active accounts in good standing, not those accounts pending disconnect
for prior delinquencies. A late charge or other fee for late payment may not be
imposed earlier than the later of (i) twenty-three (23) days after the bill is
mailed; or (ii) the twentieth (20th) day of the month in which the service for
which payment is sought is rendered. For purposes of determining whether a fee
may be imposed, the bill is deemed paid on the date licensee receives payment,
and it is licensee's responsibility to ensure that its posting and crediting
practices will not result in assessment of improper fees and charges upon
subscribers.
   (d)   Any subscriber who, in good faith, disputes all or part of any bill
has the option of withholding the disputed amount without disconnection or
imposition of late fees until licensee has investigated the dispute and has
made a determination that the amount is owed provided that:
   (i)   The subscriber pays all undisputed charges;
   (ii)   The subscriber provides written notification of the dispute to the
licensee in a timely manner and includes identifying information; and
   (iii)   The subscriber cooperates in determining the appropriateness of the
charges in dispute.
   (e)   Subscriber bills from licensee shall include the name, address, and
telephone number of the telecommunications administrator. The
telecommunications administrator will provide the required information to
licensee on an annual basis by January 1, or as needed.
   (f)   Licensee shall forward all regulatory billing inserts affecting rates,
policies and procedures and copies of all other mailings required by law or
license to subscribers to the telecommunications administrator fifteen (15)
days prior to the time they are provided to subscribers. Copies of notices to
subscribers must be forwarded to the telecommunications administrator to
determine compliance pursuant to applicable law.
   (g)   It is licensee's obligation to pick up any equipment upon termination
of any service if licensee initially delivered the equipment to the subscriber.
Any charges imposed for pick-up of such equipment shall not exceed the charge
for delivering the equipment, assuming that the customer honors the equipment
pick-up appointment agreed to with the company.
   (9)   Complaints. If a complaint to a licensee cannot be resolved to a
customer's satisfaction, the city may consider individual cases brought to its
attention and may seek that information necessary to investigate the dispute
and to exercise any authority the city may have to resolve the dispute.
   (10)   Disconnection or denial of service.
   (a)   Licensee shall not terminate residential service for nonpayment of a
delinquent account unless licensee provides initial written notice of the
delinquency and impending disconnection at least ten (10) days prior to the
proposed termination. The notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the
subscriber to whom the service is billed. This notice shall not be sent until
thirty (30) days after the delinquent date of the bill. The disconnect notice
may be included as part of a mailing containing a billing statement so long as
the disconnect notice is prominent and in at least sixteen-point bold type.
   (b)   Licensee shall terminate service only on days when the subscriber can
reach a representative of licensee either in person or by telephone. Service
terminated without good cause must be restored without charge for the service
restoration. In addition, licensee must provide two (2) months' credit or
refund for basic service plus one other service tier selected by the subscriber
at no cost to the subscriber. Good cause includes, but is not limited to,
failure to pay, payment by check for which there are insufficient funds, or
theft of service.
   (c)   Subject to provisions of the license agreement, licensee shall furnish
and maintain services to each person in the license area who makes a request to
receive any programming service. Nothing in these standards shall limit the
right of licensee to deny service to any household or individual which has a
negative credit or service history with licensee, which may include nonpayment
of bills or theft or damage to licensee's equipment, or who has threatened or
assaulted employees of licensee in the course of their employment, or for other
good cause, which must be documented; provided, however, that in the event
service is denied, licensee will give notice to the subscriber of the right to
contact the appropriate regulatory authority, providing name, address, and
phone number as directed by the licensing authority.
   (11)   Deposits, refunds, and credits.
   (a)   Licensee may require refundable deposits for service or equipment.
Upon termination of service for any reason, subscribers will be entitled to
receive a refund or credit against amounts owed to licensee equal to the
deposit.
On all deposits, licensee shall be required to pay simple interest at a rate of
one- half ( 1/2) percent per month (six (6) percent per year). Such interest
shall be accrued and payable upon termination of service. Upon termination of
service for any reason, subscribers will be entitled to receive a refund or
credit against amounts owed licensee equal to the deposit plus accumulated
interest. The rate may be modified to reflect prevailing market rates upon
approval by city which shall not be unreasonably withheld. Such interest shall
be accrued on deposits charged to subscribers after the effective date of the
license.
   (b)   Refund checks will be issued within thirty (30) days following the
resolution of the event giving rise to the refund. In addition to a refund, if
licensee fails to mail a check for a refund to any subscriber disconnecting
service with an outstanding credit of three dollars ($3.00) or more within
thirty (30) days of the date service is ended, and the subscriber has returned
all licensee-owned equipment, the subscriber is entitled to receive a ten
dollars ($10.00) penalty payment, in addition to the total refund due. Failure
to comply with the ten dollars ($10.00) penalty provision shall be grounds for
appropriate enforcement actions by the city. Refunds will be provided to
subscribers with outstanding credits of less than three dollars ($3.00) upon
request by the subscriber.
   (c)   Credits for service will be issued no later than thirty (30) days
after the event giving rise to a credit or the subscriber's next billing cycle
following the determination that a credit is warranted, whichever occurs first.
   (12)   Rates, fees, and charges.
   (a)   Licensee shall not, except to the extent permitted by law, impose any
fee or charge on any subscriber for service calls to said subscriber's premises
to perform any repair or maintenance work related to licensee-installed
equipment necessary to receive service, except for any such work which was
necessitated solely by a negligent or wrongful act of said subscriber.
   (b)   Where the actions of licensee, its agent(s) or subcontractors(s) can
be shown upon a reasonable demonstration of evidence to have contributed to the
theft, loss or damage or a converter or other equipment lawfully used by a
subscriber, the subscriber's liability with respect to said converter or other
equipment shall be reduced to the extent of such contributing actions.
   (c)   Licensee shall be entitled to recover a reasonable fee for all checks
returned due to insufficient funds.
   (13)   Employee and vehicle identification. All personnel and service
vehicles of licensee or its subcontractors contacting subscribers or potential
subscribers outside the office of licensee or performing any work within city
rights-of-way must be clearly identified as associated with licensee through
visible uniform insignia, photo identification devices, or signs affixed to the
vehicle.
   (14)   Rights reserved by city. City reserves the right to establish
additional, reasonable subscriber service standards from time to time, as may
be necessary.
(Ord. No. 8937, § 2, 9-2-97)
Sec. 7A-21. Rates.
   (1)   The city may regulate rates except to the extent prohibited by state
and federal law.
   (2)   Each licensee shall file with the city an up-to-date rate schedule of
all subscriber and user rates, fees and charges for all cable services and
products provided, which schedule shall be on file in the office of the
telecommunications administrator at all times. Any and all proprietary special
rates for institutions, motels, hotels, inns, multiple-family dwelling units
(referred to below as "MDU" rates), shall be made available for inspection
promptly upon the city's request. Should a federal agency of competent
jurisdiction rule that the City has no authority to review the MDU rates for
reasonableness or to prevent discrimination, then the rates would only be
available for inspection on the same basis as other books and records would be
available for inspection. Licensee shall file any revised rate schedule with
the telecommunications administrator in accordance with the requirements of
section
7A-20.
   (3)   The system shall be operated in a manner consistent with the
principles of fairness and equal accessibility of facilities, equipment,
channels, studios and other services to all residents, businesses, public
agencies or other entities having a legitimate use for the system; and no one
shall be arbitrarily excluded from its use. The licensee shall not discriminate
in the assessment, levy, charge, imposition or collection of rates, fees or
charges on the basis of race, color, religion, ancestry, sex, age, disability
which includes but is not limited to, HIV/AIDS, national origin, sexual
orientation, gender identity, familial status and/or marital status.
   (4)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the reduction
or waiving of charges in conjunction with promotional campaigns for the purpose
of attracting subscribers or users, so long as the promotion is bona fide,
temporary, and available to all similarly situated persons throughout the city.
   (5)   Licensee may request in writing and city may grant, temporary
authority to licensees for periods not to exceed twenty-four (24) months to
offer specifically identified services, packages and combinations of services
to selected groups of subscribers at terms and conditions not generally
available to all subscribers. The city may refuse to grant this waiver unless
it is persuaded upon sufficient showing by licensee that the temporary
authority will be used solely to offer services on an experimental or test
market basis, and that the services will either be withdrawn at the conclusion
of the test or will be made generally available to all subscribers in a
uniform, consistent and nondiscriminatory manner.
(Ord. No. 8937, § 2, 9-2-97; Ord. No. 11057, § 1, 3-27-13)
Sec. 7A-22. Reports.
   (1)   Annual reports. On or before March 31 of each year during the term of
the license agreement, the licensee shall submit a written report to the
licensing authority. The reports shall be submitted in accordance with forms
prepared by the telecommunications administrator after providing a period for
notice and comment and providing interested parties an opportunity for notice
and comment on the forms. Until such forms are prepared after notice and
opportunity for comment, the annual reports shall be prepared in accordance
with the general business practices of a licensee and shall contain at least
the following information regarding the previous calendar year:
   (a)   A summary of activities in the development of the system, including
but not limited to services begun or discontinued, total number of subscribers,
homes passed, subscribers added or discontinued and user participation, all per
the provisions of this chapter and the license agreement.
   (b)   A list of all complaints and system downtime received or experienced
during the reporting period. All such submitted data shall include complaint
disposition and response time.
   (c)   A summary by category of complaints, identifying the number and nature
of complaints and their dispositions.
   (d)   A fully audited revenue report, or a revenue report certified as
correct by a Licensee's chief financial officer.
   (e)   A projected income statement and statement of projected construction
for the next two (2) years.
   (f)   A list of officers and members of the board of directors of the
licensee and its parents.
   (g)   A list of stockholders holding five (5) percent or more of the voting
stock of the licensee or its parents.
   (h)   A copy of the licensee's annual report and those of its parents and
subsidiaries.
   (i)   A full schedule of all subscriber and user rates, fees and charges for
all cable services provided.
   (j)   A copy of subscriber and user agreements used by the licensee.
provided that, when it provides the information required by subsections (i) and
(j), a licensee need not include proprietary MDU rates and agreements.
   (2)   Annual surveys. In addition to providing such other information as may
be requested under section
7A-22(1), the licensee shall annually provide the following special reports:
   (a)   An annual opinion survey report which identifies subscriber
satisfaction/dissatisfaction with cable services offered by the licensee.
Surveys required to make said report shall be scientifically valid. In lieu of
this obligation, a licensee may agree in a license agreement to pay a fixed sum
to the city so that the city may perform the survey.
   (b)   An annual plant survey report, which shall be a survey of the
licensee's plant and a full report thereon including new construction and
complete annual outages by area of the city. The purpose of the report is to
assure the city that the plant is being operated and maintained in accordance
with applicable law. Said report shall include but not be limited to an
appropriate engineering evaluation and shall be conducted in conformance with
standard engineering practices. This requirement does not apply during a period
of initial construction, or upgrade mandated by a license.
   (3)   Quarterly reports. Within forty-five (45) days of the end of each
calendar quarter, each licensee shall submit a written report to the licensing
authority. The reports shall be submitted in accordance with forms prepared by
the telecommunications administrator after providing a period for notice and
comment and providing interested parties an opportunity for notice and comment
on the forms. Until such forms are prepared after notice and opportunity for
comment, the quarterly reports shall be prepared in accordance with the general
business practices of a licensee and shall contain the following information:
   (a)   A report showing compliance with the requirements regarding telephone
calls specified in the customer service standards.
   (b)   The percentage of time service interruptions were cured within thirty-
six (36) hours; the average time from notice that a problem existed to final
cure; and the percentage of time that other service calls were resolved within
ninety-six (96) hours.
   (c)   The percentage of time standard and non-standard installations were
completed within the time required by sections
7A-11 and
7A-20.
   (d)   The total number of complaints received for the quarter, and the
number of complaints by type of complaint; and complaints received as a
percentage of basic subscribers.
   (e)   The total number of outages, divided into planned and unplanned
outages, and showing the number of outages and the total duration of outages.
An outage is defined as a loss of audio or video or impairment of audio or
video affecting more than one subscriber.
   (f)   A list of all services offered by the licensee, including any non-
cable services; provided that, after the initial filing, subsequent filings
need only identify new services and changes in services offered.
   (4)   Reports to others. The licensee shall file promptly with the city a
copy of any document the licensee files with the FCC, the Securities and
Exchange Commission or any other regulatory agency with jurisdiction pertaining
to the system. To the extent that such documents contain, to the satisfaction
of the city manager, the information required by other reports hereunder, the
city manager may suspend the requirements to file such other reports with the
city so as to avoid duplication and the administrative costs attendant thereto.
Alternatively, a licensee may comply with this subsection (4) by providing the
city a list and short description of the documents it files, and providing
copies of the documents upon request. The list must be kept current.
   (5)   Material misrepresentations. Any material misrepresentation made by
the licensee in any report required by this section shall subject the licensee
to the penalty provisions of this chapter and shall subject the licensee to all
remedies available to the city by law.
   (6)   Access to books and records.
   (a)   The city may inspect and copy books and records of the licensee that
are reasonably necessary to the enforcement of any provision of this chapter;
the license agreement; to the conduct of performance evaluation sessions; or to
the exercise of any authority that the city may have under the same or any
other provision of applicable law. Without limiting the foregoing, a licensee
shall provide the city access to complaint data to enable the city to fully
investigate subscriber complaints. Books and records shall be produced to the
city for inspection at City Hall or at such other mutually agreed upon location
within the city. The city will not unreasonably refuse a request that it
inspect documents at the licensee's facilities within the city. Provided,
however, that nothing in this chapter shall be read to require the licensee to
violate any provision of federal or state law relating to customer privacy.
Information requested shall be made available for inspection within fourteen
(14) business days of a request therefor, which period shall be subject to
extension for good cause shown where no harm will result to the public interest
from the delay.
   (b)   A licensee must produce the books and records requested by the city
even if the licensee does not believe that the request satisfies the standard
set out above, unless the city waives the requirement, or the licensee obtains
a court order from a court of competent jurisdiction enjoining the request.
   (c)   A licensee may not refuse to produce books and records on the ground
that such books and records contain proprietary information. However, all
proprietary information received by the city from a licensee and clearly marked
as such shall not be publicly disclosed insofar as permitted by the Arizona
Public Records Law, A.R.S. 39-121 et. seq. and other applicable law. The city
will notify a licensee if any third party seeks access to any document that is
marked confidential, and the city will withhold releasing the document for the
maximum period permitted by law to permit the licensee to seek court protection
against the release of the requested documents.
(Ord. No. 8937, § 2, 9-2-97)
Sec. 7A-23. Performance evaluation sessions.
To provide for technological advances in the state of the art of cable
communications, to promote the maximum degree of flexibility and utilization of
the system, to evaluate the licensee's performance and compliance with the
provisions of this chapter and the license agreement, and to evaluate the
performance of every operator to ensure that the quality of every operator's
service continues to reasonably meet the needs of the community, the city and
each licensee shall comply with the following review procedures:
   (1)   The city may commence a regularly scheduled review session any time
after the second anniversary date of the execution of the license agreement and
subsequently every two (2) years thereafter. All review sessions shall be open
to the public notice of date, time, location and agenda shall be given by the
licensee, at the licensee's cost, by provision of the city of a bill insert to
be included in subscribers' bills to arrive at least fourteen (14) days prior
to the meeting, and by publication at least once in a newspaper of citywide
general circulation at least one (1) week prior to each session. In addition,
the licensee shall announce the date, time and location of each session on each
of at least five (5) days immediately preceding each session at a minimum of
six (6) regularly scheduled intervals daily on at least two (2) subscriber
channels of the system. Provided that, the city may waive the billing notice
requirement where the notice would be ineffective, and provided further, a
licensee is not obligated to provide notice using billing inserts unless: (i)
at least ninety (90) days prior to the date scheduled for the review session,
the city notifies licensee that it wishes the licensee to provide notice using
billing inserts; and (ii) the city provides the licensee the text to be used in
the billing inserts or, if the licensee requests it, the billing inserts
(prepared in accordance with the standard format for billing inserts used by a
licensee).
   (2)   Topics for discussion and review at the regular review sessions shall
include but shall not be limited to the following:
Rate structure, free or discounted services, application of new technologies,
system performance, services provided, programming, subscriber complaints, user
complaints, rights of privacy, construction progress, community service channel
implementation and utilization, amendments to this chapter, undergrounding
process and developments in the law.
   (3)   The city may hold special review sessions at any time on specific
issues relevant to the system. All such review sessions shall be open to the
public and shall be advertised, if possible, as provided in paragraph (1) of
this section. Either the city or the licensee may select additional topics for
discussion at any regular or special review session.
   (4)   The city shall provide for the taking of written minutes and a
recording of all review sessions held.
(Ord. No. 8937, § 2, 9-2-97)
Sec. 7A-24. Renewal, revocation, or forfeiture of license.
   (1)   Renewal. The procedure for considering renewal of the license
agreement shall be as provided by federal law.
   (2)   Revocation, procedure. Where, after notice and providing the licensee
an opportunity to be heard (if such opportunity is timely requested by a
licensee), the city finds that the facility is being maintained or operated in
violation of this chapter or in substantial violation of the terms of the
license, the city may revoke the license. The license may not be revoked unless
the licensee (1) was given notice of the default; and (2) sixty (60) days to
cure the default; and (3) the licensee failed to cure the default fully and
completely to prevent the recurrence of the same or a similar violation, or to
propose a schedule for curing the default acceptable to the city where it is
impossible to cure the default in sixty (60) days; except that, fraud shall be
deemed incurable. The city manager or his designee is authorized to provide the
notice and conduct a proceeding that provides the licensee an opportunity to be
heard, and to issue a recommended decision, but any such decision may be
appealed to the city council. Any appeal must be filed within thirty (30) days
of the decision of the city manager or it shall be deemed waived.
   (3)   Exceptions/forfeiture. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city may
declare the license forfeited where the licensee (1) fails to begin to exercise
its rights under the license or fails to commence or complete any required
rebuild of its system within nine (9) months of a period specified in the
license; (2) willfully stops operating the cable system as it is required to
operate it under the license in a substantial portion of the license area; (3)
without the prior consent of the city, transfers the license; or (4) defrauds
or attempts to defraud the city or the operator's customers. However, before
declaring the license forfeited, the city shall notify the licensee in writing
of its intent to declare the license forfeited and provide the licensee with an
opportunity to show cause why the license should not be forfeited.
   (4)   Effect of termination or forfeiture. Upon termination or forfeiture of
a license, whether by action of the city as provided above, or by passage of
time, the licensee shall be obligated to cease using the cable system for the
purposes authorized by the license.
   (5)   Remedies cumulative. All remedies under this chapter and any license
are cumulative unless otherwise expressly stated. The exercise of one remedy
shall not foreclose use of another, nor shall the exercise of a remedy or the
payment of liquidated damages or penalties relieve a licensee of its
obligations to comply with its license. Remedies may be used singly or in
combination; in addition, the city may exercise any rights it has at law or
equity. Recovery by the city of any amounts under insurance, the performance
bond, the security fund or letter of credit, or otherwise, does not limit a
licensee's duty to indemnify the city in any way; nor shall such recovery
relieve a licensee of its obligations under a license, limit the amounts owed
to the city, or in any respect prevent the city from exercising any other right
or remedy it may have. Nothing herein shall be read to authorize the double-
recovery of damages.
   (6)   Right to require dismantling. In the event that the city exercises its
option to require the licensee to dismantle the system, the licensee shall, in
an expeditious manner, at its own expense and at the direction of the city,
restore any property, public or private, to the condition in which it existed
prior to the erection or construction of the system, including any improvements
made to such property subsequent to the construction of the system.
(Ord. No. 8937, § 2, 9-2-97)
Sec. 7A-25. Continuity of service.
The licensee shall provide continuous service for the entire term of the
license agreement to all subscribers and users in return for payment of the
established rates, fees and charges. If the licensee overbuilds, rebuilds,
modifies, or seeks permission to transfer the system; or if the city revokes,
fails to renew, or otherwise terminates the license agreement or declares it
forfeited, or elects to purchase the system; or if for any reason the license
becomes void, the licensee shall continue to operate the system in a normal and
orderly manner until an orderly and lawful change of operation is effectuated.
This period of operation shall not exceed thirty-six (36) months from the date
of occurrence of any of the above events, or the date any appeals of the same
are finally concluded, whichever is later. During such interim period, the
licensee shall not make any material, administrative or operational change that
would tend to (1) degrade the quality of service, (2) decrease revenues, or (3)
materially increase expenses, without the express written permission of the
city. In addition to providing grounds for termination, if the licensee fails
to operate the system for ninety-six (96) consecutive hours without prior
approval of the city or fails to continue operation on the occurrence of any of
the events stated in this section, the city shall have the right to operate the
system, either directly or through a designate, until such time as a new
operator is selected. If the city is required to fulfill this obligation for
the licensee, the licensee shall reimburse the city for any and all costs, fees
or damages incurred by the city.
(Ord. No. 8937, § 2, 9-2-97)
Sec. 7A-26. Purchase of system by city.
   (1)   Rights To purchase. In the event the city terminates, or revokes the
license agreement or declares the license forfeited pursuant to any provisions
of this chapter, or at the normal expiration of the license agreement (referred
to collectively and individually in this section by use of the term terminate
or termination), the city shall have the first option, directly or as an
intermediary, to purchase the system. The city shall have ninety (90) days
prior to the effective date of termination and an additional ninety (90) days
following the conclusion of any appeal of the termination, to notify the
licensee of the city's intent to exercise the option to purchase stated herein.
   (2)   Valuation. In the event of a termination of the license agreement by
the city for cause, the city may purchase the system for an equitable price.
"Equitable price" means fair market value adjusted downward for the harm to the
city or subscribers, if any, resulting from Licensee's breach of its license
agreement, or violation of this chapter, and as further adjusted to account for
other equitable factors that may be considered consistent with 47 U.S.C. § 547.
Upon other termination of the license agreement the value of the system shall
be solely based on the fair market value of the system.
   (a)   No value shall be assigned to the license itself whether termination
is or is not for cause.
   (b)   "Valuation" as referred to above shall be determined by audit of
system assets pursuant to generally accepted auditing principles. Procedures
for valuation may be specified in a license agreement.
   (3)   Date of valuation. The date of valuation shall be ninety (90) days
after city gives licensee notice of its intent to exercise the option to
purchase.
   (4)   Transfer to city. Upon exercise of the city's option to purchase and
written notice of such action by the city to the licensee, the licensee shall,
immediately upon payment of the purchase price by the city, transfer to the
city possession and legal title to all system facilities and property, both
real and personal, free from any and all liens and encumbrances not agreed to
be assumed by the city in lieu of a portion of the purchase price; and the
licensee shall execute such warranty deeds or other instruments of conveyance
to the city as shall be necessary to effectuate this transfer.
(Ord. No. 8937, § 2, 9-2-97)
Sec. 7A-27. Foreclosure and receivership.
   (1)   In the case of a foreclosure or other judicial sale or termination of
lease of the plant, property or equipment of the licensee, or any substantial
part thereof, or any rights under the license agreement, the licensee shall
serve written notice upon the city of any such event; and the city may serve
written notice of termination upon the licensee and the successful bidder at
such sale, in which event the license and the license agreement and all rights
and privileges of the licensee thereunder shall cease and terminate thirty (30)
days after service of such notice, unless:
   (a)   The mayor and council have approved the transfer of ownership of the
license, in accordance with all pertinent provisions of section
7A-28 ("Transfers and Assignments"); and
   (b)   Such successful bidder shall have covenanted and agreed with the city,
in writing in a form approved by the city attorney, to assume and be bound by
all the terms and conditions of this chapter and the license agreement.
   (2)   The license shall terminate one hundred twenty (120) days after the
appointment of a receiver, or trustee, to take over and conduct the business of
the licensee, whether in receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other
related action or proceeding.
   (3)   Failure to comply with the provisions of paragraph (1) of this section
shall be deemed an unauthorized transfer pursuant to the provisions of section
7A-28 ("Transfers and Assignments").
(Ord. No. 8937, § 2, 9-2-97)
Sec. 7A-28. Transfers and assignments.
The procedures for transfers and assignments of the license agreement will
conform to the requirements as set forth in federal law and applicable FCC
regulations and will include the following requirements:
   (1)   The licensee shall not sell, transfer, assign, exchange or release, or
permit the sale, transfer, assignment, exchange or release of more than five
(5) percent of the ownership of the system or rights in the license agreement
to a person (hereinafter "proposed transferee"), without the prior written
authorization of the mayor and council. For purposes of this section, a merger
or consolidation shall be deemed a transfer or assignment. Any transaction in
which actual working control of a licensee or its system, in whatever manner
exercised, is transferred, shall be deemed a transfer. The mayor and council
specifically reserve the right to deny, restrict or condition authorization to
transfer upon the criteria stated in this section and any other lawful criteria
the mayor and council determine to be necessary in the public interest.
   (2)   The licensee shall provide the following information to the city:
   (a)   All information and forms required under federal law or the equivalent
of such forms if no longer required by federal law;
   (b)   Any contracts or other documents that constitute the proposed
transaction and all documents, schedules, exhibits, or the like referred to
therein;
   (c)   Any shareholder reports or filings with the Securities and Exchange
Commission that discuss the transaction;
   (d)   Complete information regarding any potential impact of the transfer on
subscriber rates and service and system debt; and
   (e)   A brief summary of the proposed transferee's plans for at least the
next five (5) years regarding line extension, plant and equipment upgrades,
channel capacity, expansion or elimination of services, and any other changes
affecting or enhancing the performance of the cable system.
   (3)   Once the required information has been provided, the transfer
application shall be subject to review by the city and any approval shall be
subject to the city's determination that:
   (a)   The proposed transferee has the qualifications to construct, operate
and repair the system proposed in conformity with applicable law;
   (b)   The proposed transferee will accept the conditions established by the
city on the transfer; and the proposed transferee will enter into a license and
comply with any conditions precedent to its effectiveness. This section does
not authorize the city to exercise authority it does not otherwise have under
applicable law.
   (4)   Any approval will also be subject to a determination by the city that:
   (a)   There will be no adverse effect on subscribers, the public, or the
city's interest in the license;
   (b)   Transferee will agree to be bound by all the conditions of the license
and to assume all the obligations of its predecessor;
   (c)   Any outstanding compliance and compensation issues will be resolved or
preserved to the satisfaction of the city; and
   (d)   The proposed transferee and the current licensee have provided all
required information so that the city may act on the application.
   (5)   Any proposed transferee shall execute an agreement, in such form as
acceptable to the city attorney, that it will assume and be bound by all of the
provisions, terms and conditions of this chapter, the license agreement and any
other conditions the mayor and council may have established in granting
authorization as contemplated by subsections (1) through (4).
   (6)   No transfer under paragraph (1) of this section shall be permitted
within fifteen (15) months prior to the expiration date of the license
agreement.
   (7)   The occurrence of an unauthorized transfer or assignment may, at the
option of the city, provide the mayor and council with cause to immediately
terminate the license agreement and accelerate all of the obligations and
rights as provided in section
7A-24.
   (8)   From and after any occurrence constituting an unauthorized transfer or
assignment, the putative transferee shall not make, execute or enter into any
deed, deed of trust, mortgage, contract, conditional sales contract or any
loan, lease, pledge, security agreement, sale, pole agreement or any other
agreement or hypothecation concerning any system facilities or property,
whether real or personal, without the written approval of the mayor and
council.
   (9)   Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit the use of the
licensee's property as collateral for security in regard to construction
financing. However, any such financing arrangements shall be subject to all
provisions of this chapter and the license agreement. In no case may any
person, including the institution holding the system as collateral, succeed to
the ownership or control of the system or the license without the prior
approval of the city.
   (10)   Nothing in this section shall be read to prohibit licensee from
providing information subject to the protections for proprietary information
under this chapter or a license agreement.
(Ord. No. 8937, § 2, 9-2-97)
Sec. 7A-29. Subscriber antennas.
The licensee is expressly prohibited from requiring the removal of any
potential or existing subscriber antennas as a condition for provision of
service.
(Ord. No. 8937, § 2, 9-2-97)
Sec. 7A-30. Indemnification and disputes regarding issuance of license.
   (1)   The licensee shall indemnify, save harmless and defend the city, its
mayor and council, appointed boards and commissions, officers and employees,
individually and collectively from all fines, liens, suits, claims, demands,
actions, costs of litigation, attorneys' fees, judgments or liability of any
kind (including but not limited to libel, slander, invasion of privacy,
unauthorized use of any trademark, trade name or service mark, copyright
infringement, injury, death or damage to person or property) arising out of or
in any way connected with the installation, construction, operation,
maintenance or condition of the system. The licensee shall assume all risks in
the operation of the system and shall be solely responsible and answerable for
any and all accidents or injuries to persons or property arising out of the
performance of the license agreement. The amounts and types of insurance
coverage requirements set forth in section
7A-31 ("insurance") shall in no way be construed as limiting the scope of
indemnity set forth in this section. The city shall give the licensee timely
written notice of the making of any claim or the commencement of any action,
suit or other proceeding covered by the indemnity of this section, where the
licensee is not a party thereto.
   (2)   Disputes regarding issuance of license:
   (a)   Licensee shall indemnify save harmless and defend the city, its mayor
and council, appointed boards and commissions, officers and employees,
individually and collectively from all fines, liens, suits, claims, demands,
actions, costs of litigation, attorneys' fees, judgments or liability of any
kind arising from the defense of any litigation brought by third parties
challenging the right of the city to issue the license under state law. The
city shall give the licensee timely written notice of the making of any claim
or the commencement of any action, suit or other proceeding covered by the
indemnity of this section, where the licensee is not a party thereto. In the
event that any such litigation ensues, the city may, but is not required to,
tender the defense of such litigation to licensee, which shall then defend the
litigation; provided, however, that if the city tenders such defense to
licensee, licensee shall have the right to retain counsel of its own choice, to
settle all or any part of the litigation on terms acceptable to licensee (and
as determined in the sole discretion of the city, acceptable to the city), or
at any time of its election, to terminate its license under the termination
terms provided in the license and withdraw from any such litigation.
   (b)   Licensee shall assume the risk of, and shall relinquish any claim
against the city in connection with any final, non-appealable determination by
a court of competent jurisdiction that the city lacked the current statutory
authority to issue the license.
(Ord. No. 8937, § 2, 9-2-97)
Sec. 7A-31. Insurance.
Within thirty (30) days after written notification of the award of a license by
the city, the licensee shall file with the city manager and maintain in full
force and effect throughout the term of the license agreement insurance
policies issued by an insurer duly authorized to conduct business in the state,
insuring with respect to the installation, construction, operation and
maintenance of the system as follows:
   (1)   Comprehensive general and automobile liability coverage including, but
not limited to: (a) blanket contractual liability; (b) completed operations
liability; (c) broad form property damage endorsement, including but not
limited to coverage for explosion, collapse and underground hazard; and (d)
automobile non-ownership liability. This insurance shall be written in the
following minimum amounts:
   (a)   For bodily injury, including death: Five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00) combined single limit;
   (b)   Property damage: Five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) combined
single limit;
   (c)   Comprehensive automobile liability; bodily injury: Five hundred
thousand dollars ($500,000.00) combined single limit;
   (d)   Excess umbrella liability in the minimum amount of five million
dollars ($5,000,000.00).
   (2)   Workers' compensation coverage as required by the laws, rules and
regulations of the state.
   (3)   All insurance policies required herein shall include the city as an
additional insured.
   (4)   With respect to the insurance required herein, the licensee shall be
solely responsible for all premiums due and payable.
   (5)   The insurance policies required by this section shall contain the
following endorsement, or substantially similar language approved by the city
attorney:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy of insurance may not be
canceled by the insurer nor the intention not to renew be stated by the insurer
until sixty (60) days after receipt by the City of Tucson, by registered mail,
of written notice of such intent to cancel or not to renew.
   (6)   It is each licensee's responsibility to ensure that every insurance
policy conforms to the city's requirements. Each licensee must provide a
standard insurance certificate or other adequate proof required by the city
attorney, updated whenever there is a change in the policy or insurer, showing
that the policies conform to all the requirements herein, without condition or
exception. No licensee may initiate or begin construction until such proof has
been provided.
(Ord. No. 8937, § 2, 9-2-97)
Sec. 7A-32. Bonding.
   (1)   Performance bond. Within thirty (30) days after written notification
of the award of a license by the city, the licensee shall file with the city a
performance bond for the benefit of the city in the amount of one million
dollars ($1,000,000.00) to be effective upon the execution of the license
agreement and conditioned that in the event that the licensee fails to comply
with any provision of this chapter, the license agreement or other law
applicable to the license, then there shall be recoverable jointly and
severally from the principals and surety any and all damages or costs suffered
or incurred by the city, including but not limited to attorney's fees and costs
of any action or proceeding, and including the full amount of any compensation,
indemnification, cost of removal or abandonment of any property or other costs
due and owing the city up to the full principal amount of such bond. The
performance bond shall be maintained in full as a continuing obligation during
the entire term of the license agreement and thereafter until the licensee
shall have satisfied in full any and all obligations to the city which arise
out of or pertain to the license agreement. The performance bond shall be
issued by a surety company authorized to do business in the state and shall be
in a form approved by the city attorney.
   (a)   The performance bond shall contain the following endorsement:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this bond may not be canceled by the
surety nor the intention not to renew be stated by the surety until sixty (60)
days after receipt by the City of Tucson, by registered mail, of written notice
of such intent to cancel or not to renew.
   (b)   None of the provisions of this section or section
7A-33 ("Security Fund"), nor any damages recovered by the city thereunder,
shall be construed to excuse the faithful performance by or limit the liability
of the licensee.
   (c)   Upon application to the city, the licensee shall be entitled to the
return of the performance bond at the expiration of the license agreement, or
any renewal thereof provided there is then no outstanding default or moneys due
the city by the licensee; provided that, nothing herein shall be read to excuse
a licensee from its obligation to have a performance bond during the renewal
term.
(Ord. No. 8937, § 2, 9-2-97)
Sec. 7A-33. Security fund.
   (1)   Within thirty (30) days after written notification of the award of a
license by the city, the licensee shall deposit with the finance director of
the city, and maintain on deposit throughout the term of the license agreement,
a security fund in the sum of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) in cash as
security for the faithful performance by the licensee of all provisions of this
chapter and the license agreement and compliance with all orders, permits and
directions of any agency or department of the city having jurisdiction over the
licensee's operations. In lieu of the cash deposit, a licensee may provide an
irrevocable and unconditional fifty thousand dollar ($50,000) letter of credit
with a local financial institution, in a form acceptable to the city attorney.
Both the letter of credit and the cash deposit are referred to by the term
"security fund" in subsections (2) through (6).
   (2)   Within fifteen (15) days after written notice to the licensee by the
city that the city has withdrawn any amount from the security fund, the
licensee shall deposit or pay to the finance director a sum of money sufficient
to restore such security fund to the original amount of fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00), or, in the case of a letter of credit, restore the letter of
credit to its full amount.
   (3)   If the licensee fails to pay the city any moneys due within the time
fixed in this chapter or the license agreement; or fails after ten (10) days'
written notice to pay to the city any taxes due and unpaid; or fails to repay
to the city after ten (10) days' written notice any damages, penalties, costs
or expenses which the city may be compelled to pay by reason of any act,
omission or default of the licensee; or fails, after ten (10) days' written
notice, to comply with any provision of this chapter or the license agreement
which the city reasonably determines can be remedied or partially cured by an
expenditure from the security fund, the finance director may immediately
withdraw the amount thereof, with interest and any penalties, from the security
fund. Upon such withdrawal, the finance director shall in writing notify the
licensee of the amount and date thereof. In the event the security fund is
insufficient to pay the city for any compensation, damage, penalties, costs or
expenses owing to the city pursuant to this chapter or the license agreement,
the performance bond may be drawn upon by the city for any amount due the city
over and above the amount in the security fund.
   (4)   The security fund, including any interest that may have accrued, shall
become the property of the city in the event that a license agreement is
terminated by the city by reason of a violation of this chapter or breach of
the license agreement pursuant to the provisions of section
7A-24 ("renewal and termination").
   (5)   Upon application to the city, the licensee shall be entitled to the
return of all moneys remaining in the cash security fund, including accrued
interest, at the expiration of the license agreement or any renewal thereof,
provided there is then no outstanding default or moneys owing on the part of
the licensee to the city; provided that, nothing herein shall be read to excuse
a licensee from its obligation to have a security fund during the renewal term.
   (6)   The rights reserved to the city with respect to the security fund are
in addition to all other rights of the city, whether reserved by this chapter
or authorized by law; and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with
respect to such security fund shall affect any other right the city may have.
(Ord. No. 8937, § 2, 9-2-97)
Sec. 7A-34. License fee.
   (1)   In addition to any other consideration supporting the award of a
license by the city, including but not limited to the granting of the privilege
to utilize the rights-of-way of the city pursuant to this chapter for the
purpose of providing cable service, and the license agreement to construct and
operate the system, the licensee shall pay to the city an amount equal to five
(5) percent of gross revenues.
   (2)   It is the intent of the city that these license fees may be utilized,
in the discretion of the mayor and council, to defray certain of the costs of
local regulation of the licensee and the system, to support the development and
maximum utilization of all PEG channels to generally encourage development of
the system to full utilization and potential, and for other purposes.
   (3)   Payments due the city under this section shall be computed quarterly,
for the preceding quarter, as of March 31, June 30, September 30 and December
31 of each year. Each quarterly payment shall be due and payable no later than
thirty (30) days after the applicable computation date. Each payment shall be
accompanied by a financial statement showing in detail the gross revenues of
the licensee relating to the relevant calendar quarter as well as any other
report required by section
7A-22.
   (4)   No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as an accord that the
amount paid is in fact the correct amount, nor shall such acceptance of payment
be construed as a release of any claim the city may have for further or
additional sums due and payable. The city or its designate shall have a right
to audit all financial records of licensee reasonably necessary to the
determination of whether gross revenues and franchise fees have been accurately
computed and paid upon the giving of reasonable notice and during normal
business hours. In the event an audit results in additional moneys owed the
city, interest shall be charged at the rate of one (1) percent per month on the
unpaid balance. If there is a dispute as to whether a particular item of
revenue is within the scope of the term "gross revenues," records will be
provided without prejudice to any claim the licensee might have that a
franchise fee is not owed on such revenues. Provided that, a licensee may
withhold revenue records for items that it claims are not "gross revenues" so
long as the licensee (i) provides a certified statement describing the nature
of the revenues contained in the records withheld and (ii) agrees, in its
license agreement, to pay all costs, including attorney fees, that the city
incurs should the city seek production of the records and ultimately prevail.
Each licensee shall be required, in accordance with the terms of its license,
to pay for any audit where the audit shows the licensee failed to pay the
license fee due to the city.
   (5)   The payment required pursuant to this section shall be in addition to
and not in lieu of any other tax, fee (including by way of example and not
limitation, permit fees), or payment owed the city by the licensee pursuant to
any other applicable provisions of this Code or laws of the state, unless the
tax, fee or payment is required to be treated as a franchise fee under 47
U.S.C. § 542.
(Ord. No. 8937, § 2, 9-2-97)
Sec. 7A-35. Rights reserved to the city.
   (1)   Without limitation upon the rights which the city might otherwise
have, every license issued shall be deemed to expressly reserve the following
rights, powers and authorities, whether expressly set forth in the license or
not:
   (a)   To exercise its governmental powers now or hereafter to the full
extent that such powers may be vested in or granted to the city.
   (b)   To determine any question of fact relating to the meaning, terms,
obligations or other aspects of this chapter and the license agreement, subject
to applicable judicial review.
   (c)   To inspect all construction or installation work performed by the
licensee, and to supervise all construction in the rights-of-way or on city
property.
   (2)   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed or construed to impair or
affect the right of the city to exercise its power of eminent domain to acquire
the property of the licensee for just compensation, which shall not include any
amount for the license itself or any privilege thereunder.
   (3)   The city reserves the right, during the term of the license agreement,
to install and utilize, upon the poles and conduits owned or jointly owned by
the licensee, any wire or pole fixtures required for municipal purposes,
without cost to the city so long as such installation and utilization does not
unduly interfere with the operation of the system.
(Ord. No. 8937, § 2, 9-2-97)
Sec. 7A-36. Nondiscrimination and equal employment opportunity.
   (1)   A licensee shall not deny service, access or otherwise discriminate
against subscribers, users or any resident of the city. In this regard, each
licensee shall comply with the human relations provisions of this Code, section
17-21, incorporated herein by this reference. The licensee shall strictly
adhere to the equal employment opportunity requirements of the FCC. The
licensee shall comply at all times with all other applicable federal, state and
city laws, rules and regulations, and all executive and administrative orders
relating to nondiscrimination.
   (2)   A licensee shall define the responsibility of each level of management
to ensure positive applications of the policy of equal opportunity, making all
reasonable efforts to assure employment at the higher and midmanagement levels
for minority persons. The licensee shall conduct a continuing review of
employment structures and employment practices and adopt positive recruitment
policies, on-the-job training, job design and other measures needed to assure
genuine equality of opportunity.
   (3)   Each licensee shall abide by the following general employment
practices:
   (a)   Recruiting through schools and colleges with high minority
enrollments.
   (b)   Maintaining systematic contacts with media advocacy groups, minority
and human relations organizations, leaders, spokespersons and other appropriate
recruitment sources within the county to make it known that qualified minority
persons sensitive to the needs of the minority community are being sought for
consideration whenever the licensee prepares to hire employees so as to assure
nondiscrimination in selection for employment.
   (c)   Instructing personally those on the licensee's staff who make hiring
decisions that applicants for all jobs are to be considered without
discrimination in accordance with the provisions of this section.
   (d)   Making all reasonable efforts to avoid the use of selection techniques
or tests that have the effect of discriminating against minority persons.
(Ord. No. 8937, § 2, 9-2-97)
Sec. 7A-37. Selection of licensee.
   (1)   Any person submitting a proposal for a license shall provide all
information required by this chapter and all other information as may be
solicited in the city's request for proposals or otherwise required by the
city. Any misrepresentation, failure, neglect or refusal to provide any
required information may at the option of the city render a proposal invalid
and it may be given no consideration. The requested information must be
complete and verified as true by the applicant. Every proposal must be
submitted as an offer, so that the city may incorporate the proposal into a
license agreement by reference and may condition the award of any license upon
the incorporation of the proposal into the license agreement.
   (2)   All proposals received by the city from the applicants shall become
the sole property of the city.
   (3)   The city reserves the right to reject any and all proposals and to
waive all informalities where the best interest of the city may be served.
   (4)   Before submitting a proposal, each applicant shall be solely
responsible for and must: (a) examine this chapter and the request for proposal
documents thoroughly; (b) be familiar with local conditions that may in any
manner affect performance under the license, including but in no event limited
to relevant demographics, topographics, pole attachment policies of appropriate
utility authorities, undergrounding, and subscriber and user desires; (c) be
familiar with federal, state and local laws, ordinances, rules and regulations
affecting performance under the license; and (d) carefully correlate all
observations with the requirements of this chapter and the request for
proposals documents.
   (5)   The city may make such investigations as it deems necessary to
determine the ability of the applicant to perform under the license agreement,
and the applicant shall furnish to the city all such information and date for
this purpose as the city may request. The city reserves the right to reject any
proposal if the evidence submitted by or investigation of such applicant fails
to satisfy the city that such applicant is properly qualified to carry out the
obligations of the license agreement, comply with the provisions of this
chapter, or to satisfactorily construct and operate the system. Conditional
proposals shall not be accepted.
   (6)   In evaluating an application for a license, the city may consider the
following factors:
   (a)   The extent to which the applicant has substantially complied with the
applicable law and the material terms of any existing cable license for the
city;
   (b)   Whether the quality of the applicant's service under any existing
license in the city, including signal quality, response to customer complaints,
billing practices and the like has been reasonable in light of the needs and
interests of the communities served;
   (c)   Whether the applicant has the financial, technical, and legal
qualifications to hold a cable license; which qualifications require that the
applicant can be relied upon to perform as promised and in accordance with
applicable law;
   (d)   Whether the application satisfies requirements established by the city
under this chapter or in an RFP or is otherwise reasonable to meet the future
cable-related needs and interests of the community, taking into account the
cost of meeting such needs and interests;
   (e)   Whether, to the extent not considered as part of this Code, the
applicant will provide adequate public, educational, and governmental use
capacity, facilities, or financial support thereof;
   (f)   Whether issuance of a license is in the public interest considering
the immediate and future effect on the public rights-of-way and private
property that would be used by the cable system, including the extent to which
installation or maintenance as planned would require replacement of property or
involve disruption of property, public services, or use of the public rights-
of-way; and the comparative superiority or inferiority of competing
applications; and
   (g)   Whether the approval of the application may eliminate or reduce
competition in the delivery of cable service in the city.
If the city finds that it is in the public interest to issue a license
considering the factors set forth above, the city may adopt a license ordinance
setting forth the terms and conditions of the license, which license shall
become effective upon satisfaction of conditions precedent to effectiveness,
and when signed and accepted by the applicant. If the city denies a license, it
will cause a written explanation of the denial to issue, which may be in any
appropriate form. Without limiting its authority to deny an application for a
license, the city specifically reserves the right to reject any application
that is incomplete or fails to respond to an RFP. Nothing in this chapter shall
be construed in any way to limit the discretion and legislative authority of
the city council in making decisions relative to the granting, denial, or
renewal of license.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, to the extent required by federal law, requests
for cable license renewal under the Cable Act will be received and reviewed in
a manner consistent with Section 626 of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 546, and
every provision of this Chapter shall be interpreted in a manner consistent
therewith.
   (7)   Application fees.
   (a)   Notwithstanding any other requirement of this chapter, each applicant
must furnish with its proposal a nonrefundable filing fee in the amount of
seventy-five hundred dollars ($7,500.00) by certified or cashiers check made
payable to the City of Tucson. No proposal for a license shall be considered
without receipt of such check.
   (b)   All checks received will be deposited to an account of the city and
will serve to recover all expenses incurred by the city in the preparation and
granting of the license, the execution of the license agreement and regulation
of the licensee pursuant to this chapter. Such expenses shall include but not
be limited to any and all publication costs, consultant's expenses and the
reasonable value of services performed by the city's employees, agents or
contractors.
   (c)   In the event that expenses exceed the total amount of filing fees
collected from the applicants, the applicant awarded the license shall pay to
the city (pro rata in the event more than one (1) applicant is awarded a
license) the excess amount, not to exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00)
within sixty (60) days of demand by the city.
   (8)   The decision of the mayor and council concerning licensee selection
shall be final.
(Ord. No. 8937, § 2, 9-2-97)
Sec. 7A-38. Cost of consultant.
Except as otherwise provided by law, notwithstanding any other payment required
by this chapter or the license agreement, when necessary to aid in the analysis
of matters relating to the system, including but not limited to, rate
investigations and regulation, technical standards, construction supervision or
market surveys in the city, the city shall be entitled to employ the services
of a consultant to assist and advise the city manager and the mayor and
council. All reasonable fees of the consultant incurred by the city in this
regard shall be shared equally by the licensee and the city, regardless of the
nature or outcome of any specific matter under consideration. The terms of this
section shall not apply to any research cost incurred by the city in connection
with the right of the city to purchase the system.
(Ord. No. 8937, § 2, 9-2-97)
Sec. 7A-39. Theft of service and tampering.
It shall be unlawful for any person, without the express consent of the
licensee, to make any connection or attachment, extension or division, whether
physically, acoustically, inductively, electronically or otherwise with or to
any segment of the system for the purpose of receiving or redistributing
service where the person has not paid for it. Nothing in this section shall be
read to prohibit a subscriber to cable service to utilize lawful subscriber-
owned equipment in the enjoyment of such service.
(Ord. No. 8937, § 2, 9-2-97)
Sec. 7A-40. Damages.
By execution of the license agreement, the licensee agrees that failure to
comply with the provisions of this chapter and the license agreement will
result in damage to the city, and that it will be impracticable to determine
the actual amount of such damage; and that, in addition to any other damages
suffered by the city or remedies available to it, the licensee will pay to the
city the following amounts as adjusted for inflation chargeable by the city to
the security fund established in section
7A-33 ("Security Fund") of this chapter; provided that nothing herein prevents
the city from establishing different liquidated damage amounts in a license,
based on the damage likely to be caused by the particular licensee, and to the
extent different damages are specified in a license agreement for the same
violation, the damages in the license agreement will control. Procedures, if
any, for notice and opportunity to cure, may be provided for in a license
agreement.
   (1)   For failure to timely file required plans, data or reports pursuant to
this chapter and the license agreement--Fifty dollars ($50.00) per day.
   (2)   For failure to timely comply with lawful orders of the city--Fifty
dollars ($50.00) per day.
   (3)   For failure to complete construction or commence operations of the
portion of the system that is primarily intended to serve residential
subscribers pursuant to this chapter and the license agreement--Seven hundred
dollars ($700.00) per day, or where identifiable, one dollar ($1.00) per day
for each affected subscriber.
   (4)   For failure to provide the services proposed by the licensee pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter and incorporated into the license agreement,
including but not limited to PEG channel activation, equipment and personnel--
One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day.
   (5)   For failure to timely pay the license fee or other moneys due the city
pursuant to this chapter and the license agreement--Two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) per day.
(Ord. No. 8937, § 2, 9-2-97)
Sec. 7A-41. Penalties.
   (1)   Where this chapter provides alternative penalties or remedies, they
shall be cumulative; and the imposition of one penalty or remedy shall not
prevent the imposition of any other penalty or remedy provided for.
   (2)   Any person convicted of violating any provision of this chapter or any
rule or regulation promulgated hereunder shall, upon conviction, be fined not
less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) and costs for each offense or may be imprisoned for not more than
six (6) months, or both. Each day of a continuing violation shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense.
(Ord. No. 8937, § 2, 9-2-97)
Sec. 7A-42. Severability.
If any provision, section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this
chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such
invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions of this chapter. It is the intent of the city in adopting
this chapter that no portion or provision thereof shall become inoperative or
fail by reason of any invalidity or unconstitutionality of any other portion or
provision, and to this end all provisions of this chapter are declared to be
severable.
(Ord. No. 8937, § 2, 9-2-97)
Chapter 7B
COMPETITIVE TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Sec.
7B-1.   Short title.
Sec.
7B-2.   Definitions.
Sec.
7B-3.   Findings; purpose.
Sec.
7B-4.   License application and agreement.
Sec.
7B-5.   Franchise application and agreement.
Sec.
7B-6.   Policy of innovation.
Sec.
7B-7.   Time is of the essence.
Sec.
7B-8.   License or franchise required.
Sec.
7B-9.   Grant of authority.
Sec.
7B-10.   Local regulatory framework.
Sec.
7B-11.   Regulation costs.
Sec.
7B-12.   Geographic area of the system.
Sec.
7B-13.   Shared facilities.
Sec.
7B-14.   Conditions of street occupancy.
Sec.
7B-15.   Use, rental or lease of utility poles and facilities.
Sec.
7B-16.   Construction and technical standards.
Sec.
7B-17.   Provision of service and equipment to the city.
Sec.
7B-18.   Renewal and termination.
Sec.
7B-19.   Purchase of system by city.
Sec.
7B-20.   Foreclosure and receivership.
Sec.
7B-21.   Transfers and assignments.
Sec.
7B-22.   Indemnification.
Sec.
7B-23.   Insurance.
Sec.
7B-24.   Bonding.
Sec.
7B-25.   Security deposit.
Sec.
7B-26
.   License or franchise fee.
Sec.
7B-26.1. Alternative license fee for long distance only licenses.
Sec.
7B-27.   Rights reserved to the city.
Sec.
7B-28.   Nondiscrimination and equal employment opportunities.
Sec.
7B-29.   Application for licenses and franchises.
Sec.
7B-30.   Cost of consultant.
Sec.
7B-31.   Damages.
Sec.
7B-32.   Remedies, violation or civil infraction.
Sec.
7B-33.   Severability.
Sec.
7B-34.   Effective date; application to existing systems.
Sec.
7B-35.   Permit moratorium.
Sec.
7B-36.   Limited point-of-presence only licenses authorized.
Sec.
7B-37.   Exemption for pre-statehood telecommunications providers.
Sec.
7B-38.   No vested rights.
Sec. 7B-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the city of Tucson Competitive
Telecommunications Code.
(Ord. No. 8522, § 1, 6-12-95)
Sec. 7B-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivatives shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent
with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in
the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number
include the plural number. The word "shall" is mandatory, and "may" is
permissive. Words not defined herein or in the Arizona Public Service Law,
A.R.S. sec. 40-201, et seq. or the Federal Communications Act of 1934, as
amended, U.S. Code, Title 47, Chapter 5, shall be given their generally
accepted meaning in the telecommunications industry.
   Applicant means a person, as defined in this section, who submits a written
response to the city's request for proposals to provide competitive
telecommunications service to the city.
   City is the city of Tucson, a municipal corporation of the State of Arizona.
   Competitive telecommunications service means the provision of long distance
competitive access and/or any telecommunications service where customers of the
service within the city have or are likely to have reasonably available
alternatives, as determined by the mayor and council after public notice and
opportunity to comment, or when so classified by the Arizona Corporation
Commission by rule or order duly adopted and published.
   Competitive telecommunications service does not include cable service, as
defined in Section 602(6) of the Federal Cable Act, or the distribution of
video programming directly to one or more of a multiplicity of subscribers to a
cable system as defined in Section 602(7) of such federal act, 47 U.S.C.
Sections 522(6), (7) which is subject to local governmental regulation under
the Act.
   Core system means that portion of the licensee's/franchisee's system as
shown in the license/franchise agreement which constitutes the initial
operating system of the licensee/franchisee.
   FCC means the Federal Communications Commission or any legally designated
successor.
   Franchise means a grant of authority to a telecommunications company to
place facilities in the public streets and other municipally owned rights-of-
way pursuant to Section
7B-14 hereof for the purpose of providing competitive telecommunications
services.
   Gross annual revenues means all cash, credits, property of any kind or
nature, or other consideration received directly or indirectly by the licensee
or franchisee, its affiliates, subsidiaries, parent and any person in which the
licensee or franchisee has a financial interest, arising from or attributable
to the sale or exchange of long distance competitive access or competitive
telecommunications services by the licensee within the city or in any way
derived from the operation of its system, including, but not limited to:
   (1)   All telecommunications service revenues charged on a flat rate basis;
   (2)   All telecommunications services charged on a usage sensitive or
mileage basis;
   (3)   All revenues from installation service charges;
   (4)   All revenues from connection or disconnection fees;
   (5)   All revenues from penalties or charges to customers for checks
returned from banks, net of bank costs paid;
   (6)   All revenues from equipment sold or rented to customer upon customer
premises;
   (7)   All revenues from local and long distance full rate service;
   (8)   All revenues from authorized rental of conduit space;
   (9)   All revenues from charges for access to local and long distance
networks;
   (10)   All revenues from any leases or subleases of any portion of licensee/
franchisee's network, including plant, facilities, or capacity leased to others
for any other purpose;
   (11)   All other revenues collected by licensee/franchisee from business
pursued within the city; and
   (12)   All recoveries of bad debts previously written off and revenues from
the sale or assignment of bad debts.
This sum shall be the basis for computing the fee imposed pursuant to section
7B-26 ("License Fee").
   License means that ordinance or resolution which contains the right,
authority or grant, given by a licensing authority enabling the license holder
to provide long distance competitive access or competitive telecommunications
services.
   Licensee means a person who, in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter and the city's request for proposals, executes a license agreement with
the city for the nonexclusive privilege to provide long distance competitive
access service in the city.
   Long distance competitive access service means the instantaneous
transmission for hire of voice or data signals by digital high speed fiber
optic transmission capacity to carry interstate voice and data signals only to
(a) carry interexchange carrier traffic between interexchange carrier points of
presence, or (b) to connect customer locations to interexchange carrier points
of presence.
   Mayor and council means the governing body of the city. They are the
licensing and franchising authority.
   Person includes any individual, partnership, association, corporation, legal
entity or organization of any kind. Whenever used in any clause prescribing a
penalty, the term "person" as applied to partnerships or associations includes
partners or members thereof, and if applied to corporations, the officers
thereof.
   Proposal means an applicant's formal written response to the city's request
for proposals to provide long distance competitive services or
telecommunications service to the city, pursuant to this chapter. Upon award by
the city of a license or franchise, the proposal shall become part of the
license or franchise agreement.
   Street means the surface, the air space above the surface and the area below
the surface of any public streets, roadways, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys,
courts, places, curbs, sidewalks, easements, rights-of-way, or other public
ways in the city which have been or may hereafter be dedicated to or otherwise
acquired by the city.
   Telecommunications company means any person providing long distance
competitive access or competitive telecommunication services as a public
service corporation, as defined in the Arizona Constitution, Article 15,
Section 2, that provides telecommunications services in the public rights-of-
way of the city.
   Telecommunications service means any transmission of interactive switched
and non- switched signs, signals, writing, images, sounds, messages, data or
other information of any nature by wire, radio lightwave, or any other
electromagnetic means (including access services), which originate or terminate
in the city and are offered to or for the public, or some portion thereof, for
compensation.
(Ord. No. 8522, § 1, 6-12-95; Ord. No. 8545, § 1, 7-10-95)
Sec. 7B-3. Findings; purpose.
   (a)   The mayor and council finds that the city's streets constitute
valuable public property,
   (1)   Having been acquired and maintained by the city over many years at
taxpayer expense;
   (2)   Being capable of providing rights-of-way uniquely valuable to private
companies in their respective businesses for providing telecommunications
services for hire;
   (3)   Constituting public investments for which the taxpayers are entitled
to a fair monetary return on the city's past and future investment in the
city's infrastructure; and
   (4)   Comprising significant assets which should be managed fairly and
appropriately to enhance the public safety and economy.
   (b)   Therefore, this chapter is intended:
   (1)   To regulate the provision of long distance competitive access services
and competitive telecommunications services within the jurisdiction of the
city;
   (2)   To provide for the payment of certain fees; and other valuable
considerations to the city to allow the construction, operation, use and
development of the system within the city;
   (3)   To provide conditions under which the system will serve present and
future needs of government, public institutions, commercial enterprises, lawful
public and private organizations, and the citizens and general public of the
city; and
   (4)   To provide remedies and prescribe penalties for any violation of this
chapter.
(Ord. No. 8522, § 1, 6-12-95)
Sec. 7B-4. License application and agreement.
   (a)   Application for license. Any applicant desiring a license to occupy
the streets and other municipal rights-of-way of the city to operate a long
distance competitive access service shall file an application with the
department of information services in the form prescribed by the department and
shall pay the filing fee prescribed by this chapter. Such application shall be
processed in accord with A.R.S. Section 9-563 and section
7B-29 below.
   (b)   License agreement. Prior to, or in no event later than sixty (60) days
after written notification of the award of a license by the city, the selected
applicant shall execute a license agreement which shall set forth the terms and
provisions of the license. The license agreement shall be subject to all
provisions of this chapter and shall incorporate all terms and provisions
included in the licensee's proposal. The licensee shall provide all that is set
forth in its proposal to provide long distance competitive access service
within the city. In case of any conflict or ambiguity between the terms of the
license agreement and this chapter, that provision which provides the greatest
benefit to the city, in the sole opinion of the city, shall govern. The license
agreement may be amended only in writing upon mutual agreement of the city and
licensee provided, however, that the city reserves the right to amend this
ordinance to reflect or accommodate local concerns, or changes in the Arizona
Revised Statutes and rules or orders of the Arizona Corporation Commission or
the Federal Communications Commission pertaining to telecommunications services
and providers and to conform any license issued hereunder accordingly.
(Ord. No. 8522, § 1, 6-12-95; Ord. No. 8545, § 2, 7-10-95)
Sec. 7B-5. Franchise application and agreement.
   (a)   Application for franchise. Any applicant desiring a franchise to
occupy the streets and other municipal rights-of-way of the city to operate
facilities to provide competitive telecommunications services shall file an
application with the department of information services in the form prescribed
by the department and pay the filing fee prescribed by this chapter. Such
application shall be processed in accordance with paragraph (b) of this
subsection and Section
7B-29 below.
   (b)   Franchise election. Upon finding that the application is in good
order, the department of information services shall promptly notify the
applicant of its determination and advise it to pay a franchise election fee to
the city clerk in an amount to be determined by the city clerk within a
specified number of days thereafter. Upon the city clerk's receipt of the fee,
the city clerk shall cause a franchise election to be scheduled at the next
date as determined by the mayor and council.
   (c)   Franchise agreement. Within sixty (60) days after notification of
acceptance of the terms of the franchise by the city, the applicant shall
execute a franchise agreement which shall set forth the terms and provisions of
the franchise and which shall be submitted to the electorate pursuant to
subsection (b) above. The franchise agreement shall be subject to all
provisions of this chapter and shall incorporate all terms and provisions
included in the applicant's proposal. In case of any conflict or ambiguity
between the terms of the franchise agreement and this chapter, that provision
which provides the greatest benefit to the city, in the sole opinion of the
city, shall govern. The franchise agreement may be amended only in writing upon
mutual agreement between the city and the franchisee and upon approval of the
electorate; provided, however, that the city reserves the right to amend this
ordinance to reflect or accommodate local concerns, changes in the Arizona
Revised Statutes and rules or orders of the Arizona Corporation Commission or
the Federal Communications Commission pertaining to telecommunications services
and providers and to conform any franchise issued hereunder accordingly.
(Ord. No. 8522, § 1, 6-12-95)
Sec. 7B-6. Policy of innovation.
Recognizing the fluid and expanding state of the development of communications
technology and uses, it is the policy of the city to strongly encourage
experimentation and innovation in the development of system uses, services, and
techniques that will be of general benefit to the community; provided that all
such experiments and innovations shall be subject to the rules of the FCC and
any other state and city laws.
(Ord. No. 8522, § 1, 6-12-95)
Sec. 7B-7. Time is of the essence.
Whenever this chapter or the license or franchise agreement sets forth any time
for any act to be performed by the licensee or franchisee, such time shall be
deemed of the essence; and the licensee's failure to perform within the time
allotted shall, in all cases, be sufficient grounds for the city to invoke the
remedies available under the terms and conditions of this chapter and the
license or franchise agreement.
(Ord. No. 8522, § 1, 6-12-95)
Sec. 7B-8. License or franchise required.
   (a)   License or franchise required. No person shall provide competitive
telecommunications services within the city, unless a license or franchise has
first been granted by the mayor and council pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter, and unless the license or franchise agreement is in full force and
effect. No applications for a license or franchise shall be considered unless
the city has first requested proposals in the form and in the manner prescribed
by the city. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require the granting of
any license or franchise when in the opinion of the city it would not be in the
public interest to do so.
   (b)   License or franchise nonexclusive. Any license or franchise granted
pursuant to this chapter by the city shall not be exclusive, and the city
specifically reserves the right to grant other licenses or franchises to any
persons at any time and in any area of the city if the city determines that the
granting of additional licenses or franchises are in the public interest.
   (c)   License or franchise binding. All provisions of this chapter and any
license or franchise agreement shall be binding upon the licensee or
franchisee, its successors, lessees or assignees.
(Ord. No. 8522, § 1, 6-12-95)
Sec. 7B-9. Grant of authority.
   (a)   Length of license or franchise. Any license or franchise granted by
the city pursuant to this chapter shall commence upon execution of the license
or franchise agreement by the license or franchisee and the city and shall be
for a period of fifteen (15) years, subject to the conditions and restrictions
as provided in this chapter. A license or franchise agreement may be renewed
pursuant to the provisions of section
7B-18 ("Renewal and Termination") of this chapter. No privilege or exemption
shall be inferred from the granting of any license or franchise unless it is
specifically prescribed.
   (b)   No right of property. The granting of any license or franchise
pursuant to this chapter shall be a privilege and shall not impart to the
license or franchisee any right of property in any city street or other city
property.
   (c)   Subject to city police powers and other regulatory agencies' rules and
regulations. The licensee or franchisee shall, at all times during the term of
the license or franchise agreement, be subject to all lawful exercise of the
police power by the city, including any and all ordinances, rules, or
regulations which the city has adopted or may adopt applying to the public
generally and to the licensee or franchisee, and all laws, rules, regulations,
orders, and policies of the state and the United States Government. Any
conflict between the provisions of this chapter and any other present or future
lawful exercise of the city police powers shall be resolved in favor of the
latter.
(Ord. No. 8522, § 1, 6-12-95)
Sec. 7B-10. Local regulatory framework.
   (a)   Continuing regulatory jurisdiction. The mayor and council shall have
continuing regulatory jurisdiction and supervision over the operation of any
license or franchise granted pursuant to this chapter. However, it is
recognized that the daily administrative, supervisory, and enforcement
responsibilities of the provisions of this chapter and the license or franchise
agreement shall be delegated and entrusted to the city Manager as hereafter
provided.
   (b)   The city manager or the city manager's designee, as appropriate, shall
have the following responsibilities and authority:
   (1)   To interpret, administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter
and the license or franchise agreement;
   (2)   To represent the city in all matters pertaining to the implementation
of the provisions of this chapter and the license or franchise agreement;
   (3)   To review and audit reports and other documents submitted to the city
as required by this chapter or other law, so as to ensure that the necessary
reports are completed and fulfilled pursuant to the terms of this chapter;
   (4)   To assure that all records, rules and charges pertinent to the system
are made available for inspection at reasonable hours upon reasonable notice;
   (5)   To confer with the licensee or franchisee and advise and supervise the
interconnection and compatibility of the system with other systems in the city;
   (6)   To establish and administer sanctions as authorized by the mayor and
council to ensure compliance with this chapter;
   (7)   To advise the mayor and council on matters which may constitute
grounds for termination of the license or franchise agreement in accordance
with this chapter;
   (8)   To advise the mayor and council on proposed transfers of the system;
   (9)   To promulgate regulations regarding the construction, reconstruction,
operation, maintenance, dismantling, testing or use of the system as necessary;
   (10)   To ensure that the licensee or franchisee makes all services
available to all residents of the city on a nondiscriminatory basis;
   (11)   To perform any other duties assigned under the provisions of this
chapter or other legislation which may hereafter be enacted by the mayor and
council or such other related duties as the mayor and council may direct.
(Ord. No. 8522, § 1, 6-12-95)
Sec. 7B-11. Regulation costs.
The cost of regulating the license or franchisee shall be paid out of revenue
derived from license or franchise fees provided for by section
7B-26 of this chapter. Until such time as the license or franchise fees
generated are in an amount sufficient to cover the cost of regulation and other
city costs associated with the implementation of this chapter, all as
determined by the mayor and council, as such costs and expenses as approved and
budgeted by the mayor and council shall be an assessment against the licensee
or franchisee and shall be paid within fifteen (15) days, written notice to the
licensee or franchisee of the amount due. Amounts so assessed and paid shall be
a credit against future license or franchise fee payments pro rata.
(Ord. No. 8522, § 1, 6-12-95)
Sec. 7B-12. Geographic area of the system.
The geographic area of the license or franchise shall include all portions of
the city's jurisdiction specifically set forth within the license or franchise.
(Ord. No. 8522, § 1, 6-12-95)
Sec. 7B-13. Shared facilities.
   (a)   To maximize public and employee safety, to minimize visual clutter of
aerial plant, and to minimize the amount of trenching and excavation in and
along city streets and sidewalks for underground plant, telecommunications
companies licensed hereunder shall make every commercially reasonable effort to
interconnect or to collectively "bundle" compatible facilities within the
right-of-way subject to the engineering requirements of the owners of utility
poles and other facilities used by the licensee or franchisee.
   (b)   In the event of a dispute between licensees or franchisees regarding
compatibility of facilities or reasonableness of interconnection requirements,
the matter shall be submitted to the city manager or the city manager's
designee for determination, whose decision shall be final and binding upon the
respective licensees or franchisees; however, this section shall not govern
disputes between a licensee or franchisee under this chapter and a licensee or
franchisee of the city who does not provide competitive telecommunications
service.
(Ord. No. 8522, § 1, 6-12-95)
Sec. 7B-14. Conditions of street occupancy.
   (a)   The licensee or franchisee shall first obtain the written approval of
the city engineer prior to commencing construction on the streets and public
places of the city. Approval shall be in accordance with relevant Charter and
Code provisions and administrative regulations, which approval shall not be
unreasonably withheld. The licensee or franchisee shall notify the city at
least ten (10) days prior to the commencement of any construction in any
streets.
   (b)   The licensee or franchisee shall not open or disturb the surface of
any street or public place for any purpose without first having obtained a
permit to do so in the manner provided by law. All excavation shall be
coordinated with other utility excavation or construction so as to minimize
disruption to the public. Licenses or franchises hereunder shall join and
participate in the local blue stake center.
   (c)   Use of existing poles or conduits.
   (1)   The licensee or franchisee shall utilize existing poles, conduits and
other facilities whenever possible and shall not construct or install any new,
different or additional above- ground poles, conduits or other facilities
whether on public property or on privately owned property, unless the erection
of new poles is authorized by the city manager or the city manager's designee.
Nothing in this section shall prohibit the replacement of existing poles or the
addition of poles on existing above-ground routes where engineering concerns
mandate the addition of new poles to accommodate the licensee's/franchisee's
facilities.
   (2)   The facilities of the licensee or franchisee shall be installed
underground in those areas of the city where existing telephone and electric
services are both underground at the time of construction by the licensee or
franchisee. In areas where either telephone or electric utility facilities are
installed aerially at the time of system construction, the licensee or
franchisee may install its facilities aerially; however, at such time as the
existing aerial facilities are placed underground, the licensee or franchisee
shall likewise place its facilities underground at sole cost to the licensee or
franchisee.
   (d)   All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment
erected by the licensee or franchisee shall be located so as to cause minimum
interference with the unencumbered use of streets and other public places and
minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property
owners who adjoin any of the streets and public places.
   (e)   The licensee or franchisee shall at its own expense repair, to the
satisfaction of the city, all city-owned water lines, storm and sanitary sewer
lines, service lines, water meters, streets, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, or
other property of the city damaged by any of the operations of the licensee or
franchisee, its contractors, subcontractors, employees, agents or assigns
engaged in pursuant to its license or franchise. In case of disturbance or
damage caused by the licensee or franchisee to any street or public place, the
licensee or franchisee shall, at its own cost and expense and in the manner
approved by the city, replace and restore such street or public place in as
good a condition as before the work performed by the licensee or franchisee
which caused such disturbance or damage.
   (f)   At any time during the period of the license or franchise, the
licensee or franchisee shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily
disconnect, relocate or remove any of its property when, in the opinion of the
city, the same is required by reason of traffic conditions, public safety,
street vacation, freeway or street construction, alteration to or establishment
of any street, sidewalk or other public place, installation of sewers, drains,
waterlines, power lines, traffic signal lines or transportation facilities.
   (g)   The licensee or franchisee shall, on request of any person holding a
permit to move a building, temporarily remove, raise or lower its wires to
permit the movement of such buildings. The expense of such temporary removal or
raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person requesting the same,
and the licensee or franchisee shall have the authority to require such payment
in advance. The licensee or franchisee shall be given not less than five (5)
days' advance notice to arrange such temporary wire alterations.
   (h)   Whenever, in case of fire or other emergency, it becomes necessary in
the judgment of the city manager, police chief, fire chief, or their delegates,
to remove or damage any of the licensee or franchisee's facilities, no charge
shall be made by the licensee or franchisee against the city for restoration
and repair.
   (i)   The licensee or franchisee shall have the authority to trim trees on
public property at its own expense as may be necessary to protect its wires and
facilities, subject to supervision and direction by the city. Trimming of trees
or private property shall require written consent of the property owner.
   (j)   Protection of facilities. Nothing contained in this Section shall
relieve any person from liability arising out of the failure to exercise
reasonable care to avoid damaging the licensee or franchisee's facilities while
performing any work connected with grading, regrading or changing the line of
any street or public place or the construction or reconstruction of any sewer
or water system.
   (k)   Notice of city improvements. The city shall provide the licensee or
franchisee with reasonable notice of plans for street or other public
improvements where paving or resurfacing of a permanent nature is involved. The
notice shall contain the nature and character of the improvements, the streets
upon which the improvements are to be made, the extent of the improvements and
the work schedule for the project. The notice shall give the licensee or
franchisee sufficient time to make any additions, alterations, modifications or
repairs to its facilities as the licensee or franchisee deems necessary in
advance of the commencement of the work, so as to permit the licensee or
franchisee to maintain continuity of service.
   (l)   The licensee or franchisee, in conjunction with the requirements of a
city project, shall at its sole expense make such relocations of its facilities
within city rights-of-way or take other steps as may be necessary to facilitate
any city project. Such relocations shall be under the same terms and conditions
as a new installation pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. No. 8522, § 1, 6-12-95; Ord. No. 8545, § 3, 7-10-95)
Sec. 7B-15. Use, rental or lease of utility poles and facilities.
The licensee or franchisee assumes all responsibility for gaining permission
from any electric, gas or telephone utility or any other authorized entity in
the city for the use, rental or lease of poles, underground conduits and other
structures and facilities for the purpose of extending, carrying or laying the
licensee or franchisee's wires, cables, electronic conductors and other
facilities and appurtenances necessary or desirable in conjunction with the
establishment and operation of the system. The city agrees that any public
utility owning or controlling such poles or underground conduits may, without
amendment to any franchise agreement it may have with the city, allow and is
encouraged to allow the licensee or franchisee to make such use thereof
pursuant to any agreement reached between such utility and the licensee or
franchisee.
(Ord. No. 8522, § 1, 6-12-95; Ord. No. 8545, § 4, 7-10-95)
Sec. 7B-16. Construction and technical standards.
Compliance with construction codes.
   (1)   Construction practices shall be in accordance with all applicable
provisions of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 and any amendments
thereto as well as all applicable laws, rules and regulations of the state and
the city, including but not limited to requirements of the city in regard to
various electrical wiring necessary to the operation of city functions,
including but not limited to traffic-control signalization, street lighting,
fire lines and communications lines.
   (2)   All installation of electronic equipment shall be of a permanent
nature, durable and installed in accordance with the applicable provisions of
the current editions of the National Electrical Safety Code as published by the
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, the National Electrical Code
of the National Fire Protection Association, and all state and local codes
where applicable.
   (3)   Antenna supporting structures (towers) shall be painted, lighted,
erected and maintained in accordance with all applicable rules and regulations
of the United States Department of Transportation and all other applicable
laws, rules and regulations of the state and the city.
(Ord. No. 8522, § 1, 6-12-95)
Sec. 7B-17. Provision of services and equipment to city.
As a condition of granting a license or franchise to a licensee or franchisee
hereunder, the city may require that such licensee or franchisee agree to make
available at no cost to the city such dark fibers and spares in any cable or
bundle of fibers hung or emplaced by such licensee or franchisee as the city
may reasonably need to satisfy municipal telecommunications requirements. The
licensee or franchisee shall bring such fibers to a board, block, or pedestal
such as to be readily accessible and usable by the city, as determined by the
department of information services and at no cost to the city, unless otherwise
provided in the terms of a specific license or franchise agreement. In
addition, the license or franchise may specify that certain telecommunications
services and other facilities be provided to the city at licensee's or
franchisee's cost, or at a discount from established prices, or on a most
favored nation basis.
(Ord. No. 8522, § 1, 6-12-95; Ord. No. 8545, § 5, 7-10-95)
Sec. 7B-18. Renewal and termination.
   (a)   Renewal. At any time between the last five and twelve months before
expiration of its existing license or franchise, the licensee or franchisee, as
the case may be, may apply to the city for continuation of its existing
authority to occupy the city streets and other municipal rights-of-way. If the
applicant shows to the satisfaction of the city that it is in compliance with
the terms of its existing instrument, the city may grant a five-year extension
of the existing authorization, subject to the right of either party to
renegotiate fees, conditions, and terms of access and subject to the approval
of the voters of the city in the case of a franchise.
   (b)   Termination.
   (1)   The mayor and council may terminate the license or franchise agreement
in the event of the violation of any material provision of this chapter or of
any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant thereto or of any applicable
federal, state or local law, or the material breach, failure, refusal or
neglect by the license or franchisee to perform its obligations under the terms
and conditions of the license or franchise agreement, except when such
violation, breach, failure, refusal or neglect is directly caused by any of the
following:
   a.   Acts of God;
   b.   Riots;
   c.   Emergencies declared by the President of the United States of America,
the governor of the state or the mayor.
   (2)   Criteria for termination shall include, but in no event be deemed
exclusive or limited to the following:
   a.   Attempt to dispose of any of the facilities or property of the system
to prevent the city from purchasing it, as provided for in this chapter;
   b.   Attempt to evade any material provision of this chapter or the license
or franchise agreement;
   c.   The practice of any fraud or deceit upon the city or subscribers or
users;
   d.   Failure to begin or complete system construction or system extension
pursuant to this chapter and the license or franchise agreement;
   e.   Failure to provide and maintain the types of services, facilities,
equipment or personnel provided for in the license or franchise agreement and
this chapter;
   f.   Material misrepresentation of fact in the license or franchisee's
proposal or in the execution of the license or franchise agreement or in any
reports required to be filed pursuant to this chapter;
   g.   Failure to timely make payment of any moneys due the city pursuant to
this chapter.
   (3)   After providing the licensee or franchisee with notice and an
opportunity to be heard and in the event that the mayor and council determine
that the licensee or franchisee, by its acts or omissions has given the city
cause for termination of the license or franchise agreement, the mayor and
council may instruct the city manager to make written demand upon the licensee
or franchisee for full compliance. If the violation, breach, failure, refusal
or neglect is not or cannot be remedied to the satisfaction of the mayor and
council within thirty (30) days following such demand, if made, the mayor and
council may exercise the following options:
   a.   Direct the licensee or franchisee to comply within such additional
time, in such manner and upon such terms and conditions as the mayor and
council may direct.
   b.   Declare the license or franchise agreement terminated and of no further
force and effect.
   (4)   If the mayor and council declare the license or franchise agreement
terminated, the city may pursue any remedies available to the city pursuant to
this chapter, including but not limited to the options stated in paragraph (b)
of section
7B-18 ("Renewal and Termination"), the license or franchise agreement, or any
other remedy available to the city as provided by law.
   (c)   Dismantle. In the event that the city exercises its option to require
the licensee or franchisee to dismantle the system, the licensee or franchisee
shall, in an expeditious manner, at its own expense and at the direction of the
city, restore any property, public or private, to the condition in which it
existed prior to the erection or construction of the system, including any
improvements made to such property subsequent to the construction of the
system.
   (d)   Abandonment. In the event the license or franchise granted hereunder
shall terminate without renewal or substitution, or the licensee or franchisee
shall permanently abandon operations of its telecommunications facilities in
the city, the city, at its election, may require the licensee or franchisee to
remove some or all of its facilities hereunder or may exercise its right of
purchase under section
7B-19 below. The city, however, shall be deemed to have a possessory interest
in facilities provided by the licensee or franchisee under section
7B-17 above, which possessory interest shall not be disturbed by licensee or
franchisee without the city's consent.
(Ord. No. 8522, § 1, 6-12-95)
Sec. 7B-19. Purchase of system by city.
   (a)   Rights to purchase. In the event the city terminates the license or
franchise agreement pursuant to any provisions of this chapter, or in the event
the licensee or franchisee permanently abandons operation of its facilities
within the city in whole or in part, the city shall have the first option,
directly or as an intermediary, to purchase the system. The city shall have
ninety (90) days prior to the effective date of expiration or termination to
notify the licensee or franchisee and the utility to whom the licensee's or
franchisee's equipment is attached of the city's intent to exercise the option
to purchase stated herein.
   (b)   Valuation. In the event of a termination of the license or franchise
agreement by the city, the value of the system shall be solely based on the
book value of the tangible assets of the system. Upon normal expiration of the
license or franchise agreement the value of the system shall be solely based on
the fair market value of the tangible assets of the system.
   (1)   "Book value" is defined as the original or historical cost of the
assets less accumulated depreciation.
   (2)   No value shall be assigned to either the license or franchise itself,
the license or franchise agreement or any right, privilege or expectancy
arising out of the privilege to transact business under the license or
franchise and the license or franchise agreement nor shall any value be
assigned to goodwill or as a going concern.
   (3)   "Valuation" as referred to above shall be determined by audit of
system assets pursuant to generally accepted auditing principles, and shall be
performed by a certified public accounting firm selected by the city at the
licensee or franchisee's expense. In the event of permanent abandonment of all
or some of licensee or franchisee's facilities by the licensee or franchisee,
such facilities shall be valued pro tanto at zero dollars for the purposes of
this section.
   (c)   Date of valuation. The date of valuation shall be the effective date
of expiration or termination of the license or franchise agreement or
abandonment of the facilities.
   (d)   Transfer to city. Upon exercise of the city's option to purchase and
written notice of such action by the city upon the licensee or franchisee, the
licensee or franchisee shall, immediately upon payment of the purchase price by
the city, transfer to the city possession and legal title to all system
facilities and property, both real and personal, free from any and all liens
and encumbrances not agreed to be assumed by the city in lieu of a portion of
the purchase price; and the licensee or franchisee shall execute such warranty
deeds or other instruments of conveyance to the city as shall be necessary to
effectuate this transfer.
(Ord. No. 8522, § 1, 6-12-95; Ord. No. 8545, § 6, 7-10-95)
Sec. 7B-20. Foreclosure and receivership.
   (a)   In the case of a foreclosure or other judicial sale or termination of
lease of the plant, property or equipment of the licensee and franchisee, or
any part thereof, or any rights under the license and franchise agreement, the
licensee and franchisee shall serve written notice upon the city of any such
event; and the city may serve written notice of termination upon the licensee
and franchisee and the successful bidder at such sale, in which event the
license and franchise and the license and franchise agreement and all rights
and privileges of the licensee and franchisee thereunder shall cease and
terminate thirty (30) days after service of such notice, unless:
   (1)   The mayor and council have approved the transfer of ownership of the
license and franchise, in accordance with all pertinent provisions of section
7B-21 ("Transfers and Assignments"); and
   (2)   Such successful bidder shall have covenanted and agreed with the city,
in writing in a form approved by the city attorney, to assume and be bound by
all the terms and conditions of this chapter and the license and franchise
agreement.
   (b)   The city shall have the right to terminate the license and franchise
agreement one hundred twenty (120) days after the appointment of a receiver, or
trustee, to take over and conduct the business of the licensee and franchisee,
whether in receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other related action or
proceeding, unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated
prior to the expiration of one hundred twenty (120) days, or unless:
   (1)   Within one hundred twenty (120) days after their election or
appointment, such receiver or trustee shall have fully complied with all the
provisions of this chapter and the license and franchise agreement, and
remedied any and all defaults or breaches thereunder; and
   (2)   Such receiver or trustee, within one hundred twenty (120) days, shall
have executed an agreement, in a form approved by the city Attorney and duly
approved by the court having jurisdiction over the proceedings, whereby such
receiver or trustee assumes and agrees to be bound by each and every provision
of this chapter and the license or franchise agreement.
   (c)   Failure to comply with the provisions of paragraph (a) of this section
shall be deemed an unauthorized transfer pursuant to the provisions of section
7B-21 ("Transfers and Assignments").
(Ord. No. 8522, § 1, 6-12-95)
Sec. 7B-21. Transfers and assignments.
   (a)   The licensee or franchisee shall not sell, transfer, assign, exchange
or release, or permit the sale, transfer, assignment, exchange or release of
more than three (3) percent of the ownership of the system or rights in the
license or franchise agreement to a person (hereinafter "proposed transferee"),
without the prior written authorization of the mayor and council. For purposes
of this section, a merger or consolidation shall be deemed a transfer or
assignment.
A secured debt financing arrangement in which the lender assumes the ownership
position of the licensee, but not the operation of the licensee's system, shall
not be deemed a transfer or assignment pursuant to this section. However, no
such lender may subsequently take over operation of the system without the
prior written authorization of the city obtained pursuant to this section.
   (1)   In seeking prior written authorization, the licensee or franchisee
shall have the obligation:
   a.   To inform the city as to whether the proposed transferee, which, in the
case of a corporation, shall include all officers, directors, employees and all
persons having a legal or equitable interest of five (5) percent or more of its
voting stock, or any of the proposed transferee's principals:
   1.   Has ever been convicted of a crime relating to fitness, trustworthiness
or competence including any felony, or any misdemeanor involving moral
turpitude, including, but not limited to, criminal fraud or deceit, or is
presently under an indictment charging such a crime;
   2.   Has ever had a judgment in an action for fraud, deceit or
misrepresentation entered against it, her, him or them by any court of
competent jurisdiction; or
   3.   Has pending any legal claim or lawsuit arising out of or involving a
fiber optics or cable communications system.
   b.   To establish to the satisfaction of the city the financial solvency of
the proposed transferee by submitting all current financial information of the
proposed transferee which the licensee or franchisee was required to submit in
its proposal for the license or franchise agreement, and such other financial
data as the city may request.
   c.   To establish to the satisfaction of the city that the proposed
transferee has the experience and ability to fully comply with all provisions
of this chapter and the license or franchise agreement and to effectively
operate and maintain the system.
   (2)   The mayor and council specifically reserve the right to deny, restrict
or condition authorization to transfer upon the criteria stated in this section
and any other criteria the mayor and council determine to be necessary in the
public interest.
   (b)   Any proposed transferee shall execute an agreement, in such form
acceptable to the city attorney, that it will assume and be bound by all of the
provisions, terms and conditions of this chapter, the license or franchise
agreement, and any other conditions the mayor and council may have required in
granting authorization.
   (c)   The occurrence of an unauthorized transfer or assignment may, at the
option of the city, provide the mayor and council with cause to immediately
terminate the license or franchise agreement and accelerate all of the
obligations and rights as provided in section
7B-18 ("Renewal and Termination").
   (d)   From and after any occurrence constituting an unauthorized transfer or
assignment, the licensee or franchisee shall not make, execute or enter into
any deed, deed of trust, mortgage, contract, conditional sales contract or any
loan, lease, pledge, security agreement, sale, pole agreement or any other
agreement or hypothecation concerning any system facilities or property,
whether real or personal, without the written approval of the mayor and
council.
   (e)   Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit the use of the
licensee's property as collateral for security in regard to construction
financing. However, any such financing arrangements shall be subject to all
provisions of this chapter and the license or franchise agreement.
   (f)   No person at any time shall directly or indirectly hold more than one
license or more than one franchise under this chapter. Any person holding two
or more such instruments of authorization shall promptly surrender all but one
such instrument to the department of information services or the city may
declare any or all of them forfeited.
(Ord. No. 8522, § 1, 6-12-95; Ord. No. 8545, § 7, 7-10-95)
Sec. 7B-22. Indemnification.
   (a)   The licensee or franchisee shall indemnify, save harmless and defend
the city, its mayor and council, appointed boards and commissions, officers and
employees, individually and collectively from all fines, liens, suits, claims,
demands, actions, costs of litigation, attorneys' fees, judgments or liability
of any kind (including but not limited to libel, slander, invasion of privacy,
unauthorized use of any trademark, trade name or service mark, copyright
infringement, injury, death or damage to person or property) arising out of or
in any way connected with the installation, construction, operation,
maintenance or condition of the system. The licensee or franchisee shall assume
all risks in the operation of the system and shall be solely responsible and
answerable for any and all accidents or injuries to persons or property arising
out of the performance of the license or franchise agreement. The amounts and
types of insurance coverage requirements set forth in section
7B-23 ("Insurance") shall in no way be construed as limiting the scope of
indemnity set forth in this section.
   (b)   Should any of licensee or franchisee's facilities installed pursuant
to this chapter be damaged or destroyed by the city, its agents, employees,
contractors or subcontractors, the licensee or franchisee shall repair or
replace such facilities at its own expense and shall waive any right, claim, or
action for damages or other available remedies which it may have against the
city, its agents, employees, contractors or subcontractors, except as to
intentional, willful, or malicious damage to licensee or franchisee's property
by city employees acting outside the scope of their employment or by other
parties acting without the express consent of the city.
(Ord. No. 8522, § 1, 6-12-95)
Sec. 7B-23. Insurance.
Prior to the commencement of any operation, excavation or construction pursuant
to a license or franchise, the license or franchisee shall file with the city
manager and maintain in full force and effect throughout the term of the
license or franchise agreement insurance policies issued by an insurer duly
authorized to conduct business in this state, insuring with respect to the
installation, construction, operation and maintenance of the system as follows:
   (1)   Comprehensive general and automobile liability coverage including, but
not limited to: (1) blanket contractual liability; (2) completed operations
liability; (3) broad form property damage endorsement, including but not
limited to coverage for explosion, collapse and underground hazard; and (4)
automobile non-ownership liability. This insurance shall be written in the
following minimum amounts:
   a.   For bodily injury, including death: $500,000.00 combined single limit;
   b.   Property damage: $500,000.00 combined single limit;
   c.   Comprehensive automobile liability; bodily injury: $500,000.00 combined
single limit;
   d.   Excess umbrella liability in the minimum amount of $10,000,000.00.
   (2)   Workers' compensation coverage as required by the laws, rules and
regulations of this state.
   (3)   All insurance policies required herein shall include the city as an
additional named insured.
   (4)   With respect to the insurance required herein, the license or
franchisee shall be solely responsible for all premiums due and payable.
   (5)   The insurance policies required by this section shall contain the
following endorsement:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy of insurance may not be
canceled by the insurer nor the intention not to renew be stated by the insurer
until sixty (60) days after receipt by the city, by registered mail, of written
notice of such intent to cancel or not to renew.
   (6)   All insurance policies required to be procured herein shall be in a
form approved by the city risk manager, and no licensee or franchisee may
initiate or begin construction until such approval has been granted.
   (7)   Licensee or franchisee shall require of all its contractors and
subcontractors the same insurance coverage including worker's compensation
insurance in the amounts required by state law.
(Ord. No. 8522, § 1, 6-12-95)
Sec. 7B-24. Bonding.
Performance bond. Within thirty (30) days after written notification of the
award of a license or franchise by the city, the selected applicant shall file
with the city a performance bond for the benefit of the city in the amount of
one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) to be effective upon the execution of the
license or franchise agreement and conditioned that in the event that the
licensee or franchisee fails to comply with any provision of this chapter, the
license or franchise agreement or other law applicable to the license or
franchise, then there shall be recoverable jointly and severally from the
principals and surety any and all damages or costs suffered or incurred by the
city, including but not limited to attorney's fees and costs of any action or
proceeding, and including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification,
cost of removal or abandonment of any property or other costs due and owing the
city up to the full principal amount of such bond. The performance bond shall
be maintained in full as a continuing obligation during the period of network
construction for licensee/franchisee's core network. The performance bond shall
be issued by a surety company authorized to do business in this state and shall
be in a form approved by the city attorney.
   (1)   The performance bond shall contain the following endorsement:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this bond may not be canceled by the
surety nor the intention not to renew be stated by the surety until sixty (60)
days after receipt by the city of Tucson, by registered mail, of written notice
of such intent to cancel or not to renew.
   (2)   None of the provisions of this section or section
7B-25 ("Security Deposit"), nor any damages recovered by the city thereunder,
shall be construed to excuse the faithful performance by or limit the liability
of the licensee or franchisee.
   (3)   Upon application to the city, the licensee or franchisee shall be
entitled to the return of the performance bond at the expiration of the license
or franchise agreement or any renewal thereof, provided there is then no
outstanding default or moneys due the city by the licensee or franchisee, and
subject to license or franchisee's obligation to remove abandoned facilities
under section.
7B-18 above.
(Ord. No. 8522, § 1, 6-12-95; Ord. No. 8545, § 8, 7-10-95)
Sec. 7B-25. Security deposit.
   (a)   Within thirty (30) days after written notification of the award of a
license or franchise by the city, the selected applicant shall deposit with the
finance director of the city, and maintain on deposit throughout the term of
the license or franchise agreement, a security deposit in the sum of fifty
thousand dollars ($50,000.00) in cash or in the form of a letter of credit,
bond, or alternative form of security acceptable to the city as security for
the faithful performance by the licensee or franchisee of all provisions of
this chapter and the license or franchise agreement and compliance with all
orders, permits and directions of any agency or department of the city having
jurisdiction over the licensee's or franchisee's operations.
   (b)   Within fifteen (15) days after written notice to the licensee or
franchisee by the city that the city has withdrawn any amount or taken other
steps to draw upon the security in the security deposit, the licensee or
franchisee shall deposit or pay to the finance director a sum of money or other
alternative form of security sufficient to restore such security deposit to the
original amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00).
   (c)   If the licensee or franchisee fails to pay the city any moneys due
within the time fixed in this chapter or the license or franchise agreement; or
fails after ten (10) days' written notice to pay to the city any taxes due and
unpaid; or fails to repay to the city within ten (10) days' written notice any
damages, penalties, costs or expenses which the city may be compelled to pay by
reason of any act, omission or default of the licensee or franchisee; or fails,
after ten (10) days' written notice, to comply with any provision of this
chapter or the license or franchise agreement which the city reasonably
determines can be remedied or partially cured by an expenditure or calling of
the security within the security deposit, the finance director may immediately
withdraw or call the amount thereof, with interest and any penalties, from the
security deposit. Upon such withdrawal, the finance director shall in writing
notify the licensee or franchisee of the amount and date thereof. In the event
the security deposit is insufficient to pay the city for any compensation,
damage, penalties, costs or expenses owing to the city pursuant to this chapter
or the license or franchise agreement, the performance bond may be drawn upon
by the city for any amount due the city over and above the amount held in the
security deposit.
   (d)   The security deposit, including any interest that may have accrued,
shall become the property of the city in the event that a license or franchise
agreement is terminated by the city by reason of a violation of this chapter or
breach of the license or franchise agreement pursuant to the provisions of
section
7B-18 ("Renewal and Termination").
   (e)   Upon application to the city, the licensee or franchisee shall be
entitled to the return of all moneys or other form of security remaining in the
security deposit, including accrued interest, at the expiration of the license
or franchise agreement or any renewal thereof, provided there is then no
outstanding default or moneys owing on the part of the licensee or franchisee
to the city.
   (f)   The rights reserved to the city with respect to the security deposit
are in addition to all other rights of the city, whether reserved by the
license or franchise, this chapter or authorized by law; and no action,
proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to such security deposit shall
affect any other right the city may have.
(Ord. No. 8522, § 1, 6-12-95; Ord. No. 8545, § 9, 7-10-95)
Sec. 7B-26. License or franchise fee.
   (a)   Unless a license or franchise provides otherwise, as compensation for
the rights and privileges herein conferred, licensee/franchisee shall pay to
the city each calendar quarter during the term of this agreement a quarterly
payment equal to five (5) percent of the total quarterly gross receipts (as
defined below) received by the licensee/franchisee for services provided to
customers within the corporate limits of the city from the provision of
competitive telecommunications service within the city. During the initial
fifteen (15) month buildout period or until licensee's/franchisee's core system
is operational, the minimum fee payable hereunder shall be not less than three
thousand dollars ($3,000.00) per quarter for the first four (4) quarters
following execution of this agreement, and ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00)
per quarter for every quarter thereafter. The quarterly payments required by
this section shall be due and payable not later than noon of the last day of
the month following the quarter for which payment is due. If the last day of
the month following the quarter for which payment is due falls on a weekend or
holiday, then the payment is due at noon on the last preceding business day
prior to the last day of the month. The compensation set forth in this
subsection (a) shall be exclusive of, and in addition to, any application fees
or election costs or other costs established by the Code, chapter
7B, and all special assessments and taxes of whatever nature, including, but
not limited to, business privilege, and ad valorem taxes. Notwith-standing the
foregoing sentence, all license or franchise fees paid by licensee or
franchisee pursuant to this section shall be credited towards the payment of
the public utility tax levied pursuant to article III of chapter
19 of this Code. In the event any quarterly payment is not timely made,
licensee/franchisee shall pay a late payment penalty of the greater of: (i) one
hundred dollar ($100.00) per day or (ii) simple interest at ten (10) percent
annual percentage rate of the total amount past due. As used in this section,
gross revenues shall be as defined in section
7B-2, "gross annual revenues" of this chapter.
   (b)   Payment of money under this section shall not in any way limit or
inhibit any of the privileges or rights of the city under any license or
franchise or otherwise.
   (c)   Licensee/franchisee shall file annually with the city finance
director, no later than four (4) months after the end of the licensee/
franchisee's fiscal year, a statement of revenues (for that year) attributable
to the operations of the licensee/franchisee's network within the city pursuant
to this agreement. This statement shall present, in a form prescribed or
approved by the city, a detailed breakdown of gross revenues and uncollectible
accounts for the fiscal year. This statement shall be audited at no cost to the
city by a certified public accountant chosen by licensee/franchisee whose
report shall accompany the statement. The city may cause an additional audit to
be performed by an auditor selected by the city not more frequently than every
third year and licensee/franchisee shall reimburse the city for reasonable
costs of such additional audit as determined by the city in the event the audit
determines that additional revenues are due and owing to the city.
   (d)   Any transactions which have the effect of circumventing payment of
required license or franchise fees and/or evasion of payment of license or
franchise fees by noncollection or nonreporting of gross receipts, bartering,
or any other means which evade the actual collection of revenues for business
pursued by licensee/franchisee are prohibited.
   (e)   For the purpose of securing to the city the payments of license or
franchise fees that may be owed, the city may require a licensee/franchisee to
provide city with a bond, letter of credit or other evidence of security
agreeable to city approximating the amount of license or franchise fees to be
paid by licensee/franchisee for a two (2) year period. In the event of any
default by licensee/franchisee in the payment of required license or franchise
fees, such security shall be reviewed by city and a greater level of security
agreed to and established for the remainder of the term of the license or
franchise.
   (f)   For the further purpose of securing to the city the license or
franchise fee payments that may be owed, the city shall have a lien and the
same shall be a charge upon all of the property, estate, and effects of the
licensee or franchisee, whatsoever, real, personal, or mixed, provided,
however, that such lien shall remain inchoate until notice of default has been
given by the city to the licensee or franchisee pursuant to section
7B-18 of this chapter, the licensee or franchisee has failed to take
appropriate steps to remedy the default, and the city has filed an appropriate
civil action to enforce such lien. Such lien shall be subordinate to any
mortgage or deed of trust securing any bona fide indebtedness. The foregoing
does not limit the city's rights to enforce the terms of a license and
franchise as otherwise provided in chapter
7B of the Code.
   (g)   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to require payment of any
fee, or agreement to any franchise or license fee that the city is prohibited
from enforcing under A.R.S. § 9-582.
(Ord. No. 8522, § 1, 6-12-95; Ord. No. 8545, § 10, 7-10-95; Ord. No. 9911, 11-
10-03)
Sec. 7B-26.1. Alternative license fee for long distance only licenses.
Notwithstanding the provisions of section
7B-26, licensees for long distance competitive- access service who do not meet
the twenty (20) linear mile limitation contained in section
7B-36 of this chapter but who connect only to interstate telecommunication
carrier points of presence and to no other connection within the city may, as
an alternative to the license fees specified in section
7B-26, pay a fee for each linear foot of installation within city rights-of-way
on a basis determined by the mayor and council at the time of the granting of
the license.
(Ord. No. 9444, § 1, 8-7-00; Ord. No. 10317, § 1, 9-12-06)
Sec. 7B-27. Rights reserved to the city.
   (a)   Without limitation upon the rights which the city might otherwise
have, the city does hereby expressly reserve the following rights, powers and
authorities:
   (1)   To exercise its governmental powers now or hereafter to the full
extent that such powers may be vested in or granted to the city.
   (2)   To determine any question of fact relating to the meaning, terms,
obligations or other aspects of this chapter and the license or franchise
agreement.
   (3)   To grant multiple nonexclusive licenses or franchises within the city
to other persons for the operation of systems pursuant to this chapter.
   (4)   To inspect and supervise all construction or installation work
performed by the licensee or franchisee.
   (b)   The city hereby expressly reserves the right to amend any section or
part of this chapter for any reason determined to be desirable or necessary by
the mayor and council in the exercise of its legislative powers, including, but
not limited to, new developments in the state of the technology of the
communications industry and changes in federal or state laws, rules or
regulations, provided that any such amendments are reasonable. Such amendments
shall be adopted only after a public hearing where the licensee or franchisee
shall have received written notice at least thirty (30) days prior to the
hearing and is provided an opportunity to be heard.
   (c)   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed or construed to impair or
affect the right of the city to exercise its power of eminent domain to acquire
the property of the licensee or franchisee at a fair and just value, which
shall not include any amount for the license or franchise itself or any
privilege thereunder.
   (d)   The city reserves the right, during the term of the license or
franchise agreement, to install and utilize, upon the pole attachments and
conduits of the licensee or franchisee, any wire or pole fixtures required for
municipal purposes, without cost to the city so long as such installation and
utilization does not interfere with the operation of the system. If such
utilization causes the utility to whom the licensee's or franchisee's equipment
is attached to incur costs or expenses, the licensee or franchisee shall bear
all such costs actually incurred by such utility.
(Ord. No. 8522, § 1, 6-12-95; Ord. No. 8545, § 11, 7-10-95)
Sec. 7B-28. Nondiscrimination and equal employment opportunities.
The licensee or franchisee shall not deny service, access or otherwise
discriminate against subscribers, users or any resident of the city. In this
regard, the licensee or franchisee shall comply with the human relations
provisions of this Code, section 17-21, incorporated herein by this reference.
The licensee or franchisee shall strictly adhere to the equal employment
opportunity requirements of the FCC. The licensee or franchisee shall comply at
all times with all other applicable federal, state and City laws, rules and
regulations, and all executive and administrative orders relating to
nondiscrimination.
(Ord. No. 8522, § 1, 6-12-95)
Sec. 7B-29. Applications for licenses or franchises.
   (a)   Any person submitting a proposal in response to the city's request for
proposals shall provide all information required by this chapter and all other
information as may be solicited in the city's request for proposals or
otherwise required by the city. Each proposal shall be responsive to the
questions soliciting the information and shall completely, accurately and
materially supply all of the information so solicited. Any misrepresentation,
failure, neglect or refusal to provide any of such information may at the
option of the city render a proposal invalid and it may be given no
consideration. The requested information must be complete and verified as true
by the applicant.
   (b)   All proposals received by the city from the applicants shall become
the sole property of the city.
   (c)   The city reserves the right to reject any and all proposals and to
waive all informalities where the best interest of the city may be served.
   (d)   Before submitting a proposal, each applicant shall be solely
responsible for and must: (1) examine this chapter and the request for proposal
documents thoroughly; (2) be familiar with local conditions that may in any
manner affect performance under the license or franchise, including but in no
event limited to relevant demographics, topographics, pole attachment policies
of appropriate utility authorities, undergrounding, and subscriber and user
desires; (3) be familiar with federal, state and local laws, ordinances, rules
and regulations affecting performance under the license or franchise; and (4)
carefully correlate all observations with the requirements of this chapter and
the request for proposal documents.
   (e)   The city may make such investigations as it deems necessary to
determine the ability of the applicant to perform under the license or
franchise agreement, and the applicant shall furnish to the city all such
information and date for this purpose as the city may request. The city
reserves the right to reject any proposal if the evidence submitted by or
investigation of such applicant fails to satisfy the city that such applicant
is properly qualified to carry out the obligations of the license or franchise
agreement, to comply with the provisions of this chapter, or to satisfactorily
construct and operate the system. Conditional proposals shall not be accepted.
   (f)   Application fees.
   (1)   In addition to any franchise fees, and notwithstanding any other
requirement of this chapter, each applicant must furnish with its proposal a
nonrefundable filing fee in the amount of seventy-five hundred dollars
($7,500.00) by certified or cashiers check made payable to the city. No
proposal for a license or franchise shall be considered without receipt of such
check.
   (2)   All checks received will be deposited to an account of the city and
will serve to recover all expenses incurred by the city in the preparation and
granting of the license or franchise, the execution of the license or franchise
agreement and regulation of the licensee or franchisee pursuant to this
chapter. Such expenses shall include but not be limited to any and all
publication costs, consultant's expenses and the reasonable value of services
performed by the city's employees, agents or contractors.
   (3)   In the event that the city's expenses in connection with the
application and selection process exceed the total amount of filing fees
collected from the applicants, the applicant awarded the license or franchise
shall pay to the city (pro rata in the event more than one (1) applicant is
awarded a license or franchise) the excess amount, not to exceed fifty thousand
dollars ($50,000.00) within sixty (60) days of demand by the city.
   (g)   Application for a license or franchise pursuant to this chapter
constitutes a consent by the applicant to the surrendering of any and all
preexisting licenses or franchises for the provision of any aspect of
competitive telecommunications services previously granted by the city. Upon
the granting of a license or franchise pursuant to this chapter, the applicant
shall forthwith surrender any and all such existing licenses or franchises to
the city, and any and all such licenses or franchises shall be superceded by
the license or franchise granted pursuant to this chapter.
   (h)   Any and all decisions of the mayor and council concerning licensee or
franchisee selection shall be final.
(Ord. No. 8522, § 1, 6-12-95; Ord. No. 8545, § 12, 7-10-95)
Sec. 7B-30. Cost of consultant.
In addition to any required franchise fees, and notwithstanding any other
payment required by this chapter or the license or franchise agreement, when
necessary to aid in the analysis of matters relating to the system, including,
but not limited to, rate investigations and regulation, technical standards,
construction supervision or market surveys in the city, the city shall be
entitled to employ the services of a consultant to assist and advise the city
manager and the mayor and council. All reasonable fees of the consultant
incurred by the city in this regard shall be shared equally by the licensee or
franchisee and the city, regardless of the nature or outcome of any specific
matter under consideration. The terms of this section shall not apply to any
research cost incurred by the city in connection with the right of the city to
purchase the system.
(Ord. No. 8522, § 1, 6-12-95)
Sec. 7B-31. Damages.
By execution of the license or franchise agreement, the licensee or franchisee
agrees that failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter and the
license or franchise agreement will result in damage to the city, and that it
will be impracticable to determine the actual amount of such damage; and that,
in addition to any other damages suffered by the city or remedies available to
it, the licensee or franchisee will pay to the city the following amounts
chargeable by the city to the security deposit established in section
7B-25 ("Security Deposit") of this chapter:
   (1)   For failure to timely file required plans, data or reports pursuant to
this chapter and the license or franchise agreement, per day . . . . . $ 50.00
   (2)   For failure to comply with reasonable orders of the city, per day . .
. . . 50.00
   (3)   For failure to complete construction or commence operations pursuant
to this chapter and the license or franchise agreement, per day . . . . .
350.00
   (4)   For failure to provide the services proposed by the licensee or
franchisee pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and incorporated into the
license or franchise agreement, per day . . . . . 350.00
   (5)   For failure to timely pay the license or franchise fee or other moneys
due the city pursuant to this chapter and the license or franchise agreement,
per day . . . . . 250.00
(Ord. No. 8522, § 1, 6-12-95; Ord. No. 8545, § 13, 7-10-95)
Sec. 7B-32. Remedies, violation a civil infraction.
   (a)   Where this chapter provides alternative penalties or remedies, they
shall be cumulative; and the imposition of one penalty or remedy shall not
prevent the imposition of any other penalty or remedy provided for.
   (b)   It shall be a civil infraction for any person to violate any of the
provisions of this chapter. Any person found liable for violating any provision
of this chapter or any rule or regulation promulgated hereunder shall be
subject to a civil penalty of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor
more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense. Each day of a
continuing violation shall constitute a separate and distinct civil infraction.
(Ord. No. 8522, § 1, 6-12-95)
Sec. 7B-33. Severability.
If any provision, section, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such
invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions of this chapter. It is the intent of the city in adopting
this chapter that no portion or provision thereof shall become inoperative or
fail by reason of any invalidity or unconstitutionality of any other portion or
provision, and to this end all provisions of this chapter are declared to be
severable.
(Ord. No. 8522, § 1, 6-12-95)
Sec. 7B-34. Application to existing systems.
In any case where a person had been previously granted a non-exclusive license
or franchise for telecommunications facilities for the purpose of providing
local linkage to long distance telecommunications services and that person or
an assignee, duly consented to by the mayor and council, is validly operating
under the terms thereof, such licensee or franchisee may continue to provide
such local linkage in strict accord with its terms over existing facilities. No
permits for further expansion of existing facilities will be granted without an
application under this chapter. Any renewal of such continuing license,
however, shall be in accord with the provisions of this chapter. At any time
within one year of the enactment of this ordinance, however, the licensee or
franchisee may elect to bring itself under the provisions of this chapter for
the balance of the term of the subsisting license, and the terms of the
subsisting license shall be deemed to conform to this chapter.
(Ord. No. 8522, § 1, 6-12-95)
Sec. 7B-35. Permit moratorium.
No sooner than thirty (30) days from the date of adoption of this chapter, the
city shall examine whether equal access to the capability for fiber optic
facility attachments to utility poles or other facilities of other city-
franchised entities exists within the city. In the event that the city
determines, in its sole discretion, that equal access to pole or other utility
facility attachments does not exist at such time, the city shall forthwith
impose a permit moratorium upon the issuance of all new street excavation,
right-of-way excavation, or other construction or installation permits for all
fiberoptic installations within the city relating to such facilities, including
permits for modification of existing facilities. Such moratorium shall also
have the effect of cancelling any existing permit for any fiber optic licensee
which allows attachment to any such pole or other utility facility attachments
of other city-franchised entities within the city for the duration of such
moratorium. The moratorium imposed pursuant to this section shall remain in
effect until the city determines, in its sole discretion, that equal access
exists within the city for pole or other utility facility attachments for fiber
optic communications facilities.
(Ord. No. 8522, § 1, 6-12-95; Ord. No. 8545, § 14, 7-10-95)
Sec. 7B-36. Limited point-of-presence only licenses authorized.
The mayor and council may issue limited non-exclusive licenses pursuant to the
authority of A.R.S. § 9-561, et seq., to authorize placement of interstate
fiber-optic telecommunications facilities within city rights-of-way in the
event the facilities do not exceed twenty (20) linear miles in total length of
installation and connect only to interstate telecommunication carrier points of
presence, and to no other connection within the city. Notwithstanding any other
provision of this chapter, said licenses shall provide for payment to the city
of a right-of-way occupancy fee for each linear foot of installation on a basis
determined by the mayor and council at the time of the granting of the license,
and shall contain such other terms and conditions as the mayor and council may
approve.
(Ord. No. 8936, § 1, 9-2-97; Ord. No. 10317, § 2, 9-12-06)
Sec. 7B-37. Exemption for pre-statehood telecommunications providers.
The provisions of this chapter
7B shall not apply to any telecommunications provider in connection with the
provision of wireline local exchange services who is providing, and with its
predecessors-in-interest has been continuously providing, local exchange
service within the city since prior to February 14, 1912, under a claim of a
territorial franchise.
(Ord. No. 9909, § 1, 11-3-03)
Sec. 7B-38. No vested rights.
The exemptions in this chapter shall not be interpreted to create vested rights
in any person.
(Ord. No. 9909, § 2, 11-3-03)
Chapter 7C
RESERVED*
__________
*   Editors Note: Ordinance No. 9099, § 1, adopted August 3, 1998, repealed
chapter
7C in its entirety. Formerly, such section pertained to telecommunications
service providers: fees for rights-of-way and derived from Ord. No. 8997, § 1,
12-8-97.
__________
Chapter 7D
LOCATION AND RELOCATION OF FACILITIES IN RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Sec.
7D-1.   Registration.
Sec.
7D-2.   Location and relocation of facilities in rights-of-way.
Sec.
7D-3.   Conflict with city projects.
Sec.
7D-4.   Damage to city rights-of-way and facilities.
Sec.
7D-5.   Relocation of facilities.
Sec.
7D-6.   City police power; continuing jurisdiction.
Sec.
7D-7.   Compliance required.
Sec. 7D-1. Registration.
Providers must register with the city on a form prescribed by the city and must
include the following information: (1) the provider's name, address and
telephone number; (2) a description of the services to be provided; (3)
description of the facilities used or provided by provider; and (4) a
description of the location of the facilities. A provider shall file a proposed
amendment to the registration before it makes any change that would render the
registration information incomplete or inaccurate. A change of the provider's
name or address must be filed at least sixty (60) days prior to the date the
change becomes effective, a change in the telephone number must be filed ten
(10) days before the change becomes effective; in the case of change in
facilities (by addition, subtraction or modification or movement) the change in
facilities must be filed at least sixty (60) days before work commences on the
facilities unless the relocation was ordered by the city. In the case of a
change in services, the change must be noticed thirty (30) days before the
earlier of the date the service commences, or provider begins marketing the
service.
(Ord. No. 8997, § 2, 12-8-97)
Sec. 7D-2. Location and relocation of facilities in rights-of-way.
   A.   Each provider is responsible for ensuring that its facilities are
installed, constructed and maintained in strict accordance with the City Code;
that all required licenses, franchises and permits are applied for and obtained
before any work commences; and that the terms and conditions thereof are
strictly followed. Where a facility has more than one (1) provider, each
provider is fully responsible for ensuring that all requirements are satisfied.
Facilities shall be installed, constructed and maintained so that no additional
costs are imposed upon the city, and so that the facility does not interfere
with other uses or users of the public rights-of-way. Without limiting the
requirement of any other provision of the City Code, or the provisions of any
license, permit or franchise issued by the city, this shall require, at a
minimum, compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   The facilities to be constructed, installed, operated, and maintained
by the provider shall be so located or relocated as to interfere as little as
possible with traffic or other authorized uses over, under, or through the
rights-of-way. Those phases of construction relating to traffic control,
backfilling, compaction, and paving, as well as the location or relocation of
said facilities shall be subject to regulation by the city council of the city.
   C.   The provider shall keep accurate installation records of the location
of all facilities in the rights-of-way and furnish them to the city upon
request or at such periodic intervals as the city may require. Upon completion
of new or relocation construction of underground facilities in the rights-of-
way, the provider shall provide the city, if requested or as required, with
installation records in a format compatible with the current city mapping
format showing the location of the underground and above ground facilities.
   D.   Whenever the provider shall cause any opening or alteration whatever to
be made for any purpose in any rights-of-way, the work shall be completed
within a reasonable time, and the provider shall, without expense to the city
and upon the completion of such work, restore the property disturbed in a
manner consistent with the city's duly adopted standards, or as required by its
permits, licenses, or franchises.
   E.   Subject to the further provisions of section
7D-3, the installation, use, and maintenance of the provider's facilities
within the rights-of-way authorized herein shall be in such a manner as not to
interfere with the city's placement, construction, use, and maintenance of its
rights-of-way, street lighting, water pipes, drains, sewers, traffic signal
systems, or other city systems that have been, or may be, installed,
maintained, used or authorized by the city. Upon the city's request, provider's
facilities will be relocated at provider's expense (unless state law expressly
requires otherwise). Upon the cites request, by a time specified by the city.
If the provider fails to move its facilities, the city may do so and will bill
the provider the costs therefore. Further, the provider shall reimburse the
city any additional cost the city incurs due to the location or relocation of
the provider's facilities, including all design and construction costs.
   F.   The provider shall not install, maintain, or use any of its facilities
in such a manner as to damage or interfere with facilities of another located
within the rights-of-way of the city will relocate its facilities, if
necessary, to accommodate another facility relocation.
   G.   All installation of facilities shall be installed per plans approved by
the city. Provider may install facilities on existing utility poles or in
existing conduit where permission is granted by owner of the utility pole or
conduit, and such permission is verified by the city except where those same
poles are scheduled to be replaced with buried facilities. No new poles, or
longer poles, will be permitted in the rights-of-way for any new facilities. If
provider installs facilities on existing poles as provided herein, the provider
shall bury its facilities if such poles are removed and not replaced in kind
for any reason. If the provider makes use of existing conduit of another
provider, the provider shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter in
the use of such conduit in the rights-of-way.
   H.   Each provider must obtain and must prove that it has obtained such
insurance, bonding, and security fund requirements as specified by the city, or
if no specific requirements are specified, as are required by the city for
similar facilities. No work shall commence unless these requirements have been
satisfied, and the city may require the provider to remove or stop work on
facilities or require a provider to cease using the facility, by where
insurance, bonding and security fund requirements are not satisfied.
   I.   A permit shall be obtained prior to removing, abandoning, relocating,
or reconstructing, if necessary, any portion of a provider's facilities.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city understands and acknowledges there may
be instances when a provider is required to make repairs, in compliance with
federal or state laws, that are of an emergency nature. The provider will
notify the city prior to such repairs, if practicable, and will obtain the
necessary permits in a reasonable time after notification.
(Ord. No. 8997, § 2, 12-8-97)
Sec. 7D-3. Conflict with city projects.
   A.   If, during the design process for public improvements, the city
discovers a potential conflict with proposed construction, the provider shall
either:
   (1)   Locate and, if necessary, expose its facilities in conflict; or
   (2)   Use a location service under contract with the city to locate or
expose its facilities. The provider shall reimburse the city for the cost
resulting from the use of such location service. The city shall make reasonable
efforts to design and construct projects pursuant to this section so as to
avoid relocation expense to the provider. Provider shall furnish the location
information in a timely manner, but in no case longer than forty-five (45)
days.
   B.   The city reserves the prior and superior right to lay, construct,
erect, install, use, operate, repair, replace, remove, relocate, regrade,
widen, realign, or maintain any right-of-way, aerial, surface, or subsurface
improvements, including, but not limited to, water mains, traffic control
conduits, cable and devices, sanitary or storm sewers, subways, tunnels,
bridges, viaducts, or any other public construction within the rights-of-way of
the city.
   C.   When the city invokes its prior superior right to the rights-of-way,
the provider shall move its facilities located in the rights-of-way, at its own
cost, to such a location as the city directs.
   D.   If, during the course of a project, the city determines provider's
facilities are in conflict, the following shall apply:
   (1)   Prior to city notice to proceed to contractor: The provider shall,
within a reasonable time, but in no event exceeding six (6) months, remove or
relocate the conflicting facility. This time period shall begin running upon
receipt by the provider of written notice from the city. However, if both the
city and the provider agree, the time frame may be extended based on the
requirements of the project.
   (2)   Subsequent to city notice to proceed to contractor: The city and the
provider will immediately begin the coordination necessary to remove or
relocate the facility. Actual construction of such removal or relocation is to
begin no later than seventy-two (72) hours, if practicable, after written
notification from the city of the conflict.
(Ord. No. 8997, § 2, 12-8-97)
Sec. 7D-4. Damage to city rights-of-way and facilities.
   A.   If, in the installation, use, or maintenance of its facilities, the
provider damages or disturbs the surface or subsurface of any rights-of-way or
adjoining public property, or the public improvement located thereon, therein,
or thereunder, the provider shall promptly, at its own expense, and in a manner
acceptable to the city, restore the surface or subsurface of the rights-of- way
or public property, or repair or replace the public improvement thereon,
therein, or thereunder, in as good a condition as before such damage or
disturbance. If such restoration, repair, or replacement of the surface,
subsurface, or any structure located thereon, therein, or thereunder is not
completed within a reasonable time, or such repair or replacement does not meet
duly adopted standards, the city shall have the right to perform the necessary
restoration, repair, or replacement, either through its own forces, or through
a hired contractor, and the provider shall pay the city for its expenses in so
doing within thirty (30) days after its receipt of the invoice therefor.
   B.   The provider shall reimburse the city for all costs arising from the
reduction in the service life of any public road or pavement damage, to the
extent required by any other city ordinances, resulting from pavement cuts of
the provider. The provider shall pay such costs within thirty (30) days from
the date of issuance of an invoice from the city.
(Ord. No. 8997, § 2, 12-8-97)
Sec. 7D-5. Relocation of facilities.
   A.   The city shall not bear any cost of relocation of existing facilities,
irrespective of the function served, where the city facilities or other
facilities occupying the rights-of-way under authority of a city permit,
license, or franchise which must be relocated, are already located in the
rights-of-way and the conflict between the provider's potential facilities and
existing facilities can only be resolved expeditiously as determined by the
city by the movement of the existing city or other approved facilities.
   B.   If provider's relocation effort so delays construction of a public
project causing the city to be liable for delay damages, the provider shall
reimburse the city for those damages attributable to the delay created by the
provider. If the event the provider should dispute the amount of damages
attributable to the provider, the matter shall be referred to the dispute
resolution board. The dispute resolution board shall consist of one (1) member
selected by the city, one (1) member selected by the provider, and a third
person agreed upon by both parties. The person agreed upon by both parties
shall be chairperson of the dispute resolution board. Expenses for the dispute
resolution board shall be shared equally by the city and the provider. The
board will hear the dispute promptly, and render an opinion as soon as
possible, but in no case later than sixty (60) days after notification by the
city of provider's allocated share of damages suffered by the city. All
decisions of the dispute resolution board are non-binding on either the city or
the provider, however, the findings of the dispute resolution board shall be
admissible in any legal action.
The city and the provider shall accept or reject findings of the dispute
resolution board within thirty (30) days after receipt of the findings. If
damages are assessed by the dispute resolution board, the provider shall pay
the city within thirty (30) days. Late charges of five (5) percent and interest
charges of one and one-half percent per month shall be added for late payment.
   C.   Except as otherwise provided in a license, franchise or permit or by
other provision of law, the entire cost of relocation shall be borne by the
city if the provider is required by the city to relocate facilities which are
located in private basements obtained by the provider prior to the dedication
of the public street or easement from which the facilities must be relocated.
These prior rights of the provider would also be unaffected by any subsequent
relocation. A prior rights as used in this subsection, means private easement
rights obtained by the provider prior to the dedication of the streets or
public ways from which the facilities are requested by the city to be
relocated. In the case of a facility that serves multiple purposes, the prior
rights must extend to all uses for this exception to apply.
(Ord. No. 8997, § 2, 12-8-97)
Sec. 7D-6. City police power; continuing jurisdiction.
   A.   The provider shall at all times be subject to all lawful exercise of
the police power by the city, including any and all ordinances, rules, or
regulations which the city has adopted or may adopt, and all laws, rules,
regulations, orders, and policies of the state and the United States
government. In the event of a conflict between this ordinance and other
provisions of the Tucson Code, the stricter requirement shall apply.
   B.   Continuing jurisdiction. The city shall have continuing jurisdiction
and supervision over any facilities located within or on city rights-of-way.
However, it is recognized that the daily administrative, supervisory, and
enforcement responsibilities of the provisions of this article and the permit
shall be delegated and entrusted to the city manager or the manager's designee
to interpret, administer, and enforce the provisions of this chapter, and to
promulgate standards regarding the construction, reconstruction, relocation,
maintenance, dismantling, abandonment, or use of the facilities within the city
rights-of-way.
(Ord. No. 8997, § 2, 12-8-97)
Sec. 7D-7. Compliance required.
From and after the effective date of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any
provider to occupy the streets and public ways unless the provider is in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
This chapter manages and regulates the use of facilities in the public streets
and ways by providers, it does not grant the right to occupy the streets and
public ways, which authority must be obtained by separate permit, license, or
franchise or other legal authority.
(Ord. No. 8997, § 2, 12-8-97)
Chapter 8
CITY COURT*
__________
*   Charter References: City court,
ch. XII.
   Cross References: Penalty for violating ordinances, §
1-8; treatment of prisoners generally, §
1-9 et seq.; violations of traffic regulations, §
20-68 et seq.
__________
Art. I.   In General, §§ 8-1--8-34
Art. II.   Reserved
Article I. In General
Sec.
8-1.   Jurisdiction, powers, duties.
Sec.
8-2.   Appointment of magistrates; several powers, duties.
Sec.
8-2.1.   Methods of appointment of magistrates and qualifications; establishing
senior special magistrate status and compensation.
Sec.
8-2.2.   Appointment of special magistrates; full-time magistrate pro tempore;
terms of office; compensation; powers; duties; qualifications.
Sec.
8-2.3.   Appointment of limited special magistrates; term; powers; duties;
qualifications; compensation.
Sec.
8-2.4.   Criminal history records check prior to appointment of city
magistrates.
Sec.
8-2.5.   Justices of the peace appointed as special magistrates for weekend
arraignments, initial appearances, and conflict and other cases designated by
the presiding magistrate.
Sec.
8-3.   Conducting business on nonjuridical days.
Sec.
8-4.   Magistrates; powers and duties.
Sec.
8-4.1.   Authorizing assignment of a presiding magistrate, term, compensation,
duties.
Sec.
8-5.   Duty to fix bond, bail, fines, penalties, fees and assessments.
Sec.
8-5.2.   Probation monitoring fees.
Sec.
8-6.   Assumption of chapter
28 procedures.
Sec.
8-6.1.   Penalties.
Sec.
8-6.3.   Reimbursement of city's costs of incarceration; factors to be
considered; exemption for indigent persons; reimbursement separate and distinct
from any sentence or probation conditions; action for recovery authorized.
Sec.
8-6.4.   Administrative fee for warrants issued for failure to pay fines or
restitution; exemption for indigent persons; fee separate and distinct from any
sentence or probation conditions; action for recovery authorized.
Sec.
8-6.5.   Case processing fee; exemption for indigent persons; deposit and use
of funds collected; fee separate and distinct from any sentence or probation
conditions or civil penalty; action for recovery authorized.
Sec.
8-6.6.   Assessment of administrative charge on persons convicted in city court
of violations of A.R.S. § 28-1381 et seq.
Sec.
8-6.7.   Administrative default fee; exemption for indigent persons; fee
separate and distinct from any fine or other fee; action for recovery
authorized.
Sec.
8-6.8.   Post-adjudicated civil motion filing fee; exemption for extraordinary
circumstances; fee separate and distinct from any sentence; action for recovery
authorized.
Sec.
8-6.9.   Defensive Driving School (DDS) rescheduling fee; fee separate and
distinct from any sentence; action for recovery authorized.
Sec.
8-7.   Fines; collection; abatement.
Sec.
8-8.   City court procedures.
Sec.
8-9.   When jury trial required.
Sec.
8-10.   Summoning jurors.
Sec.
8-11.   Number of jurors; challenges for cause.
Sec.
8-12.   Pay of jurors.
Sec.
8-13.   Execution to collect fine.
Sec.
8-14.   Director of finance; powers and duties in relation to city court.
Secs.
8-15--8-34.   Reserved.
Article II. Reserved
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL*
__________
*   Editors Note: Ord. No. 7733, adopted Dec. 9, 1991, extensively revised this
article by amending certain sections, by repealing certain sections, and by
renumbering certain sections. The editor has retained the history note as it
appeared prior to the renumbering and has included a note giving the former
section number.
   Section 10 gave an effective date of §§ 2--7 as the effective date of the
intergovernmental agreement between the city and the county superior court
attached to Res. No. 15893. Section 1 of Ord. No. 7756, adopted Jan. 13, 1992,
changed the number of the resolution to Res. No. 15917.
__________
Sec. 8-1. Jurisdiction, powers, duties.
   (a)   There shall be a city court which shall be the municipal court for the
city, to be known and designated as "The City Court of the City of Tucson, Pima
County, State of Arizona". It shall have and exercise the jurisdiction
conferred upon it by the Charter and the Code of the city. It shall exercise
exclusive original jurisdiction of all proceedings of a criminal nature for the
violation of the Charter or of any ordinance of the city, and of every action
of any nature for the enforcement of a penalty, or the recovery of a penalty or
forfeiture imposed by any ordinance of the city for the violation thereof or
for neglect to perform any duty by any ordinance imposed or for a violation of
a civil traffic ordinance and of every action for the collection of any license
fee, fine or penalty due from any person to the city and required to be paid or
which is due and collectible under the ordinances of the city.
   (b)   The city court shall further have jurisdiction over all actions
alleging civil violations or civil infractions of this Code.
   (c)   The city court shall further have concurrent jurisdiction with
justices of the peace over all violations of the laws of the state committed
within the limits of the city. The court shall also have jurisdiction of
violations of the Charter and ordinances of the city committed on land owned or
leased by the city, whether contiguous or noncontiguous, lying without the
corporate limits thereof, to the same extent and with like effect as if the
violation occurred within the corporate limits of the city, provided that the
land is signed as provided in subsection B of A.R.S. section 9-401.
   (d)   The city court shall further have jurisdiction over all civil actions
filed by any interested party or individual aggrieved by an employer's or
hiring entity's violation of chapter 17, article X, and the city court shall
have authority to award to a prevailing plaintiff legal or equitable relief, as
well as attorneys' fees and costs.
(1953 Code, ch. 9A, § 1; Ord. No. 5930, § 1, 12-19-83; Ord. No. 7887, § 2, 8-3-
92; Ord. No. 11868, 8-10-21)
   Cross References: Authority of city to exercise jurisdiction over land owned
or leased outside city. §
1-7.
Sec. 8-2. Appointment of magistrates; several powers, duties.
There shall be appointed a sufficient number of magistrates as determined by
the mayor and council. Each magistrate shall exercise powers and duties as
provided by the Charter and Code of the city and the constitution and laws of
the state in such cases made and provided.
(1953 Code, ch. 9A, §§ 2, 3, 4; Ord. No. 1956, §§ 1, 3, 9-8-59; Ord. No. 2529,
§ 1, 10-14-63; Ord. No. 4679, § 2, 6-27-77; Ord. No. 5169, § 1, 6-16-80; Ord.
No. 7733, § 2, 12-9-91)
   Charter References: Term of office of magistrate,
ch. XII, § 3.
Sec. 8-2.1. Methods of appointment of magistrates and qualifications;
establishing senior special magistrate status and compensation.
   (a)   There shall be a nonpartisan merit selection commission known as the
magistrate merit selection commission on magistrate appointments composed of
four (4) attorney members appointed by the county bar association, not more
than two (2) of whom shall be of the same political party, and five (5) non-
attorney members appointed by the Mayor and Council. Of the five (5) non-
attorney members not more than three (3) shall be of the same political party.
None of the attorney or non-attorney members of the commission shall hold any
other elective or appointive public office or be a member of law enforcement,
and no attorney member shall be eligible for appointment to the office of
magistrate until one (1) year after ceasing to be a member of the commission.
All members shall serve four (4) year terms.
   (b)   For the purpose of conducting the business of the commission, a quorum
shall consist of five (5) members.
   (c)   Within ninety (90) days from the occurrence of a vacancy in the office
of magistrate or at the request of mayor and council, the commission shall
recommend to the mayor and council the names of not more than three (3) persons
in ranked order to fill the position of magistrate or satisfy such request. Any
such candidate shall be:
   (1)   Of good moral character;
   (2)   A resident of Arizona for one (1) year immediately preceding
recommendation; and
   (3)   Admitted to the practice of law for five (5) years immediately
preceding recommenda-tion.
   In addition to other relevant materials and the results of the biennial
judicial performance review, where a sitting magistrate seeks a new appointment
the commission shall consider the magistrate's courtroom administrative
performance, as evidenced by matters including but not limited to case aging,
case load, time to rule on matters under advisement and rulings reversed/
affirmed on appeal to the extent any such measures do not conflict with
judicial independence; and the magistrate's adherence to the city's rules of
conduct and code of ethics to the extent adherence is not inconsistent with the
Code of Judicial Conduct. The presiding magistrate of the city court shall
perform a written annual review of each magistrate's performance measured by
these criteria.
   (d)   No later than nine (9) months prior to the expiration of the term, a
magistrate may apply for reappointment in writing to the mayor and council.
Upon such notice, the magistrate merit selection commission shall review the
term of the magistrate and submit a written report of its findings to the mayor
and council, which shall include a recommendation as to the reappointment. Such
report shall be submitted at least ten (10) days prior to the expiration of the
term. Upon expiration of the magistrate's term, the mayor and council may
reappoint the magistrate, or may appoint a successor in accordance with the
procedures set forth herein.
   (e)   A regular magistrate who completes a term in office and does not seek
reappointment enters senior special magistrate status. The presiding magistrate
of the city court may call a senior special magistrate to serve temporarily as
needed; such senior special magistrates shall be compensated (without benefits)
at the per-session rate for special magistrates set forth in Section
8-2.2(b) of this code.
(Ord. No. 4815, § 1, 5-22-78; Ord. No. 4866, § 1, 8-7-78; Ord. No. 4919, § 1,
12-18-78; Ord. No. 7305, § 1, 11-6-89; Ord. No. 7513, § 1, 11-19-90; Ord. No.
8189, § 1, 2-7-94; Ord. No. 8254, § 1, 4-25-94; Ord. No. 8569, § 1, 9-5-95;
Ord. No. 8767, § 1, 10-21-96; Ord. No. 9086, § 1, 7-6-98; Ord. No. 10062, §§ 1,
2, 10-11-04; Ord. No. 10952, § 1, 12-20-11, eff. 1-1-12; Ord. No. 11335, § 1,
1-5-16; Ord. No. 11626, § 1, 1-20-19)
Sec. 8-2.2. Appointment of special magistrates; full-time magistrate pro
tempore; terms of office; compensation; powers; duties; qualifications.
   (a)   Upon recommendation of the presiding judge of the Pima County Superior
Court and subject to the appointment procedures set forth by the presiding
judge, the mayor and council may appoint special magistrates, as needed, to
assist in the timely adjudication of city court cases. Special magistrates
shall serve a two (2) year term of office and may be reappointed to additional
two (2) year terms. Any special magistrates already serving as of July 1, 2024,
will serve the balance of their existing term, and any subsequent terms will be
two (2) years.
   (b)   The compensation of a special magistrate during the term of
appointment is fixed at the rate of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for
each morning, afternoon or evening session of court at which the special
magistrate sits; provided, however, that such special magistrate shall receive
no more compensation than would be paid to a regular magistrate each month.
   (c)   The powers and duties of a special magistrate shall be the same as
those of a regular magistrate and shall extend beyond the period of appointment
for the purpose of hearing and determining any proceeding necessary for a final
determination of a cause heard by the special magistrate in whole or in part
during the period of appointment.
   (d)   Any such candidate for special magistrate shall possess the
qualifications for a magistrate set forth in Tucson Code section
8-2.1(c)(1) through (c)(3).
   (e)   Subject to the nomination and appointment procedures set forth in
section
8.2.1(a), mayor and council shall appoint construction special magistrates
possessing a demonstrated experience and familiarity of not less than five (5)
years in contract and construction law to hear and decide cases arising under
Tucson Code section
11-38. The compensation for such construction special magistrates shall be as
set forth in subsection (b) above.
   (f)   Upon recommendation of the presiding judge of the Pima County Superior
Court and subject to the appointment procedures set forth by the presiding
judge, the mayor and council may appoint a full-time magistrate pro tempore, as
needed, to assist in the timely adjudication of Tucson City Court cases. The
full-time magistrate pro tempore shall serve a two (2) year term of office and
may be reappointed to an additional two (2) year terms. Any full-time
magistrates pro tempore already serving as of July 1, 2024, will serve the
balance of their existing term, and any subsequent terms will be two (2) years.
Compensation shall be set at eighty (80) percent of the city magistrate's pay
with benefits during the term of the appointment.
   (g)   Any such candidate for full-time magistrate pro tempore shall possess
the qualifications for a magistrate set forth in Tucson Code section 8-2.1(c)
(1) through (c)(3).
(Ord. No. 7887, § 3, 8-3-92; Ord. No. 8835, § 1, 3-3-97; Ord. No. 8943, § 1, 9-
8-97; Ord. No. 9158, § 3, 11-9-98; Ord. No. 9973, § 1, 5-17-04; Ord. No. 10063,
§ 1, 10-11-04; Ord. No. 10952, § 2, 12-20-11, eff. 1-1-12; Ord. No. 11111, § 1,
9-24-13, eff. 10-1-13; Ord. No. 11626, § 1, 1-20-19; Ord. No. 12110, § 1, 8-7-
24)
Sec. 8-2.3. Appointment of limited special magistrates; term; powers; duties;
qualifications; compensation.
   (a)   Subject to the appointment procedures set forth in section
8-2.1, the mayor and council may appoint limited special magistrates to provide
for the expeditious enforcement of civil violations and civil infractions of
the Tucson Code and civil traffic violations under state law. Limited special
magistrates shall be full time, shall serve a two (2) year term of office, and
may be reappointed to additional two (2) year terms. Any limited special
magistrates already serving as of July 1, 2024, will serve the balance of their
existing term, and any subsequent terms will be two (2) years.
   (b)   Limited special magistrates shall have concurrent jurisdiction with
regular and special magistrates to hear and decide actions alleging civil
violations or civil infractions of the Tucson Code and civil traffic violations
under state law, and shall assume all duties referenced in the Tucson Code as
being the responsibility of an administrative hearing officer.
   (c)   At the time of appointment, limited special magistrates must have
demonstrated experience or familiarity with administrative proceedings,
technical codes or traffic law.
   (d)   The compensation to be received by limited special magistrates shall
be as set from time to time by the mayor and council and shall include the same
fringe benefits as provided to regular magistrates.
(Ord. No. 7887, § 4, 8-3-92; Ord. No. 8179, § 1, 1-3-94; Ord. No. 9398, § 1, 6-
12-00; Ord. No. 10063, § 2, 10-11-04; Ord. No. 12110, § 1, 8-7-24)
Sec. 8-2.4. Criminal history records check prior to appointment of city
magistrates.
   (a)   Pursuant to A.R.S. § 41-1750, the City of Tucson is hereby authorized
to receive criminal history record information for the purpose of evaluating
the fitness of current and prospective city court magistrates.
   (b)   Each person who seeks to be appointed as a regular, special, or
limited special city court magistrate or full-time magistrate pro tempore
shall, as part of such appointment application process, furnish a full set of
fingerprints to the city.
   (c)   Pursuant to A.R.S. § 41-1750 and Public Law 92-544, the city shall
submit such fingerprints accompanied by the appropriate fees, which will be
paid by the city, to the Arizona Department of Public Safety and the Federal
Bureau of Investigation for the purpose of obtaining criminal history record
information on all individuals identified in Section 1, subpart B. Such
information shall be used only for the purpose of evaluating the fitness of
such current and prospective city court magistrates.
   (d)   The city shall comply with any relevant State and Federal rules and
regulations that may relate to the dissemination of such criminal history
record information.
(Ord. No. 9085, § 1, 7-6-98; Ord. No. 12110, § 1, 8-7-24)
Sec. 8-2.5. Justices of the peace appointed as special magistrates for weekend
arraignments, initial appearances, and conflict and other cases designated by
the presiding magistrate.
   Any justice of the peace, upon assuming office, is appointed as a special
magistrate of the city for the specific purpose of presiding over arraignments,
initial appearances and any conflict case(s) or other case(s) designated by the
presiding magistrate of the Tucson City Court involving any state law or city
ordinance.
(Ord. No. 9971, § 1, 5-17-04; Ord. No. 10155, § 1, 5-24-05; Ord. No. 10996, §
1, 6-19-12, eff. 7-1-12; Ord. No. 11653, § 1, 5-21-19; Ord. No. 12110, § 1, 8-
7-24)
Sec. 8-3. Conducting business on nonjuridical days.
City court shall always be open except on nonjuridical days. On such
nonjuridical days, it may transact business within its jurisdiction.
(1953 Code, ch. 9A, §§ 2, 3; Ord. No. 1956, § 2, 9-8-59; Ord. No. 4679, § 3, 6-
27-77; Ord. No. 7733, § 3, 12-9-91)
Sec. 8-4. Magistrates; powers and duties.
Each magistrate of the city court, in addition to exercising such judicial
authority as provided in the Charter and Code of the city and the laws of the
state shall:
   (1)   Devote their entire time to the duties of being a magistrate and shall
not engage in the private practice of law.
   (2)   Observe, be available, and be present in attendance upon the court for
the transaction of business every juridical day between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
and 5:00 p.m. In addition to such hours, a magistrate may open court and be in
attendance at the court during such additional hours of any juridical or
nonjuridical day as may be necessary for the discharge or disposition of
business properly coming before the court.
   (3)   Dispose with all reasonable promptness all matters taken under
advisement and, in any event, issue a decision no later than twenty (20) days
thereafter.
   (4)   Issue a minute entry of the court's judgment in all matters wherein
disposition was based upon legal grounds rather than upon the factual merits of
the matter, specifying therein the legal conclusion underlying the court's
judgment.
   (5)   Follow and adhere to supervision by the presiding judge of the
superior court as provided for in Arizona Supreme Court Administrative Order
93-30, and any amendment or successor to this provision.
   (6)   Follow and adhere to the city's rules of conduct and code of ethics
contained in administrative directive 2.02-5 and 2.02-14 and any amendments or
successors to these provisions to the extent adherence to these provisions does
not affect judicial independence or is not inconsistent with the Code of
Judicial Conduct.
(Ord. No. 4679, § 12, 6-27-77; Ord. No. 5169, § 3, 6-16-80; Ord. No. 7733, § 4,
12-9-91; Ord. No. 10062, § 3, 10-11-04; Ord. No. 12110, § 1, 8-7-24)
   Editors Note: Ord. No. 4679, § 1, adopted June 27, 1977, specifically
amended the Code by repealing former §
8-5, which had pertained to office hours and had been derived from the 1953
Code, ch. 9A, § 5. Section 12 of Ord. No. 4679 added a new §
8-5 as hereinabove set out. The section was renumbered §
8-4 and the text amended by § 4 of Ord. No. 7733.
Sec. 8-4.1. Authorizing assignment of a presiding magistrate, term,
compensation, duties.
   (a)   There is hereby created one administrative assignment position of
Presiding Magistrate of the City Court of the City of Tucson whose function it
is to assist the presiding judge of the superior court in performing
administrative duties associated with the judicial and non-judicial functions
of the city court.
   (b)   The presiding judge of the superior court is hereby authorized to
appoint, in their sole discretion, any sitting city magistrate to the
administrative assignment position of presiding magistrate.
   (c)   Any sitting city magistrate selected for assignment to the position of
presiding magistrate shall serve at the pleasure of the presiding judge of the
superior court, and may be removed from the administrative assignment of
presiding magistrate at any time, for any reason, without cause and without
right of appeal by the presiding judge of the superior court.
   (d)   While performing the administrative assignment of presiding
magistrate, a city magistrate shall receive additional compensation in the
amount of ten (10) percent of their annual salary, payable on a biweekly basis,
pro-rated.
   (e)   The presiding magistrate shall perform those duties as required by law
and this chapter and as assigned by the presiding judge of the superior court.
(Ord. No. 9042, § 1, 4-13-98; Ord. No. 10062, § 4, 10-11-04; Ord. No. 10454, §
1, 9-25-07; Ord. No. 12110, § 1, 8-7-24)
Sec. 8-5. Duty to fix bond, bail, fines, penalties, fees and assessments.
The city magistrates shall fix all bonds, bail, fines, penalties, fees and
other assessments which are now or hereafter may be provided by law.
(1953 Code, ch. 9A, § 6; Ord. No. 4679, § 4, 6-27-77; Ord. No. 7733, § 7, 12-9-
91)
   Note: Formerly, §
8-6. Renumbered §
8-5 by § 7 of Ord. No. 7733.
Sec. 8-5.2. Probation monitoring fees.
When granting supervised probation, the city court shall, as a condition of
such probation, assess a monthly probation monitoring fee reflecting the actual
costs of such supervised probation, including screening sessions, any necessary
testing, court-ordered treatment, and any other necessary costs of supervised
probation. Such monthly probation monitoring fee shall be not less than the sum
specified in A.R.S. 13-901(A), or any successor provision(s), unless, after
determining the inability of the probationer to pay the fee, the city court
assesses a lesser fee. Such monthly probation monitoring fee may be assessed
only when the person is placed on supervised probation.
(Ord. No. 8521, § 1, 6-12-95)
Sec. 8-6. Assumption of chapter
28 procedures.
All references in this Code to section
28-12 shall be amended to read section
8-6.1, all references in this Code to section 28-14 shall be amended to read
Rule 23 of Local Rules of Practice and Procedure in City Court Civil
Proceedings, and all references in the Code to chapter
28 shall be amended to read chapter
8.
(Ord. No. 7887, § 5, 8-3-92)
Sec. 8-6.1. Penalties.
   (a)   Unless otherwise provided in this Code, when a civil violation or
civil infraction is determined, the following penalties shall be imposed:
   (1)   A person found responsible for a civil violation or civil infraction
for the first time shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00)
nor more than twenty-five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per civil violation or
civil infraction. A person found responsible for the same civil violation or
civil infraction for a second time shall be fined not less than two hundred
dollars ($200.00) nor more than twenty-five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per
civil violation or civil infraction. A person found responsible for the same
civil violation or civil infraction for a third or subsequent time shall be
fined not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) nor more than twenty-five
hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per civil violation or civil infraction. The
imposition of a fine for civil violations or civil infractions shall not be
suspended.
   (2)   The magistrate, special magistrate or limited special magistrate
shall, after a finding of responsibility, order abatement of the civil
violation or civil infraction. An abatement order shall be effective for one
(1) year unless stayed on appeal. If stayed on appeal the order shall be
effective for one (1) year from the end of the appeal if the finding of
responsible and sentence is upheld.
   (3)   The magistrate, special magistrate or limited special magistrate shall
warn a violator that additional fines will be imposed for failure to abate a
violation, and criminal charges may be brought by the city attorney for failure
to obey an order to abate a violation.
   (b)   Failure of a defendant to comply with any order contained in a
judgment for a civil violation or civil infraction shall result in an
additional fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than
twenty-five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each day the defendant fails to
comply. A defendant's second failure to comply with any order contained in a
judgment for a civil violation or civil infraction shall result in an
additional fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than
twenty-five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each day after the first
determination of the defendant's failure to comply; a defendant's third and
subsequent failures to comply with any order contained in a judgment for a
civil violation or civil infraction shall result in an additional fine of not
less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) nor more than twenty-five hundred
dollars ($2,500.00) for each day after the second or subsequent determination
of the defendant's failure to comply; provided, however, that the total fines
imposed by this subsection and subsection (a) shall not exceed twenty-five
hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per civil violation or civil infraction.
(Ord. No. 7887, § 6, 8-2-92; Ord. No. 8154, § 2, 11-8-93; Ord. No. 8672, § 1,
4-8-96; Ord. No. 11393, § 3, 8-9-16; Ord. No. 12110, § 1, 8-7-24; Ord. No.
12115, § 3, 8-27-24)
Sec. 8-6.3. Reimbursement of city's costs of incarceration; factors to be
considered; exemption for indigent persons; reimbursement separate and distinct
from any sentence or probation conditions; action for recovery authorized.
   (a)   Where the city court sentences a person to a term of incarceration in
the Pima County Jail, or makes a term of incarceration a condition of the
person's probation for an offense, the city court shall order the person to
reimburse the city for all or part of the actual incarceration costs to the
city; EXCEPT THAT no person found by the city court to be indigent shall be
required to reimburse the city for such incarceration costs.
   (b)   The city court shall determine the amount of incarceration costs to be
reimbursed to the city based on the actual per diem per person cost of
incarceration incurred by the city and on the person's ability to pay all or
part of the incarceration costs.
   (c)   The reimbursement of incarceration costs provided for in this section
is hereby declared to be a cost recovery measure, administrative in nature,
separate from and in addition to any sentence or probation conditions imposed
by the city court in the criminal case. The city court shall set forth the
requirement and amount of such reimbursement of incarceration costs as a
separate item in all orders and judgments.
   (d)   In addition to any other rights and remedies available to the city,
where a person fails to reimburse the city for costs of incarceration in
accordance with an order of the city court pursuant to this section the city
attorney is authorized to institute any appropriate civil action in any court
of competent jurisdiction for recovery of such costs of incarceration.
(Ord. No. 8557, § 1, 8-7-95)
Sec. 8-6.4. Administrative fee for warrants issued for failure to pay fines or
restitution; exemption for indigent persons; fee separate and distinct from any
sentence or probation conditions; action for recovery authorized.
   (a)   When a city court magistrate issues a warrant for failure to pay a
fine or restitution, the court shall impose a warrant fee in the amount of
fifty dollars ($50.00) upon the person who is the subject of the warrant, to
cover the city court's administrative cost for processing such warrants. As
used in this section, the term "magistrate" includes senior special
magistrates, magistrates, special magistrates, limited special magistrates, and
full-time magistrates pro tempore.
   (b)   The warrant fee may be waived or suspended when such waiver would be
in the interest of justice. No person who is found to be indigent by the city
court shall be required to pay the warrant fee.
   (c)   The warrant fee provided for in this section is hereby declared to be
a cost recovery measure, administrative in nature, separate from and in
addition to any sentence or probation conditions imposed by the city court in
the criminal case. The city court shall set forth the requirement and amount of
such warrant fee as a separate item in all orders and judgments.
   (d)   In addition to any other rights and remedies available to the city,
the city attorney is authorized to institute any appropriate civil action in
any court of competent jurisdiction for recovery of the warrant fee authorized
under this section.
(Ord. No. 8557, § 1, 8-7-95; Ord. No. 12110, § 1, 8-7-24)
Sec. 8-6.5. Case processing fee; exemption for indigent persons; deposit and
use of funds collected; fee separate and distinct from any sentence or
probation conditions or civil penalty; action for recovery authorized.
   (a)   Each person found guilty or responsible or who enters a plea of guilty
or responsible for any charge in a city court case shall be assessed a
processing fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) for each charge to cover part of the
cost of processing that person's charge through the city court system.
   (b)   The case processing fee may be waived or suspended when such waiver
would be in the interest of justice. No person who is found to be indigent by
the city court shall be required to pay the case processing fee.
   (c)   The case processing fee provided for in this section is hereby
declared to be a cost recovery measure, administrative in nature, separate from
and in addition to any sentence or probation conditions imposed by the city
court in any criminal case, or any civil penalty in cases where a civil penalty
is imposed. The city court shall set forth the requirement and amount of such
case processing fee as a separate item in all orders and judgments.
   (d)   In addition to any other rights and remedies available to the city,
the city attorney is authorized to institute any appropriate civil action in
any court of competent jurisdiction for recovery of the case processing fee
authorized under this section.
(Ord. No. 9851, § 1, 5-12-03; Ord. No. 10585, § 1, 10-7-08, eff. 1-1-09)
Sec. 8-6.6. Assessment of administrative charge on persons convicted in city
court of violations of A.R.S. § 28-1381 et seq.
   (a)   A person convicted in city court of a violation of A.R.S. § 28-1381 et
seq. either after trial or pursuant to plea agreement, shall be assessed an
administrative charge to cover all or part of the administrative costs and
expenses directly incurred by the city police department in the investigation
of violations of A.R.S. § 28-1381 et seq. The administrative charge constitutes
a debt of the person, and may be collected by the city.
   (b)   The city court shall assess and collect the administrative charge on
behalf of the city. The court shall set forth the requirement and amount of the
administrative charge as a separate item in all orders and judgments, and not
as part of any sentence or probation conditions imposed by the city court in
the criminal case.
   (c)   No person whom the city court finds to be indigent shall be required
to pay the monetary charge authorized in this section. If the court finds that
a person is able to pay only a portion of the administrative charge as
calculated by the chief of police pursuant to subsection (d), the court may
waive that portion that the court finds the person is unable to pay.
   (d)   The chief of police shall, on a periodic basis, determine the amount
of costs and expenses, including but not limited to officer salaries, directly
incurred by the city police department in the investigation of violations of
A.R.S. § 28-1381 et seq., and set the administrative charge to be assessed
against each convicted person at an amount reasonably calculated to recover all
or part of those costs and expenses, but in no event to exceed the average case
amount of such costs and expenses. The calculated amount shall not include
costs and expenses for officer testimony given during discovery, or at a
hearing or trial. The chief of police shall communicate the amount of the
administrative charge to be assessed against each convicted person to the city
court.
   (e)   The administrative charge collected by the city court shall be
deposited in the general fund.
   (f)   In addition to any other rights and remedies available to the city,
the city attorney is authorized to institute any appropriate civil action in
any court of competent jurisdiction for recovery of the administrative charge
authorized under this section.
   (g)   The liability imposed under this section is in addition to and not in
limitation of any other liability which may be imposed, except that this
section shall not apply in any case where the convicted person caused an
accident that resulted in an appropriate emergency response, thereby making
A.R.S. § 28-1386 et seq. applicable. It is the intent of the mayor and council
that this section supplement the provisions of A.R.S. § 28-1386 et seq. in
cases where that statute is not applicable, and that A.R.S. § 28-1386 et seq.
control in the event of any actual conflict between it and this section.
   (h)   The administrative charge provided for in this section is hereby
declared to be a cost recovery measure, administrative in nature, separate from
and in addition to any sentence or probation conditions imposed by the city
court in the criminal case.
   (i)   As used in this section, the term "chief of police" includes any
designee(s) of that officer.
(Ord. No. 8729, § 1, 7-1-96; Ord. No. 8958, § 2, 9-22-97)
Sec. 8-6.7. Administrative default fee; exemption for indigent persons; fee
separate and distinct from any fine or other fee; action for recovery
authorized.
   (a)   A default fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each charge shall be
assessed against a defendant who fails to appear, or who fails to pay a
sanction or penalty imposed by the court, in any case involving a civil traffic
violation of the Arizona Revised Statutes or civil violation, civil infraction
or civil parking infraction of the Code.
   (b)   The default fee may be waived or suspended when such waiver would be
in the interest of justice. No person who is found to be indigent by the city
court shall be required to pay the default fee.
   (c)   The default fee provided for in this section is hereby declared to be
a cost recovery measure, administrative in nature, separate from and in
addition to any other fines or fees imposed. The city court shall set forth the
requirement and amount of such default fee as a separate item in all orders and
judgments.
   (d)   In addition to any other rights and remedies available to the city,
the city attorney is authorized to institute appropriate civil action in any
court of competent jurisdiction for recovery of the default fee authorized
under this section.
(Ord. No. 9194, § 1, 1-25-99; Ord. No. 10010, § 1, 8-2-04)
Sec. 8-6.8. Post-adjudicated civil motion filing fee; exemption for
extraordinary circumstances; fee separate and distinct from any sentence;
action for recovery authorized.
   (a)   Each person filing a motion in a post-adjudicated civil case, to
include those in default and/or submitted to the Fines Fees and Restitution
Enforcement (FARE) program, will pay a five dollar ($5.00) post-adjudicated
civil motion filing fee. The five dollar ($5.00) filing fee shall be paid prior
to acceptance and processing of the motion.
   (b)   Absent extraordinary circumstances the five dollar ($5.00) filing fee
shall not be waived. When waving the five dollar ($5.00) filing fee, city court
shall set forth the extraordinary circumstances in all orders and judgments
waving the fee.
   (c)   The post-adjudicated civil motion filing fee provided for in this
section is hereby declared to be a cost recovery measure, administrative in
nature, separate from and in addition to any sentence or civil penalty
previously imposed by the court.
   (d)   In addition to any other rights and remedies available to the city,
the city attorney is authorized to institute any appropriate civil action in
any court of competent jurisdiction for recovery of the post adjudicated civil
motion filing fee authorized under this section.
(Ord. No. 10849, § 1, 11-9-10, eff. 12-1-10)
Sec. 8-6.9. Defensive Driving School (DDS) rescheduling fee; fee separate and
distinct from any sentence; action for recovery authorized.
   (a)   Each person requesting the court for an extension of time to complete
Defensive Driving School shall pay a seventeen dollar ($17.00) rescheduling
fee. The seventeen dollar ($17.00) rescheduling fee shall be paid prior to each
court authorized extension.
   (b)   The rescheduling fee provided for in this section is hereby declared
administrative in nature, separate from and in addition to any sentence or
civil penalty previously imposed by the court.
   (c)   In addition to any other rights and remedies available to the city,
the city attorney is authorized to institute any appropriate civil action in
any court of competent jurisdiction for recovery of the DDS rescheduling fee
authorized under this section.
(Ord. No. 10901, § 1, 6-14-11, eff. 7-1-11)
Sec. 8-7. Fines; collection; abatement.
Any civil fine not paid within thirty (30) days after judgment shall constitute
a lien against the real property of the defendant and may be filed with the
county recorder's office. The city attorney may commence a separate legal
action in city court to collect the fine. When the magistrate, special
magistrate or limited special magistrate or full-time magistrate pro tempore
orders correction or abatement of a civil violation or civil infraction, and
there is no compliance within thirty (30) days, such violation shall be deemed
a public nuisance, and the city attorney may seek injunctive relief in a court
of competent jurisdiction. Any action taken under this section shall be in
addition to any other remedies provided for in this Code.
(Ord. No. 7887, § 7, 8-3-92; Ord. No. 12110, § 1, 8-7-24)
Sec. 8-8. City court procedures.
   (a)   The rules of criminal procedure of the state shall apply to all
criminal proceedings in city court. The rules of procedure in civil traffic
violation cases shall apply to all proceedings in city court for civil traffic
violations. The Local Rules of Practice and Procedure in City Court Civil
Proceedings shall apply to all proceedings for civil parking infractions and to
all other actions for civil violations or civil infractions of this Code.
   (b)   The civil rules of the justice courts of the state shall apply to
civil actions filed by an interested party or individual aggrieved by an
employer's or hiring entity's violation of chapter 17, article X until such
time that the city court adopts rules for the adjudication of civil actions
initiated by a private litigant.
(Ord. No. 7887, § 8, 8-3-92; Ord. No. 11868, 8-10-21)
   Note: Formerly, §
8-9. Renumbered §
8-8 by § 7 of Ord. No. 7733.
Sec. 8-9. When jury trial required.
In the trial of offense for the violation of the Charter and ordinances of the
city and the laws of the state which are within the jurisdiction of the city
court, and which by common law were not triable before a jury, no jury trial
shall be granted. But in all cases where the offense charged was an offense at
common law, a trial by jury shall be had if demanded by either the state or the
defendant before the commencement of the trial. Unless such demand is made not
less than three (3) days before the commencement of the trial, trial by jury
shall be deemed waived.
(1953 Code, ch. 9A, § 14; Ord. No. 7733, § 7, 12-9-91)
   Note: Formerly, §
8-10. Renumbered §
8-9 by § 7 of Ord. No. 7733.
Sec. 8-10. Summoning jurors.
Upon proper demand by either of the parties for a jury trial in a case triable
before a jury as herein provided, the magistrate shall issue an order directed
to the chief of police or to any police officer of the city, commanding such
officer to summon from the citizens of the city, and not from the bystanders,
the number of qualified persons specified in the order to serve as jurors in
the case. In the alternative, juries may be formed and jurors summoned in the
manner authorized in A.R.S. sections 22-320.B and 22-426, as amended.
(1953 Code, ch. 9A, § 14; Ord. No. 5091, § 1, 1-21-80; Ord. No. 7733, § 5, 12-
9-91)
   Note: Formerly, §
8-11. Renumbered §
8-10 and the text amended by § 5 of Ord. No. 7733.
Sec. 8-11. Number of jurors; challenges for cause.
In trials for offenses within the jurisdiction of this court which are triable
by jury, the jury shall consist of six (6) persons but may, by consent of both
parties, consist of any number less than six (6) and not under three (3). Any
juror shall be subject to challenge for cause, which challenge for cause shall
be tried by the court. At the time appointed for a jury trial in the city
court, the list of jurors summoned shall be called; and if they all attend they
shall constitute the jury unless excused or successfully challenged, in which
case enough others to complete the jury shall be forthwith summoned in the
manner hereinbefore provided.
(1953 Code, ch. 9A, § 15; Ord. No. 7733, § 7, 12-9-91)
   Note: Formerly, §
8-12. Renumbered §
8-11 by § 7 of Ord. No. 7733.
Sec. 8-12. Pay of jurors.
   (a)   Jurors who serve one (1) session shall receive the sum of five dollars
($5.00). Jurors who serve the morning session and the afternoon session shall
receive the sum of eight dollars ($8.00); and in addition thereto the jurors
shall receive free parking either by having parking spaces allocated for their
vehicles or through the validation of their parking tickets, the sums to be
paid by the city.
   (b)   A session of court shall be designated as a morning session or an
afternoon session. The morning session will be between the hours of 8:30 a.m.
and 12:00 noon, and the afternoon session shall be between the hours of 1:30
p.m. and 5:00 p.m.
   (c)   In the alternative, jurors may be paid as authorized in A.R.S. section
21-221, as amended.
(1953 Code, ch. 9A, § 20; Ord. No. 2852, § 1, 3-7-66; Ord. No. 4064, §§ 1, 2,
7-16-73; Ord. No. 5091, § 2, 1-21-80; Ord. No. 7733, § 6, 12-9-91)
   Note: Formerly, §
8-13. Renumbered §
8-12 and the text amended by § 6 of Ord. No. 7733.
Sec. 8-13. Execution to collect fine.
The city may, if a fine is imposed for the violation of its Charter, ordinances
or the statutes of the state within the jurisdiction of the city court, have
execution against the property of the defendant as in civil actions.
(1953 Code, ch. 9A, § 23; Ord. No. 7733, § 7, 12-9-91)
   Note: Formerly, §
8-14. Renumbered §
8-13 by § 7 of Ord. No. 7733.
Sec. 8-14. Director of finance; powers and duties in relation to city court.
The director of finance shall at his discretion inspect and audit any accounts
or records of the financial transactions of the city court and prepare from
time to time such financial reports of the court's transactions as are deemed
necessary and appropriate.
(Ord. No. 4679, § 13, 6-27-77; Ord. No. 5169, § 4, 6-16-80; Ord. No. 7733, § 7,
12-9-91)
   Note: Formerly, §
8-15. Renumbered §
8-14 by § 7 of Ord. No. 7733.
Secs. 8-15--8-34. Reserved.
   Editors Note: Ord. No. 2754, § 1, enacted Apr. 5, 1965, repealed §
8-15, formerly derived from 1953 Code, ch. 9A, § 24 and Ord. No. 2582, § 1, 2-
17-64. The section authorized the mayor and council to appoint and remove
bailiffs and determine their compensation and term of office.
ARTICLE II.
RESERVED*
__________
*   Editors Note: Section 1 of Ord. No. 5950, adopted Feb. 13, 1984, repealed
art. II, §§ 8-35--8-39, relating to unclaimed property, derived from the 1953
Code, ch. 2, §§ 40--43; Ord. No. 3225, §§ 1, 2, adopted Mar. 3, 1969; Ord. No.
4021, §§ 1--4, adopted May 1, 1973; and Ord. No. 4679, § 5, adopted June 27,
1977.
   Cross References: Disposition of surplus, obsolete, lost, unclaimed and
confiscated property, 2-53.
__________
Chapter 9
PUBLIC SAFETY COMMUNICATIONS*
__________
*   Editors Note: Section 1 of Ord. No. 6324, adopted Oct. 28, 1985, repealed
former ch. 9, §§ 9-1--9-11, derived from Ord. No. 3777, § 1, adopted Jan. 17,
1972, and enacted a new ch. 9, §§ 9-1--9-3, Emergency Services. Section 1 of
Ord. No. 11512, adopted Dec. 19, 2017, repealed former ch. 9, §§ 9-1 – 9-3, and
enacted a new ch. 9, §§ 9-1–9-3, Public Safety Communications.
__________
Sec.
9-1.   Definitions.
Sec.
9-2.   Purpose.
Sec.
9-3.   Department of public safety communications established; director as head
of department; functions.
Sec. 9-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where a different meaning
is specified:
City means the City of Tucson.
Department means the city's public safety communications department.
Director means the director of the city's public safety communications
department or the director's authorized designee(s).
Public safety communications means and includes the answering, processing and
dispatching of all calls made to and through the 9-1-1 system.
(Ord. No. 11512, § 2, 12-19-17)
Sec. 9-2. Purpose.
   (a)   The purpose of this chapter is to preserve, promote and protect the
health, safety and welfare of the residents and visitors of the city and of the
region through the efficient operation and management of public safety
communications.
   (b)   Nothing in this chapter is intended or shall be construed to impinge
upon or supplant the authority of the city's police or fire chief as otherwise
provided in the city's Charter, Code or other laws.
(Ord. No. 11512, § 2, 12-19-17)
Sec. 9-3. Department of public safety communications established; director as
head of department; functions.
   (a)   The department of public safety communications is established. The
head of the department shall be the director of public safety communications,
whose appointment, compensation and removal shall be in accordance with
sections 2(14), 6, and 11 of
chapter V of the Charter.
   (b)   The director shall implement and enforce the provisions of this
chapter for the promotion of the public health and safety; and to maintain the
efficient operation and management of public safety communications.
   (c)   In the event that the city establishes or maintains a non-emergency
communications system, the director shall have the authority, as designated by
the city manager, to direct the efficient operation and management of that
system.
   (d)   The director is hereby authorized and directed to make and impose
administrative and operational rules, procedures and regulations necessary to
the efficient implementation and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 11512, § 2, 12-19-17)
Chapter 10
CIVIL SERVICE--HUMAN RESOURCES*
__________
*   Editors Note: The editor added "Human Resources" to the title in order to
more accurately reflect the contents of the chapter as expressed in §
10-1.
   Charter References: Civil service generally,
ch. XXII; department of human resources,
ch. XXX.
   Cross References: Civil service statutes of reserve police officers, §
2-122(a).
__________
Art. I.   In General, §§ 10-1--10-30
Art. II.   Compensation Plan, §§ 10-31--10-53.7
Art. III.   Reserved, § 10-54
Article I. In General
Sec.
10-1.   Short title.
Sec.
10-2.   General purpose.
Sec.
10-3.   Definitions.
Sec.
10-4.   Officers, employees in classified service; exceptions.
Sec.
10-5.   Reserved.
Sec.
10-6.   Adoption, construction of classification plan.
Sec.
10-7.   Job evaluation grades.
Sec.
10-8.   Procedures for classification review.
Sec.
10-9.   Allocation of positions to appropriate classes.
Sec.
10-10.   Changes in classification.
Sec.
10-11.   Use of class titles.
Sec.
10-12.   Commission rules authorized.
Sec.
10-13.   Payrolls to be certified.
Sec.
10-14.   Recovery of money improperly paid out.
Sec.
10-15.   Retirement ages.
Sec.
10-16.   Officers and employees to comply with, carry out civil service
provisions.
Sec.
10-17.   Commission to cooperate with other governmental and private agencies.
Sec.
10-18.   Discrimination prohibited; political activities.
Sec.
10-19.   Unlawful acts.
Sec.
10-20.   Commission's authority to investigate.
Sec.
10-21.   Power to administer oaths, require production of evidence, subpoena
witnesses.
Sec.
10-22.   Salaries of civil service commissioners.
Secs.
10-23--10-30.   Reserved.
Article II. Compensation Plan
Sec.
10-31.   Establishment and adoption of compensation plan; payment of employees.
Sec.
10-32.   Administration of plan.
Sec.
10-33.   Language communication compensation.
Sec.
10-33.1.   Proficiency pay for City of Tucson employees certified as bilingual
users of American Sign Language (ASL) or Spanish.
Sec.
10-34.   Incentive pay for fire prevention inspectors.
Sec.
10-34.1.   Assignment and incentive pay for maintaining paramedic certification
and working as a paramedic.
Sec.
10-34.2.   Assignment pay for commissioned fire personnel assigned to a
paramedic truck.
Sec.
10-34.3.   Incentive pay for maintaining a Hazardous Materials certification
and assignment to a Hazardous Materials Team.
Sec.
10-34.4.   Incentive pay for maintaining a Personal Fitness Trainer (PEER)
certification and active participation in the program.
Sec.
10-34.5.   Incentive pay for maintaining a Peer Operation Support Team (POST)
certification and active participation in the program.
Sec.
10-35.   Fire chief call back shift pay.
Sec.
10-36.   Probationary periods.
Sec.
10-37.   Reallocation.
Sec.
10-37.1.   Reserved.
Sec.
10-37.2.   Reserved.
Sec.
10-38.   Movement within salary ranges.
Sec.
10-39.   Increases for exceptionally meritorious service.
Sec.
10-40.    Reserved.
Sec.
10-41.   Premium pay.
Secs. 10-42 – 10-44. Reserved.
Sec.
10-45.   Computation of hourly rates.
Sec.
10-46.   Part-time employees to be paid by the hour.
Sec.
10-47.   Referral compensation for recruiting commissioned police and fire
personnel, public safety communications personnel, and certain Information
Technology personnel.
Sec.
10-48.   Supplement to military pay.
Sec.
10-49.   Holiday and BOI pay for commissioned officers of the Tucson police
department of the position of lieutenant and assignment positions of captain
and assistant chief.
Sec.
10-50.   Reserved.
Sec.
10-51.   Basic working hours; alternate work schedules for city employees are
authorized subject to city manager approval.
Sec.
10-52.   Longevity compensation plan.
Sec.
10-53.   Pipeline protection program; compensation.
Sec.
10-53.1.   Permanent and probationary city civil service employees and elected
officials and appointed employees downtown allowance.
Sec.
10-53.2.   Maintenance management program, assignment and incentive pay
compensation.
Sec.
10-53.3.   Career enhancement program (CEP) incentive pay for commissioned
police personnel through rank of captain.
Sec.
10-53.4.   Reserved.
Sec.
10-53.5.   Honor guard assignment pay for fire commissioned personnel.
Sec.
10-53.6.   Reserved.
Sec.
10-53.7.   Certified crane operator assignment and incentive pay program.
Sec.
10-53.8.   Certified compressed natural gas inspector assignment and incentive
pay program.
Sec.
10-53.9.   Tool enhancement allowance.
Sec.
10-53.10.   Solid waste equipment operator (SWEO) tier assignment program.
Sec.
10-53.11.   Certification pay for automotive service excellence (ASE).
Article III. Reserved
Sec.
10-54.   Reserved.
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL
Sec. 10-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Human Resources Ordinance"
of the city.
(1953 Code, ch. 10, § 1; Ord. No. 7369, § 1, 3-12-90)
Sec. 10-2. General purpose.
The general purpose of this chapter is to establish for the city a system of
human resources administration based on merit principles and business methods
as contemplated by the Charter, particularly, chapters
XXII and
XXX thereof as amended. All appointments and promotions to positions in this
classified service shall be made solely on the basis of merit and fitness to be
ascertained, insofar as practicable, by competitive examinations.
(1953 Code, ch. 10, § 2; Ord. No. 7369, § 3, 3-12-90)
Sec. 10-3. Definitions.
The following words and phrases as used in this chapter shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, unless the context, clearly requires
otherwise:
   Allocation means the official determination of the class in which a position
in the classified service shall be deemed to be included. "Reallocation" means
the reassignment of a position from one classification to another
classification which is determined to be more appropriate based on the assigned
duties and responsibilities.
   Appointing officer means the city manager or other persons authorized by the
Charter to make appointments to the classified service.
   Appointment means the action of an appointing officer which appoints a
person as an employee in the classified service.
   Classification means a class of positions sufficiently similar as to duties
performed, degree of supervision exercised or required, minimum qualifications
and other characteristics that the same title, the same test of fitness, and
the same schedule of compensation may be applied with equity to each position
in the group.
   Commission means the civil service commission of the city.
   Commissioned personnel means police department or fire department employees
who have been duly certified and commissioned to be a police officer certified
as a peace officer or firefighter and who are eligible for the public safety
personnel retirement system provided by the State of Arizona pursuant to A.R.S.
§ 38-851 et seq.
   Demotion means the reassignment of an employee from a position in one
classification to a position in another classification that is assigned a lower
salary range by ordinance.
   Director means the director of human resources as provided for in chapter
XXX of the Charter.
   Discharge means the termination of the employment of an employee made for
cause by action of an appointing officer.
   Eligible means any person who has, in accordance with the provisions of the
rules and regulations of the commission, been officially entered upon an
eligible list for a specified class of positions.
   Emergency means an unforeseen occurrence or combination of circumstances
which would not have been foreseen in the exercise of reasonable care, and
which required immediate action and remedy.
   Emergency appointment means the appointment of an individual to a position
required by a state of emergency without compliance with the usual procedures
of request for and certification of eligibles therefor as provided in the rules
and regulations of the commission.
   Employee means any person, including officer, lawfully appointed to a
position in the classified service and receiving compensation for the class of
positions to which such appointment is made.
   Entrance examination means any competitive test considered appropriate by
the commission or the director for the selection of eligibles for appointment
to a specified class in the classified service, and open to all persons
possessing the minimum qualifications therefor.
   Entrance list means an officially promulgated list of names of persons
arranged in the order of their merit who have been found qualified by a
suitable entrance examination, or as otherwise provided in the rules and
regulations, for appointment to a specified class.
   Full-time basis means employment on a work schedule consisting of forty (40)
hours per week and which is intended to be continuous beyond a period of twelve
(12) months.
   Just cause. The following shall constitute just cause for discipline up to
and including termination, although enumeration thereof shall not exclude other
causes, namely: fraud in securing appointment; incompetence; inability to
perform essential functions of assigned position with or without reasonable
accommodation; dishonesty, insubordination; inattention to duties; discourteous
treatment of the public, supervisors, or fellow employees; violation of the
ordinances of the mayor and council, the rules and regulations of the
commission, administrative directive of the city manager, and the rules and
regulations of the department in which an employee is employed; absence from
duty without leave; intoxication on duty; violation of the city's directives on
drug and alcohol use; addiction to the use of narcotics; conviction of a crime
involving violence, moral turpitude, or the aggravating circumstances described
in A.R.S. § 13-702(c)(15) [relating to "hate crimes"]; and conduct, while
either on or off duty, tending to cause discredit to the city or the department
that affects its ability to perform its mission, or the city or the department
to question an employee's reliability, judgment, and trustworthiness in
carrying out assigned responsibilities. In no case shall any political or
religious belief of affiliation of any indefinite or vague charges, such as for
the good of the service, be considered just cause.
   Lay-off means the termination of a person's employment because of lack of
funds or work, or because of material changes in duties or organization.
   Minimum qualifications means the requirements as to education, training,
skill, experience and other qualifications prescribed for a given class in the
classification plan.
   Non-permanent position means the following:
   A.   A position which is annually designated as intermittent, seasonal, or
temporary by the human resources director and subject to the conditions
hereafter provided. Non-permanent positions supplement the regular permanent
workforce and include only the following:
   1.   Intermittent positions work up to one thousand five hundred (1,500)
hours per fiscal year on an on-call, as needed basis or on schedules that vary
depending on workload.
   2.   Seasonal positions work up to one thousand five hundred (1,500) hours
per fiscal year with specific start and end dates to cover workloads in
specific periods of the year.
   3.   Temporary positions work part-time or full-time on a specific project
that is expected to be one year or less in duration. Temporary positions can be
extended one time for an additional six (6) months with the approval of the
city manager.
   B.   Non-permanent positions must be advertised as non-permanent positions
on the recruitment notices. Newly appointed non-permanent employees must sign
an acknowledgement that the position is non-permanent.
   C.   The acceptance or declination of a non-permanent appointment shall not
affect an applicant's standing on any employment list, eligibility list, or
eligibility for a probationary appointment.
   D.   Employment under a non-permanent appointment shall not be counted as
part of a probationary period. Non-permanent appointments do not grant any
property rights to the incumbent. The appointing officer may terminate a non-
permanent appointment at any time without notice or right of appeal but shall
transmit to the director the reasons for such actions.
   Original appointment means the appointment of an eligible from an entrance
list to a position in the classified service.
   Permanent appointment means the action of an appointing officer which serves
to lawfully constitute a person a permanent employee in the classified service.
This definition is not to be construed as making the procedures for lay-off,
suspension and discharges provided for in this article and such rules and
regulations inapplicable to permanent employees.
   Permanent employee means any employee who either (1) qualified in accordance
with
chapter XXV, section 10, of the Charter, or (2) has been given a permanent
appointment to a position in classified service upon completion of a
probationary period.
   Permanent position means that the tenure of the position is anticipated to
continue without interruption for a period of more than twelve (12) months.
   Position means an office or a position of employment in the classified
service, whether part-time, full-time, permanent or non-permanent, occupied or
vacant, composed of specific duties which call for services to be performed.
   Probationary appointment means an original or promotional appointment to a
permanent position in the classified service to fill a vacancy therein, other
than one caused by the regular incumbent thereof being on leave for a period of
not more than twelve (12) months, of an eligible who must serve a probationary
period previous to acquiring the status of a permanent employee.
   Probationary period means a working test period considered an integral part
of the examination process during which a new appointee is required to
demonstrate fitness for the position to which appointed by actual performance
of the duties of the position.
   Promotion means the reassignment of an employee from a position in one
classification to a position in another classification that is assigned a
higher salary range by ordinance.
   Promotional examination means any competitive test considered appropriate by
the commission and the director for the selection of eligibles for promotional
appointment to a specified class and open only to employees in the classified
service possessing the minimum qualifications therefor.
   Promotional list means an officially promulgated list of names of persons
arranged in the order of their merit who have been found by a promotional
examination, or as otherwise provided in the rules and regulations, to be
qualified for promotion to a specified class.
   Reemployment list means a list of names of persons, established on either a
departmental or servicewide basis as the commission may determine, who have
attained the status of permanent employees in a specified class, who have been
separated from their positions without fault on their part, and who are
entitled to placement on a certification list for consideration for employment
in such class when a vacancy occurs therein before certification of persons
thereto from either a promotional or entrance list therefor.
   Suspension means the temporary termination of services of an employee
without pay for just cause.
   Temporary appointment means the appointment of an eligible person to a
position or appointment to a permanent position because of a temporary vacancy
caused by the regular incumbent being on leave for a period of not more than
twelve (12) months.
   Transfer means the reassignment of an employee from a position in one
classification to another position in the same classification, or to another
position in another classification that is assigned the same salary range by
ordinance.
(1953 Code, ch. 10, § 3; Ord. No. 5000, §§ 1--7, 6-25-79; Ord. No. 7369, § 4,
3-12-90; Ord. No. 10057, §§ 1--6, 10-11-04; Ord. No. 10302, § 1, 8-8-06; Ord.
No. 10538, §§ 1, 2, 6-3-08)
Sec. 10-4. Officers, employees in classified service; exceptions.
The classified service shall be comprised of:
   Sec. 10-4(1). The appointive officers of the city as enumerated in
chapter V, section 2, of the Charter and such other officers as may have
heretofore or may hereafter be provided for by ordinance in accordance with
subsection (15) thereof.
   Sec. 10-4(2). All other positions of employment now existing or hereafter
created in the city service which are not enumerated in
chapter V, section 2 of the Charter, except elected officials and those
positions within the city manager's office and the mayor and council offices
which are authorized by
chapter V, section 13 of the Charter.
   Sec. 10-4(3). Exceptions. The classified service shall not include
nonimmigrant workers who have an employment-based visa status who are appointed
and removed by the city manager as authorized by chapter V, section 13(a), and
chapter X, section 1 of the charter and consistent with federal law.
(1953 Code, ch. 10, § 4; Ord. No. 1897, § 1, 4-20-59; Ord. No. 7369, § 5, 3-12-
90; Ord. No. 10057, § 7, 10-11-04; Ord. No. 11995, § 1, 3-21-23)
Sec. 10-5. City manager appointment of nonimmigrant workers.
The city manager is authorized to appoint and remove nonimmigrant workers who
have an employment-based visa status in the manner provided in chapter V,
section 13(a), and chapter X, section 1 of the Charter and consistent with
federal law. The city manager may assign the employees appointed pursuant to
this section to departments with a documented inability to fill vacant
positions.
(Ord. No. 11995, § 2, 3-21-23)
   Editors Note: Former Section 10-5, dealing with the duties of the civil
service commission, derived from the 1953 Code, ch. 10, § 5, was repealed by §
1 of Ord. No. 7369, adopted Mar. 12, 1990.
Sec. 10-6. Adoption, construction of classification plan.
Subject to the prior approval of the city manager, the human resources director
shall adopt a classification plan. Such plan shall group all positions in the
classified service into classes based on their duties, authority and
responsibilities. An appropriate job title, a brief description of the job and
essential functions to be performed by persons holding positions therein and
the minimum qualifications necessary for appointment thereto shall be set forth
for each class of positions. The plan shall be so constructed that all
positions substantially similar as to duties performed, degree of authority
exercised, responsibility assumed, minimum acceptable qualifications, and other
characteristics shall be included in the same class.
(1953 Code, ch. 10, § 6; Ord. No. 7369, § 6, 3-12-90; Ord. No. 9675, § 1, 2-25-
02)
   Editors Note: It should be noted that the provisions of Ord. No. 9675 become
effective June 30, 2002.
Sec. 10-7. Job evaluation grades.
Subject to the prior approval of the city manager, the human resources director
shall appoint a job evaluation team, which shall include representatives of the
city's recognized labor organizations. Excepting the mayor and council, charter
officers appointed directly by the mayor and council (city manager, city
attorney, city clerk and city magistrates), police and fire commissioned
classifications, golf professional classifications and hourly classifications,
the job evaluation team will evaluate on a periodic basis all existing or new
classifications and will make job evaluation grade recommendations to the human
resources director and the city manager. The job evaluation shall be based on
factors and levels that are consistent with professionally established
criteria. Subject to prior approval of the city manager, the human resources
director shall record the final job evaluation grades as part of the adopted
classification plan.
(Ord. No. 9675, § 1, 2-25-02)
   Editors Note: It should be noted that the provisions of Ord. No. 9675 become
effective June 30, 2002.
Sec. 10-8. Procedures for classification review.
Subject to the prior approval of the city manager, the human resources director
shall establish administrative policies and procedures for review of
classifications. For classifications subject to Tucson Code section
10-7, the job evaluation team will forward a recommendation to either retain or
change the current job evaluation grade. Subject to prior approval of the city
manager, the human resources director shall record the final job evaluation
grades as part of the adopted classification plan.
(Ord. No. 9675, § 1, 2-25-02)
   Editors Note: It should be noted that the provisions of Ord. No. 9675 become
effective June 30, 2002.
Sec. 10-9. Allocation of positions to appropriate classes.
Subject to the prior approval of the city manager, and as promptly as
practicable after the adoption of the classification plan, the human resources
director shall allocate, or cause to be allocated, each position in the
classified service to the appropriate class therein on the basis of its duties,
authority and responsibilities.
(1953 Code, ch. 10, § 7; Ord. No. 7369, § 7, 3-12-90; Ord. No. 9675, § 1, 2-25-
02)
   Editors Note: It should be noted that the provisions of Ord. No. 9675 become
effective June 30, 2002.
Sec. 10-10. Changes in classification.
Subject to the prior approval of the city manager, existing classes may be
divided, consolidated, altered or abolished, new classes established and
positions allocated or reallocated thereto by the human resources director. All
such changes and reallocations, however, shall be made solely for the purpose
of meeting the needs of the service and not for the purpose of effecting the
separation of an employee from the service or a demotion or promotion contrary
to the provisions of this chapter and the rules and regulations of the
commission governing such actions.
(1953 Code, ch. 10, § 8; Ord. No. 7369, § 8, 3-12-90; Ord. No. 9675, § 1, 2-25-
02)
   Editors Note: It should be noted that the provisions of Ord. No. 9675 become
effective June 30, 2002.
Sec. 10-11. Use of class titles.
Following the adoption of the classification plan and the allocation of
positions in the classified service to classes therein, the class titles so set
forth shall be used to designate all positions included in the respective
classes in all official records and payrolls. No person shall be appointed or
employed in the classified service under a class title which has not been
approved by the human resources director, subject to the prior approval of the
city manager, as appropriate to the duties to be performed.
(1953 Code, ch. 10, § 9; Ord. No. 7369, § 9, 3-12-90; Ord. No. 9675, § 1, 2-25-
02)
   Editors Note: It should be noted that the provisions of Ord. No. 9675 become
effective June 30, 2002.
Sec. 10-12. Commission rules authorized.
The commission shall adopt and from time to time amend rules and regulations
for the administration of the Charter provisions and the ordinances of the
mayor and council governing entry into the classified service, promotion,
transfer, demotion, layoff, suspension without pay exceeding ten (10) days and
termination of persons within the classified service. Such rules and
regulations and all amendments thereto shall be adopted at a public hearing
only after affording a reasonable opportunity to city officers and employees
for consultation, and after due notice to the public by posting notice in three
(3) public places. Amendments may be initiated by the commission, or proposed
by the director, city officers, employees or citizens of the city. Rules and
regulations adopted under this section shall have the force and effect of law.
Among other things, such rules and regulations shall provide:
   Sec. 10-12(1). Conduct of examinations. For the conducting of both entrance
and promotional examinations, including the manner in which notice thereof
shall be given; the requirements for filing applications therefor; the
requirements as to residence and age of persons to be admitted thereto,
including the requirements established in section
2-4 of this Code; the bases and methods to be used in qualifying and
disqualifying applicants for admission to examinations; the character of
examinations; the method of conducting, rating and providing notice of the
results thereof; conditions under which special examinations may be given
applicants who are unable or who fail to appear for an examination at the
announced time and place; and such other matters as may be deemed necessary and
pertinent thereto.
   Sec. 10-12(2). Establishment of lists. For the establishment of departmental
reemployment, servicewide reemployment, promotional and entrance lists of names
of persons eligible for appointment to the several classes in the classified
service, including the order in which names shall appear thereon; their
duration; the conditions under which they may be canceled, extended or
consolidated with new lists; the causes for and the procedure to be followed in
removing names therefrom; and the manner in which persons whose names appear
thereon may waive appointments.
   Sec. 10-12(3). Certification of lists. For the certification of eligibles to
appointing officers upon their request for appointment to positions in the
classified service, including the order in which names shall be certified from
the departmental reemployment, servicewide reemployment, promotional and
entrance lists, and the number of names to be certified therefrom for each
appointment to be made.
   Sec. 10-12(4). Making appointments. For the making of appointments to
positions in the classified service, including the conditions under which
probationary, permanent, non-permanent, temporary, and emergency appointments
may be made, and the imposition of limitations as to the duration and other
necessary restrictions upon non- permanent, temporary, and emergency
appointments.
   Sec. 10-12(5). Probationary period. For a probationary period, not to exceed
eighteen (18) months, applicable to all appointments, other than temporary, to
permanent positions made from entrance or promotional lists, including a
statement of the duration, nature and purposes of such period; the conditions
preliminary to the attainment of the status of a permanent employee of any
person so appointed; the conditions under which an employee may receive a
promotion during such period; the procedure to be followed by appointing
officers in making discharges of probationary employees; and the rights of such
employees when so discharged.
   Sec. 10-12(6). Transfer of employees. For the transfer of employees from one
position to another position in the same class or from a position in one class
to a position in another class; however, a transfer from a position in one
class to a position in another class which, in accordance with the compensation
plan carries a higher salary range of pay, shall be deemed a promotion and
shall be accomplished only in the manner provided in the rules and regulations
of the commission for making promotions. Further, a transfer from one class to
a position in another class which has a lower salary range shall be deemed a
demotion which shall be accomplished only in the manner provided in the rules
and regulations of the commission for making demotions.
   Sec. 10-12(7). Lay-off of employees. For the procedure to be followed by
appointing officers in effecting the lay-off of employees in a given class
required because of a shortage of work or funds, the abolition of a position or
other material change in duties or organization. In all such lay-offs,
emergency, temporary, and probationary employees in the classes affected shall
be laid off in such order before permanent employees; and, within such
categories, the order shall be inverse to length of service. The names of all
permanent employees so laid off shall be placed on appropriate departmental or
servicewide reemployment lists for their respective classes in the order of
their length of service, the name of the employee with the longest service in a
particular department heading the departmental list, if one is established, and
the name of the employee with the longest service on a servicewide basis
heading the servicewide list for a given class.
   Sec. 10-12(8). Procedure for disciplinary suspensions exceeding ten days,
etc. For the procedure to be followed by appointing officers in making
suspensions without pay for periods in excess of ten (10) days or for periods
totaling more than ten (10) days in any period of one (1) year, demotions,
reductions in pay, or discharges of employees for just cause and providing for
appeals therefrom to the commission, a fair and impartial hearing and the
rendering of a decision thereon in accordance with
chapter XXII, section 3, paragraph (c) of the Charter.
   Sec. 10-12(9). Other incidents of employment. For any and all other
incidents relating to entry into the classified service, promotion, transfer,
demotion, lay-off, suspension without pay exceeding ten (10) days and
termination of persons within the classified service, not inconsistent with the
Charter and the ordinances and resolutions of the mayor and council, deemed
necessary and expedient by the commission.
(1953 Code, ch. 10, § 11; Ord. No. 5000, § 8, 6-25-79; Ord. No. 7369, § 10, 3-
12-90; Ord. No. 9047, § 1, 4-20-98; Ord. No. 9675, § 2, 2-25-02; Ord. No.
10088, § 1, 11-22-04; Ord. No. 10302, § 2, 8-8-06; Ord. No. 10536, § 2, 5-20-
08, eff. 6-28-08)
   Cross References: Terms and conditions of membership on boards, committees
and commissions and filing of rules, § 10A-133 et seq.
Sec. 10-13. Payrolls to be certified.
No disbursing or auditing officer of the city shall make or approve or take any
part in making or approving any payment for personal services to any person
holding or purporting to hold a position in the classified service unless the
payroll voucher or account therefor bears the certification of the commission,
or its authorized agent, that the persons named therein have been appointed and
employed in accordance with the provisions of the Charter, the ordinances of
the mayor and council, and the rules and regulations of the commission.
(1953 Code, ch. 10, § 12; Ord. No. 9675, § 2, 2-25-02)
   Editors Note: It should be noted that the provisions of Ord. No. 9675 become
effective June 30, 2002.
Sec. 10-14. Recovery of money improperly paid out.
Any sum paid contrary to this chapter or in excess of the amount legally due
for services rendered may be recovered in an action maintained by the city or
by any taxpayer of the city from an officer who made, approved or authorized
such payment, whoever is culpable, or from the sureties of the official bond of
any such officer. All moneys recovered in any such action shall be paid into
the city treasury and credited to the fund from which they were disbursed.
(1953 Code, ch. 10, § 12; Ord. No. 7369, § 11, 3-12-90; Ord. No. 9675, § 2, 2-
25-02)
   Editors Note: It should be noted that the provisions of Ord. No. 9675 become
effective June 30, 2002.
Sec. 10-15. Retirement ages.
The services of all persons holding positions in the classified civil service
shall be terminated as of the end of the day preceding the date they attain the
compulsory superannuation retirement age for the class of positions in which
they are then employed. Such compulsory superannuation retirement ages shall be
as follows:
   (a)   Age sixty-five (65) for all classes of commissioned personnel
positions in the police department; however, the services of any person
employed in the police department may be extended from year to year by the
mayor and council of the city for five (5) successive years and no more, if
such person files a written request for each such extension.
   (b)   Age for all classes of commissioned personnel positions in the fire
department are:
   1.   For all commissioned personnel engaged in fire suppression, continued
employment beyond the age of sixty (60) years shall be subject to all of the
following: (a) a written request for extension submitted by the fire chief to
the city manager no later than sixty (60) days prior to the sixtieth birthday;
(b) certification by the city physician that the applicant is mentally and
physically capable of performance; and (c) subsequent approval by the city
manager. Medical certification shall be in compliance with all local and
national established standards for professional firefighters. An approved
extension shall be for a period of one (1) year only. A subsequent annual
extension may be granted in the same manner, but shall not, except as provided
in section
10-15(b)(2) below, be for a period which will exceed the age of sixty-five (65)
years. Failure to be so certified by the city physician or disapproval by the
city manager shall result in mandatory retirement from the commissioned
personnel.
   2.   For all commissioned fire personnel permanently assigned to non-
suppression positions, continued employment beyond the age of sixty-five (65)
years shall be subject to all of the following: (a) a written request for
extension submitted by the fire chief to the city manager no later than sixty
(60) days prior to the sixty-fifth birthday; (b) certification by the city
physician that the applicant is mentally and physically capable of performance;
and (c) subsequent approval by the city manager. Medical certification shall be
in compliance with all local and national established standards for
professional firefighters. An approved extension shall be for a period of one
(1) year only. A subsequent annual extension may be granted in the same manner,
but shall not be for a period which will exceed the age of seventy (70) years.
Failure to be so certified by the city physician or disapproval by the city
manager shall result in mandatory retirement from the commissioned personnel.
Any person who extends service beyond the age of sixty-five (65) years under
this subsection shall not be assigned or allowed to perform fire suppression
duties.
   (c)   Retirement for all other classes of positions shall be governed by the
provisions of chapter
22 of the Tucson Code.
(1953 Code, ch. 9, § 13; Ord. No. 4751, § 2, 1-23-78; Ord. No. 6060, § 1, 8-6-
84; Ord. No. 7369, § 12, 3-12-90; Ord. No. 9675, § 2, 2-25-02; Ord. No. 10538,
§ 3, 6-3-08; Ord. No. 10653, § 1, 4-21-09)
   Cross References: Pensions and retirement, ch.
22.
Sec. 10-16. Officers and employees to comply with, carry out civil service
provisions.
All officers and employees of the city shall comply with and aid in all proper
ways in carrying out the civil service provisions of the Charter, the
provisions of this chapter, and the rules and regulations thereunder. All
officers and employees shall furnish or allow access to any records or
information which the director or commission may request for any purpose
consistent therewith.
(1953 Code, ch. 10, § 14; Ord. No. 9675, § 2, 2-25-02)
   Editors Note: It should be noted that the provisions of Ord. No. 9675 become
effective June 30, 2002.
Sec. 10-17. Commission to cooperate with other governmental and private
agencies.
The commission may cooperate with other governmental agencies and private
associations or organizations concerned with human resources administration. It
may announce and conduct joint examinations and establish joint eligible lists
with either federal, state or other local civil service or merit system
agencies and the lists so established shall be given recognition under this
chapter and the rules and regulations thereunder.
(1953 Code, ch. 10, § 15; Ord. No. 7369, § 13, 3-12-90; Ord. No. 9675, § 2, 2-
25-02)
   Editors Note: It should be noted that the provisions of Ord. No. 9675 become
effective June 30, 2002.
Sec. 10-18. Discrimination prohibited; political activities.
   (a)   Favor or discrimination in service. No person shall be appointed or
promoted to, or suspended without pay, reduced in pay, demoted or dismissed
from any position in the classified service or in any way favored or
discriminated against with respect to employment in the classified service
because of race, color, religion, ancestry, sex, age, disability, national
origin, sexual orientation, gender identity, familial status or marital status,
or political opinions, beliefs or affiliations.
   (b)   Political endorsement. No person shall seek or attempt to use any
political endorsement in connection with any appointment or promotion to a
position in the classified service.
   (c)   Use of political influence. No person shall use or promise to use,
directly or indirectly, any official authority or influence, whether possessed
or anticipated, to secure or attempt to secure for any person an appointment or
advantage in an appointment to a position in the classified service, or an
increase in pay or other advantage in employment in any such position, for the
purpose of influencing the vote or political action of any such person or for
any other consideration.
   (d)   Solicitations from or reprisals against persons in classified service.
   (1)   No officer or employee of the city shall at any time or place, either
directly or indirectly, command, solicit or receive, or be concerned in
soliciting or receiving, of any officer or employee in the classified service
assessments, subscriptions or contributions in money or any other valuable
consideration whosoever for any political organization or candidate for public
office.
   (2)   No person shall, directly or indirectly, command, solicit or receive,
or be concerned in soliciting or receiving, any such assessments, subscriptions
or contributions from officers or employees in the classified service during
the hours they are required to be on duty.
   (3)   A person shall not, directly or indirectly, solicit or command, or be
concerned with soliciting or commanding, any officer or employee in the
classified service to engage or not engage in activities permitted by this
section with the direct or indirect promise or use of any benefit, reward,
promotion, advancement or compensation, or with the direct or indirect use of
any threat, intimidation or coercion including threats of discrimination,
reprisal, force or any other adverse consequence including the loss of any
benefit, reward, promotion, advancement or compensation.
   (4)   A person shall not, directly or indirectly, subject, or be concerned
with subjecting, any officer or employee in the classified service voluntarily
engaging, or voluntarily choosing not to engage, in activity permitted by this
section to any direct or indirect discrimination, reprisal, force, coercion or
intimidation or any other adverse consequence including the loss of any
benefit, reward, promotion, advancement or compensation.
   (e)   Prohibited political activities by persons in classified service.
   (1)   No officer or employee in the classified service shall:
   a.   Be a candidate for nomination or election to any elective City of
Tucson office.
   b.   Take any part in the management of any partisan or nonpartisan campaign
or recall effort, except as permitted under paragraph (f)(3) of this section.
   c.   Engage in any permitted political activity during working, duty or
service hours.
   d.   Except pursuant to A.R.S. § 16-402, engage in any permitted political
activity at any time while wearing any city uniform, badge, insignia, or other
similar item that identifies the city or the employee's position with the city,
or use city property or any other city resource in such activity.
   (2)   No officer or employee in the classified service shall at any time
take any active part in securing or contributing any money toward the
nomination or election of any candidate for any elective office of the city or
in influencing the results of an election for any such office.
   (f)   Permitted political activities by persons in classified service. An
officer or employee in the classified service is permitted to voluntarily:
   (1)   Express a private opinion or cast a vote.
   (2)   Be an officer or a member of any national, state or local committee of
a political party or partisan political club or organization.
   (3)   Take part in any campaign for city office, subject always to the
specific restrictions set forth in the City Charter and this section. The
following activities are specifically permissible:
   a.   Display pictures, signs, banners, stickers, badges or buttons
associated with candidates on their person while off-duty, outside of city
buildings or other facilities, or at their private home.
   b.   Sign or circulate nomination or recall petitions.
   c.   Engage in activities advocating a candidate's election or defeat.
   d.   Solicit or canvass for votes in support of or opposition to a
candidate.
   e.   Act as a recorder, watcher, challenger, or similar poll officer on
behalf of a candidate.
   f.   Drive voters to the polls on behalf of a candidate.
   g.   Endorse or oppose a candidate in a political advertisement, broadcast,
campaign literature, or similar material.
   h.   Address a caucus, rally or gathering in support of or opposition to a
candidate.
   i.   Solicit, receive, collect, handle, disburse or account for assessments,
contributions or other funds, for a partisan political purpose, from persons
other than officers or employees in the classified service of the city.
   j.   Organize, sell tickets to, promote, or actively participate in, a fund-
raising activity of a candidate.
   (4)   Contribute to, or participate in, any candidate election campaigns
other than those for city office, or election campaigns on non-candidate
matters such as city, county, or state initiative, referendum, franchise or
bond measures.
   (5)   Contribute to the city's election campaign account, used to provide
public funds to candidates for city office.
   (g)   Participation of persons elected to public office. No person elected
to a partisan public office of the City of Tucson shall, during the term for
which elected, be appointed to any position in the classified service.
(1953 Code, ch. 10, § 16; Ord. No. 4165, § 1, 4-8-74; Ord. No. 7369, § 14, 3-
12-90; Ord. No. 9199, § 1, 2-1-99; Ord. No. 9675, § 2, 2-25-02; Ord. No. 9712,
§ 1, 6-3-02)
   Editors Note: It should be noted that the provisions of Ord. No. 9675 become
effective June 30, 2002.
Sec. 10-19. Unlawful acts.
   Sec. 10-19(1). No member of the commission, examiner or employee of the
commission or any other person, directly or indirectly, shall defeat, deceive
or obstruct any person in his right to examination, eligibility, certification
or appointment under this chapter; falsely mark, rate, grade or report upon the
examination of any person examined hereunder; make any false representations
concerning a person examined or his place on an eligible list; or furnish to
any person any special or secret information for the purpose of either
improving or injuring his prospects or chances in any examination or of being
appointed or promoted to a position in the classified service.
   Sec. 10-19(2). No person, officer or employee of the city shall, directly or
indirectly, give, render, pay, offer, solicit or accept any money, service or
other valuable consideration for or on account of any appointment, proposed
appointment, promotion or proposed promotion to or any advantage in a position
in the classified service.
(1953 Code, ch. 10, § 17; Ord. No. 9675, § 2, 2-25-02)
   Editors Note: It should be noted that the provisions of Ord. No. 9675 become
effective June 30, 2002.
Sec. 10-20. Commission's authority to investigate.
The commission may investigate the enforcement of the Charter provisions, this
chapter, and its own rules and regulations relating to entry into the
classified service, promotion, transfer, demotion, suspension without pay
exceeding ten (10) days and termination of persons within the classified
service as and when it deems the same necessary or expedient. It may make
findings of fact and recommendations as a consequence of any such
investigations to appointing officers or the mayor and council.
(1953 Code, ch. 10, § 18; Ord. No. 7369, § 15, 3-12-90; Ord. No. 9675, § 2, 2-
25-02)
   Editors Note: It should be noted that the provisions of Ord. No. 9675 become
effective June 30, 2002.
Sec. 10-21. Power to administer oaths, require production of evidence, subpoena
witnesses.
The commission, each member thereof, and the director shall have power to
administer oaths and affirmations, subpoena witnesses, and compel the
production of books, papers and documents which it deems pertinent to any
inquiry, investigation or hearing authorized by the Charter or by this chapter.
Such subpoenas may be personally served by the human resources department or by
any process server recognized in the state.
(1953 Code, ch. 10, § 19; Ord. No. 7369, § 16, 3-12-90; Ord. No. 9675, § 2, 2-
25-02, eff. 6-30-02)
Sec. 10-22. Salaries of civil service commissioners.
Commissioners shall receive a salary of twenty-four hundred dollars ($2,400.00)
per annum. The chairperson of the commission shall, for the performance of
those additional duties required of the position, receive an additional six
hundred dollars ($600.00) per annum.
(Ord. No. 6839, § 1, 11-23-87; Ord. No. 9675, § 2, 2-25-02, eff. 6-30-02)
Secs. 10-23--10-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE II.
COMPENSATION PLAN*
__________
*   Cross References: Compensation of senior officers acting as department
heads, §
2-3; salary of employees during injury or sickness, §
2-13.
__________
Sec. 10-31. Establishment and adoption of compensation plan; payment of
employees.
   Sec. 10-31(1). Compensation policy. The city's compensation system provides
equitable and consistent treatment of employees commensurate with internal and
external values of classifications and the objective of attracting, retaining
and motivating employees. Key measures of employee compensation shall be labor
market information and job performance. In addition, for classifications
subject to Tucson Code section
10-7, a key measure will be job evaluation grades assigned to classifications
based on compensable factors. Job evaluation grades shall be correlated with
compensation ranges set forth in salary schedules. Classifications not subject
to Tucson Code section
10-7 shall be assigned a range or rate set forth in a salary schedule. Other
pay provisions such as commission, shift differential, overtime, standby,
weekend premium pay for regularly schedule hours, incentive, special skills,
education, and other certification and special duty pays for designated
employee groups may be provided for when adopted and/or reenacted by the mayor
and council as part of the annual compensation plan. (Ord. No. 9675, § 3, 2-25-
02; Ord. No. 10003, § 3, 6-28-04)
   Sec. 10-31(2). Formulation. Subject to the prior approval of the city
manager, the human resources director shall, as part of the budget process,
annually recommend a compensation plan for adoption by the mayor and council.
The recommended compensation schedules of the compensation plan will retain a
competitive posture in the relevant labor markets subject to available funding
and current economic trends. Under the direction of the city manager, the human
resources director shall annually conduct, or cause to be conducted a labor
market survey which, subject to available funding and current economic trends,
shall be the basis for the annual compensation schedules recommendation. Such
schedules shall provide for the compensation of all persons employed by the
city whether classified or unclassified, except the mayor and council and those
charter officers appointed directly by the mayor and council (city manager,
city attorney, city clerk and city magistrates). (Ord. No. 9675, § 3, 2-25-02)
   Sec. 10-31(3). Amendments. Subject to the prior approval of the city
manager, amendments to the annual compensation plan may from time to time be
initiated, formulated and recommended to the mayor and council. (Ord. No. 4411,
§ 1, 11-17-75; Ord. No. 4418, § 1, 12-8-75; Ord. No. 9675, § 3, 2-25-02)
   Sec. 10-31(4). Adoption and filing. Prior to the beginning of each fiscal
year, subject to Tucson Charter
Chapter VII, Sec. 2, the mayor and council shall adopt a compensation plan.
Three (3) copies of the compensation plan and all current amendments thereto,
shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk. (Ord. No. 9675, § 3, 2-
25-02)
   Sec. 10-31(5). Applications. Each person employed by the city, except the
mayor and council and those charter officers appointed directly by the mayor
and council, (city manager, city attorney, city clerk and city magistrates),
shall be paid within a designated range or rate of the compensation schedules.
For classifications subject to Tucson Code section
10-7, the range shall correlate to the job evaluation grade assigned to the
class in which employed. Each person, whether subject to Tucson Code section
10-7 and within a salary range or rate of the compensation schedules, subject
to the approval of the city manager shall be placed within a range or at a rate
by the human resources director on implementation of the annual compensation
plan and as provided by city administrative directive for compensation
administration. Changes in rates within the hourly range schedule may be made
by the appointing authority in accordance with established criteria. (Ord. No.
7653, § 3, 6-24-91; Ord. No. 8206, § 2, 2-7-94; Ord. No. 8519, § 3, 6-12-95;
Ord. No. 9675, § 3, 2-25-02; Ord. No. 10003, § 3, 6-28-04)
   Sec. 10-31(6). Implementation. Effective retroactive to June 27, 2004, the
position compensation schedules for the Annual Compensation Plan provided for
in section
10-31(6) of the Tucson Code for the classified and unclassified employees of
the city are amended by adding new rates to special rate schedule, Exhibit J to
Appendix A, for weekend premium pay and shift differential pay for that
employee group eligible for representation by the American Federation of State
County and Municipal Employees to read as set forth in amended attached
schedule. (Ord. No. 7780, § 1, 3-16-92; Ord. No. 8316, § 1, 7-5-94; Ord. No.
8712, § 1, 6-10-96; Ord. No. 9675, § 3, 2-25-02; Ord. No. 9866, § 1, 6-23-03;
Ord. No. 10003, § 1, 6-28-04; Ord. No. 10021, § 1, 8-2-04)
   Sec. 10-31(7). Providing percentages for calculation of compensation from
salary schedules for employees in specified assignment positions.
   a.   Notwithstanding any other provision of section 10-31 of the
compensation plan, the assignment positions of chief deputy city attorney;
chief prosecutor; deputy chief prosecutor; lead assistant city attorney IV;
police legal advisor; lead senior paralegal; fire fighter, trainee; public
safety communications specialist I and II; and Tucson police department
assignment position as identified by the chief of police on a list maintained
by the human resources director; staff fire captain; deputy fire chief; and
assistant fire chief, shall be compensated as follows:
      (1)   Chief deputy city attorney, assignment pay is ten percent (10%) of
employee's base pay.
      (2)   Chief prosecutor, assignment pay is ten percent (10%) of employee's
base pay.
      (3)   Deputy chief prosecutor, assignment pay is five percent (5%) of
employee's base pay.
      (4)   Lead assistant city attorney IV, assignment pay is ten percent
(10%) of employee's base pay.
      (5)   Police legal advisor, assignment pay is ten percent (10%) of
employee's base pay.
      (6)   Lead senior paralegal, assignment pay is ten percent (10%) of
employee's base pay.
      (7)   Fire fighter, trainee, eighty-five percent (85%) of range 401, step
1.
      (8)   Public safety communications specialists I and II will receive
temporary assignment pay for five percent (5%) of the employees base hourly
rate for all hours when employee is assigned to train and evaluate an operator-
trainee or dispatcher-trainee as part of the department's formal training
program.
      (9)   Public safety communications administrator on assignment as deputy
director over 311 division, assignment pay is ten percent (10%) of the
employee's base pay.
      (10)   Tucson police department (TPD) assignment positions identified by
the chief of police. The human resources director will maintain a list of TPD
positions eligible for assignment pay to be included in the compensation plan.
These positions are divided into two groups, by the chief of police (Section A
and Section B), and can be combined for assignment pay ranging from five
percent (5%) of an officer's base pay up to a maximum of ten percent (10%) of
an officer's base pay.
      (11)   Staff firefighter captains in pay range 408 will receive
assignment pay of twelve percent (12%) more than suppression fire captains in
pay range 406.
      (12)   Tucson fire department deputy chief on assignment to assistant
fire chief receives assignment pay that is ten percent (10%) of the employee's
base pay.
      (13)   Administrators on assignment to deputy director in the following
departments: human resources, information technology, Tucson water, housing &
community development, environmental & general services, parks & recreation,
transportation & mobility, public safety communications, city court, planning &
development services, and business services will receive assignment pay that is
at least ten percent (10%) of the employee's base pay.
   b.   Assignment to and removal from an assignment position is at the
discretion of the appointing authority. Removal from an assignment position
(re-assignment to previous position for non-disciplinary reasons) is neither
grievable nor appealable to the civil service commission. When re-assigned to
the employee's previous position, compensation will be adjusted accordingly.
   c.   This section is subject to yearly readoption and reenactment by the
mayor and council as part of the annual compensation plan.
(Ord. No. 9724, § 2, 6-17-02; Ord. No. 9727, § 2, 6-24-02; Ord. No. 10165, § 2,
6-14-05; Ord. No. 10365, § 1, 12-19-06; Ord. No. 10426, § 2, 6-19-07; Ord. No.
10550, § 2, 6-17-08; Ord. No. 10558, § 1, 6-25-08; Ord. No. 10675, § 2, 6-2-09,
eff. 7-1-09; Ord. No. 10806, § 2, 6-15-10, eff. 7-1-10; Ord. No. 10900, § 2, 6-
28-11, eff. 7-1-11; Ord. No. 10989, § 3, 6-5-12, eff. 7-1-12; Ord. No. 11075, §
5, 5-21-13, eff. 7-1-13; Ord. No. 11134, § 2, 12-17-13; Ord. No. 11180, § 2, 6-
3-14, eff. 6-29-14; Ord. No. 11273, § 2, 6-9-15, eff. 6-28-15; Ord. No. 11373,
§ 2, 6-7-16, eff. 6-26-16; Ord. No. 11429, eff. 12-25-16; Ord. No. 11558, § 2,
6-5-18, eff. 6-24-18; Ord. No. 11611, § 1, 12-18-18; Ord. No. 12012, § 3, 6-6-
23, eff. 7-2-23; Ord. No. 12062, § 1, 12-12-23, eff. 12-18-23; Ord. No. 12074,
§ 1, 2-21-24, eff. 12-18-23; Ord. No. 12101, § 3, 6-4-24, eff. 6-30-24; Ord.
No. 12173, § 3, 6-3-25, eff. 7-1-25)
   Editor’s note – Ord. No. 11180, § 2, adopted June 3, 2014, ratified,
reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year 2015. Appendix A and
accompanying schedules are implemented for all classified and unclassified
employees, effective June 29, 2014.  Ord. No. 11273, § 2, adopted June 9, 2015,
ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year 2016. Appendix
A and accompanying schedules are implemented for all classified and
unclassified employees, effective June 28, 2015. Ord. No. 11373, § 2, adopted
June 7, 2016, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year
2017. Appendix A and accompanying schedules are implemented for all classified
and unclassified employees, effective June 26, 2016. Ord. No. 11464, § 2,
adopted June 6, 2017, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for
Fiscal Year 2018. Ord. No. 11848, § 2, adopted June 22, 2021, ratified,
reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year 2022. Appendix A and
accompanying schedules are implemented for all classified and unclassified
employees, effective June 25, 2017. Ord. No. 11883, § 2, adopted November 9,
2021, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year 2022.
Ord. No. 11935, § 2, adopted June 7, 2022, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted
this section for fiscal year 2023. Ord. No. 11935, § 2, adopted June 7, 2022,
ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for fiscal year 2023. Ord. No.
12101, § 2, adopted June 4, 2024, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this
section for fiscal year 2025. Ord. No. 12173, § 2, adopted June 3, 2025,
ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for fiscal year 2026.
   Sec. 10-31(8). Payment for uniform maintenance. Subject to the prior
approval of the city manager, the human resources director shall, as part of
the budget process, annually recommend payment for uniform maintenance.
(Ord. No. 10426, § 4, 6-19-07, eff. 6-24-07; Ord. No. 10806, § 2, 6-15-10, eff.
7-1-10; Ord. No. 10900, § 2, 6-28-11, eff. 7-1-11; Ord. No. 10989, § 3, 6-5-12,
eff. 7-1-12; Ord. No. 11075, § 5, 5-21-13, eff. 7-1-13; Ord. No. 11134, § 2,
12-17-13; Ord. No. 11180, § 2, 6-3-14, eff. 6-29-14; Ord. No. 11273, § 2, 6-9-
15, eff. 6-28-15; Ord. No. 11291, § 3, 8-5-15; Ord. No. 11373, § 2, 6-7-16,
eff. 6-26-16; Ord. No. 11558, § 2, 6-5-18, eff. 6-24-18; Ord. No. 11611, § 1,
12-18-18)
   Editor’s note—Ord. No. 12173, § 2, adopted June 3, 2025, ratified,
reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for fiscal year 2026.
   Sec. 10-31(9). Authority to exceed the maximum rate of pay of adopted
compensation salary schedules.
   a.   To authorize payment of an hourly rate or salary higher than the
maximum rate/ salary range established in the adopted salary schedules to
address extraordinary circumstances, to include:
   1)   To continue compensation for employees at the same rate of pay who as
of December 1, 2022, are earning a pay rate/salary that exceeds the maximum
rate/salary established in the adopted schedules; and
   2)   To allow for the implementation and administration of pay adjustments
approved by the Mayor and Council (e.g., cost of living, cost of labor, or
other generally applicable pay adjustments) in a manner that eligible employees
will receive the pay adjustment even though their current rate of pay is at or
above the maximum pay rate/salary in the relevant adopted schedules.
   b.   Authority to exceed established salary schedules per this section is
capped at 20% of the maximum pay rate/salary range in adopted salary schedules.
   c.   This section is subject to yearly readoption and reenactment by the
mayor and council as part of the annual compensation plan.
(Ord. No. 11973, § 2, 12-6-22, eff. 12-18-22)
   Editor’s note – Ord. No. 11180, § 2, adopted June 3, 2014, ratified,
reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year 2015. Appendix A and
accompanying schedules are implemented for all classified and unclassified
employees, effective June 29, 2014. Ord. No. 11273, § 2, adopted June 9, 2015,
and Ord. No. 11291, § 5, adopted August 5, 2015, ratified, reaffirmed, and
reenacted this section for Fiscal Year 2016. Appendix A and accompanying
schedules are implemented for all classified and unclassified employees,
effective June 28, 2015. Ord. No. 11373, § 2, adopted June 7, 2016, ratified,
reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year 2017. Appendix A and
accompanying schedules are implemented for all classified and unclassified
employees, effective June 26, 2016. Ord. No. 11464, § 2, adopted June 6, 2017,
ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year 2018. Appendix
A and accompanying schedules are implemented for all classified and
unclassified employees, effective June 25, 2017. Ord. No. 11659, §§ 1-2,
adopted June 18, 2019, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for
Fiscal Year 2020, with amendments to Schedules B-2, C-2 and F-1 (Schedule F
effective December 22, 2019). Ord. No. 11761, §§ 1-2, adopted June 30, 2020,
ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year 2021, with
amendments to Schedules A, B-1, B-2, C-1, C-2, C-3, D, E, F-1, G, G-2, H-1, H-
2, and H-3. Ord. No. 11800, §§ 1-2, adopted November 17, 2020, ratified,
reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year 2021, with replacement
of Schedule F effective December 20, 2020. Ord. No. 11817, §§ 1-2, adopted
February 23, 2021, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal
Year 2021, with replacement of Schedule B-2 effective January 31, 2021. Ord.
No. 11818, §§ 1-2, adopted February 23, 2021, ratified, reaffirmed, and
reenacted this section for Fiscal Year 2021, with replacement of Schedule H-
1 effective January 31, 2021. Ord. No. 11848, § 2, adopted June 22, 2021,
ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year 2022. Appendix
A and accompanying schedules are implemented for all classified and
unclassified employees, effective June 23, 2018. Ord. No. 11883, § 2, adopted
November 9, 2021, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal
Year 2022. Ord. No. 11935, § 2, adopted June 7, 2022, ratified, reaffirmed, and
reenacted this section for fiscal year 2023. Ord. No. 12012, § 2, adopted June
6, 2023, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for fiscal year 2024.
Ord. No. 12101, § 2, adopted June 4, 2024, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted
this section for fiscal year 2025. Ord. No. 12173, § 2, adopted June 3, 2025,
ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for fiscal year 2026.
(1953 Code, ch. 10, § 10; Ord. No. 7369, § 17, 3-12-90; Ord. No. 9675, § 3, 2-
25-02, eff. 6-30-02)
   Editor's note – Listed below are the ordinances constituting and amending
the compensation plan:
      1957 Supp. to 1953 Code, Ch. 10, § 36--Amended by:
      Ord. No. 1826, § 2, 5-5-58
      Ord. No. 1853, § 1, 8-18-58
      Ord. No. 1855, § 2, 9-2-58
      Ord. No. 1870, § 1, 12-8-58
      Ord. No. 1899, § 1, 4-20-59
      Ord. No. 1960, §§ 1, 2, 9-28-59
      Ord. No. 1980, § 6, 11-16-59
      Ord. No. 1981, § 1, 11-16-59
      Ord. No. 2004, § 1, 2-3-60
      Ord. No. 2030, § 1, 5-2-60
      Ord. No. 2129, § 1, 1-3-61
      Ord. No. 2187, § 1, 6-19-61
      Ord. No. 2212, § 3, 9-18-61
      Ord. No. 2329, § 1, 8-13-62
      Ord. No. 2390, § 3, 12-17-62
      Ord. No. 2496, § 1, 7-22-63
      Ord. No. 2574, § 1, 1-20-64
      Ord. No. 2651, § 1, 8-13-64
      Ord. No. 2658, § 1, 9-8-64
      Ord. No. 2693, § 1, 11-2-64
      Ch. 10, § 36a of the 1953 Code as added by Ord. No. 1980, § 7, 11-16-59--
Amended by:
      Ord. No. 2004, § 2, 2-3-60
      Ord. No. 2105, § 1, 11-7-60
      Ord. No. 2129, § 2, 1-3-61
      Ord. No. 2212, § 4, 9-18-61
      Ord. No. 2390, § 4, 12-17-62
      Ord. No. 2608, § 1, 5-4-64
      Ord. No. 2709, § 1, 12-7-64
      Ch. 10, § 36b of the 1953 Code as added by Ord. No. 1980, § 7, 11-16-59--
Amended by:
      Ord. No. 2004, § 3, 2-3-60
      Ord. No. 2212, § 5, 9-18-61
      Ord. No. 2390, § 5, 12-17-62
      Ord. No. 2651, § 2, 8-13-64
      Ord. No. 2659, § 1, 9-8-64
      Ch. 10, § 36c of the 1953 Code as added by Ord. No. 1980, § 7, 11-16-59--
Amended by:
      Ord. No. 2004, § 4, 2-3-60
      Ord. No. 2074, § 1, 8-1-60
      Ord. No. 2212, § 6, 9-18-61
      Ord. No. 2329, § 2, 8-13-62
      Ord. No. 2574, § 2, 1-20-64
      Ch. 10, § 36d of the 1953 Code as added by Ord. No. 1980, § 7, 11-16-59--
Amended by:
      Ord. No. 1971, § 2, 11-16-59
      Ord. No. 2004, § 5, 2-3-60
      Ord. No. 2032, § 1, 5-16-60
      Ord. No. 2212, § 7, 9-18-61
      Ord. No. 2390, § 7, 12-17-62
      Ord. No. 2496, § 2, 7-22-63
      Ch. 10, § 36e of the 1953 Code as added by Ord. No. 1980, § 7, 11-16-59--
Amended by:
      Ord. No. 2004, § 6, 2-3-60
      Ord. No. 2212, § 8, 9-18-61
      Ord. No. 2329, § 3, 8-13-62
      Ord. No. 2390, § 8, 12-17-62
      Ord. No. 2460, § 2, 5-6-63
      Ord. No. 2574, § 3, 1-20-64
      Ord. No. 2608, § 2, 5-4-64
      Ord. No. 2695, § 1, 11-9-64
      Ch. 10, § 36f of the 1953 Code as added by Ord. No. 1980, § 7, 11-16-59--
Amended by:
      Ord. No. 2004, § 7, 2-3-60
      Ord. No. 2105, § 2, 11-7-60
      Ord. No. 2212, § 9, 9-18-61
      Ord. No. 2213, § 1, 9-25-61
      Ord. No. 2390, § 9, 12-17-62
      Ord. No. 2460, § 3, 5-6-63
      Ord. No. 2490, § 3, 7-22-63
      Ord. No. 2574, § 4, 1-20-64
      Ord. No. 2693, § 2, 11-2-64
      Ch. 10, § 36g of the 1953 Code as added by Ord. No. 1980, § 7, 11-16-59--
Amended by:
      Ord. No. 2004, § 8, 2-3-60
      Ord. No. 2063, § 1, 7-5-60
      Ord. No. 2105, § 3, 11-7-60
      Ord. No. 2212, § 10, 9-10-61
      Ord. No. 2216, § 1, 10-19-61
      Ord. No. 2390, § 10, 12-17-62
      Ord. No. 2496, § 4, 7-22-63
      Ord. No. 2574, § 5, 1-20-64
      Ch. 10, § 36 of the 1953 Code as added by Ord. No. 2638, § 1, 7-6-64.
   Section 10-31 has been amended by the following ordinances:
      Ord. No. 2754, § 3, 4-5-65
      Ord. No. 2845, § 4, 2-7-66
      Ord. No. 2874, § 1, 5-16-66
      Ord. No. 2908, §§ 1, 2, 8-1-66
      Ord. No. 2930, §§ 1, 2, 10-24-66
      Ord. No. 2940, § 3, 11-28-66
      Ord. No. 2973, § 1, 2-6-67
      Ord. No. 2974, § 1, 2-6-67
      Ord. No. 2986, § 2, 3-20-67
      Ord. No. 3009, §§ 1, 2, 6-5-67
      Ord. No. 3061, § 1, 12-4-67
      Ord. No. 3079, § 1, 1-15-68
      Ord. No. 3123, § 1, 5-20-68
      Ord. No. 3126, § 2, 5-27-68
      Ord. No. 3127, § 1, 6-3-68
      Ord. No. 3137, § 1, 7-1-68
      Ord. No. 3163, §§ 1, 2, 9-9-68
      Ord. No. 3179, § 1, 11-12-68
      Ord. No. 3199, § 1, 12-2-68
      Ord. No. 3208, § 1, 1-13-69
      Ord. No. 3209, §§ 1, 2, 1-13-69
      Ord. No. 3214, § 1, 2-3-69
      Ord. No. 3215, §§ 1, 2, 2-24-69
      Ord. No. 3251, §§ 1, 2, 5-5-69
      Ord. No. 3266, § 1, 6-2-69
      Ord. No. 3279, § 1, 6-23-69
      Ord. No. 3298, § 1, 7-21-69
      Ord. No. 3344, § 2, 10-16-69
      Ord. No. 3405, § 1, 2-2-70
      Ord. No. 3428, § 1, 3-23-70
      Ord. No. 3429, § 1, 3-23-70
      Ord. No. 3444, § 1, 5-18-70
      Ord. No. 3512, § 1, 8-31-70
      Ord. No. 3534, § 1, 10-12-70
      Ord. No. 3581, § 1, 1-4-71
      Ord. No. 3582, § 1, 1-4-71
      Ord. No. 3635, §§ 1, 2, 5-12-71
      Ord. No. 3648, §§ 1--4, 5-10-71
      Ord. No. 3710, §§ 1, 2, 9-7-71
      Ord. No. 3768, § 1, 12-20-71
      Ord. No. 3838, §§ 1--4, 5-1-72
      Ord. No. 3863, §§ 1--4, 6-12-73
      Ord. No. 3914, §§ 1, 2, 9-5-72
      Ord. No. 3968, § 1, 1-22-73
      Ord. No. 4014, § 1, 4-23-73
      Ord. No. 4025, § 1, 5-21-73
      Ord. No. 4027, § 1, 5-29-73
      Ord. No. 4038, § 2, 6-25-73
      Ord. No. 4065, § 1, 7-16-73
      Ord. No. 4075, § 1, 8-6-73
      Ord. No. 4105, § 1, 11-5-73
      Ord. No. 4119, § 2, 12-11-73
      Ord. No. 4142, § 1, 2-25-74
      Ord. No. 4182, § 1, 5-28-74
      Ord. No. 4194, § 1, 6-3-74
      Ord. No. 4198, § 2, 6-17-74
      Ord. No. 4203, § 2, 7-1-74
      Ord. No. 4218, § 1, 7-22-74
      Ord. No. 4239, § 1, 9-9-74
      Ord. No. 4241, § 1, 9-9-74
      Ord. No. 4306, § 1, 1-13-75
      Ord. No. 4371, § 1, 6-30-75
      Ord. No. 4381, § 1, 8-4-75
      Ord. No. 4425, § 2, 12-30-75
      Ord. No. 4445, § 1, 2-17-76
      Ord. No. 4523, § 2, 6-21-76
      Ord. No. 4528, § 1, 6-28-76
      Ord. No. 4643, § 1, 5-23-77
      Ord. No. 4682, § 2, 7-5-77
      Ord. No. 4735, § 2, 12-19-77
      Ord. No. 4849, §§ 2, 3, 7-3-78
      Ord. No. 4859, § 1, 8-7-78
      Ord. No. 4872, § 1, 9-5-78
      Ord. No. 4896, § 1, 10-23-78
      Ord. No. 4905, §§ 1, 2, 11-13-78
      Ord. No. 4939, §§ 1, 2, 2-12-79
      Ord. No. 4984, § 2, 6-4-79
      Ord. No. 5007, §§ 1, 2, 7-2-79
      Ord. No. 5032, § 1, 9-4-79
      Ord. No. 5061, §§ 1, 2, 11-13-79
      Ord. No. 5085, § 1, 1-7-79
      Ord. No. 5146, §§ 1, 2, 5-5-80
      Ord. No. 5164, § 2, 5-27-80
      Ord. No. 5199, § 1, 8-4-80
      Ord. No. 5305, §§ 1, 2, 2-9-81
      Ord. No. 5365, § 1, 6-8-81
      Ord. No. 5399, §§ 2, 3, 7, 6-29-81
      Ord. No. 5413, § 1, 8-3-81
      Ord. No. 5599, §§ 1, 3--5, 9, 6-28-82
      Ord. No. 5624, § 1, 8-3-82
      Ord. No. 5677, § 1, 11-8-82
      Ord. No. 5798, §§ 1, 3, 8, 7-5-83
      Ord. No. 5832, § 1, 8-1-83
      Ord. No. 5850, §§ 1--3, 9-6-83
      Ord. No. 5901, § 1, 11-21-83
      Ord. No. 5903, § 1, 11-21-83
      Ord. No. 5951, § 1, 2-13-84
      Ord. No. 6007, § 1, 4-30-84
      Ord. No. 6040, §§ 1, 3, 8, 6-25-84
      Ord. No. 6071, § 1, 8-6-84
      Ord. No. 6114, §§ 1--3, 11-5-84
      Ord. No. 6169, § 1, 2-11-85
      Ord. No. 6264, §§ 1, 3, 8, 6-24-85
      Ord. No. 6302, §§ 1, 2, 9-3-85
      Ord. No. 6329, § 1, 11-18-85
      Ord. No. 6332, § 1, 11-25-85
      Ord. No. 6338, § 1, 11-25-85
      Ord. No. 6452, § 1, 3, 6-16-86
      Ord. No. 6506, § 1, 9-2-86
      Ord. No. 6613, § 1, 1-12-87
      Ord. No. 6643, § 1, 3-16-87
      Ord. No. 6735, §§ 1, 5, 10, 7-6-87
      Ord. No. 6772, §§ 1, 2, 9-14-87
      Ord. No. 6840, § 1, 11-16-87
      Ord. No. 6913, § 1, 3-28-88
      Ord. No. 6921, § 1, 4-4-88
      Ord. No. 6945, § 1, 5-9-88
      Ord. No. 6960, §§ 1, 2, 6-6-88
      Ord. No. 7004, §§ 1, 4, 9--11, 14, 7-5-88
      Ord. No. 7024, § 1, 9-6-88
      Ord. No. 7097, § 1, 11-28-88
      Ord. No. 7151, §§ 1, 2, 3-6-89
      Ord. No. 7196, §§ 1, 2, 5-15-89
      Ord. No. 7243, §§ 7, 9, 12, 7-3-89
      Ord. No. 7275, §§ 1--3, 9-11-89
      Ord. No. 7312, §§ 1, 2, 11-13-89
      Ord. No. 7350 § 1, 2-5-90
      Ord. No. 7383, § 2, 3-19-90
      Ord. No. 7439, § 1, 6-25-90
      Ord. No. 7466, § 1, 8-6-90
      Ord. No. 7497, § 1, 9-17-90
      Ord. No. 7518, § 1, 11-19-90
      Ord. No. 7549, § 1, 1-14-91
      Ord. No. 7566, § 1, 2-25-91
      Ord. No. 7599, §§ 1, 2, 4-1-91
      Ord. No. 7605, §§ 1, 2, 4-15-91
      Ord. No. 7653, §§ 1, 2, 6-24-91
      Ord. No. 7691, §§ 1, 2, 9-16-91
      Ord. No. 7780, §§ 1, 2, 3-16-92
      Ord. No. 7906, § 1, 9-14-92
      Ord. No. 7917, §§ 1, 2, 10-5-92
      Ord. No. 7970, § 1, 1-4-93
      Ord. No. 8022, § 1, 4-12-93
      Ord. No. 8067, §§ 1, 2, 6-21-93
      Ord. No. 8090, § 1, 7-6-93
      Ord. No. 8092, § 1, 8-2-93
      Ord. No. 8149, § 1, 11-1-93
      Ord. No. 8166, § 1, 11-22-93
      Ord. No. 8206, § 1, 2-7-94
      Ord. No. 8316, § 1, 7-5-94
      Ord. No. 8367, § 1, 9-12-94
      Ord. No. 8378, § 1, 10-17-94
      Ord. No. 8439, § 2, 1-23-95
      Ord. No. 8444, § 1, 2-6-95
      Ord. No. 8519, §§ 1, 2, 6-12-95
      Ord. No. 8619, § 1, 1-2-96
      Ord. No. 8712, § 2, 6-10-96
      Ord. No. 8753, § 2, 8-5-96
      Ord. No. 8791, § 1, 1-6-97
      Ord. No. 8842, § 1, 3-17-97
      Ord. No. 8844, § 1, 3-24-97
      Ord. No. 8878, § 1, 6-9-97
      Ord. No. 8975, § 1, 11-3-97
      Ord. No. 9008, § 1, 2-2-98
      Ord. No. 9055, § 1, 5-18-98
      Ord. No. 9068, § 1, 6-8-98
      Ord. No. 9093, § 1, 8-3-98
      Ord. No. 9151, § 1, 11-2-98
      Ord. No. 9191, § 1, 1-11-99
      Ord. No. 9237, § 1, 6-14-99
      Ord. No. 9347, § 1, 2-7-00
      Ord. No. 9352, § 1, 2-28-00
      Ord. No. 9399, § 1, 6-12-00
      Ord. No. 9465, § 1, 9-25-00
      Ord. No. 9475, § 1, 10-16-00
      Ord. No. 9575, § 1, 6-25-01
      Ord. No. 9588, § 1, 8-6-01
      Ord. No. 9677, § 1, 2-25-02 (effective June 30, 2002)
      Ord. No. 9724, §§ 1, 2, 6-17-02
      Ord. No. 9727, §§ 1, 2, 6-24-02
      Ord. No. 9742, § 2, 8-5-02 (retroactive to June 30, 2002)
      Ord. No. 10003, § 1, 6-28-04 (effective June 27, 2004)
      Ord. No. 10165, § 1, 6-14-05 (effective June 26, 2005)
      Ord. No. 10289, §§ 1--3, 6-27-06 (effective July 9, 2006)
      Ord. No. 10293, §§ 1, 2, 6-27-06 (retroactive to June 25, 2006)
      Ord. No. 10364, § 1, 12-19-06 (amending Ord. No. 10289)
      Ord. No. 10426, § 1, 6-19-07 (effective June 24, 2007)
      Ord. No. 10491, §§ 1, 2, 1-8-08
      Ord. No. 10550, § 1, 6-17-08 (effective July 1, 2008)
      Ord. No. 10619, §§ 1, 2 (Exh. A), 1-6-09 (effective January 1, 2009)
      Ord. No. 10675, § 1, 6-2-09 (effective July 1, 2009)
      Ord. No. 10806, § 1, 6-15-10 (effective July 1, 2010)
      Ord. No. 10900, § 1, 6-28-11 (effective July 1, 2011)
      Ord. No. 10989, § 2, 6-5-12 (effective July 1, 2012)
      Ord. No. 11075, § 5, 5-21-13 (effective July 1, 2013)
      Ord. No. 11134, § 2, 12-17-13
      Ord. No. 11180, § 1, 6-3-14 (effective June 29, 2014)
      Ord. No. 11233, § 1, 12-16-14
      Ord. No. 11273, § 1, 6-9-15 (effective June 28, 2015)
      Ord. No. 11291, § 3, 8-5-15
      Ord. No. 11373, § 1, 6-7-16 (effective June 26, 2016)
      Ord. No. 11407, § 1, 11-9-16 (effective November 27, 2016)
      Ord. No. 11429, § 1, 1-24-17 (effective December 25, 2016)
      Ord. No. 11464, § 1, 6-6-17 (effective June 25, 2017)
      Ord. No. 11511, § 1, 12-19-17 (effective December 24, 2017)
      Ord. No. 11535, § 1, 3-20-18
      Ord. No. 11542, § 1, 4-17-18
      Ord. No. 11558, § 1, 6-5-18 (effective June 24, 2018)
      Ord. No. 11611, § 1, 12-18-18
      Ord. No. 11659, § 1, 6-18-19 (effective June 23, 2018; new Sch. F
effective December 22, 2019)
      Ord. No. 11761, § 1, 6-30-20
      Ord. No. 11800, § 1, 11-17-20 (new Sch. F effective December 20, 2020)
      Ord. No. 11817, § 1, 2-23-21 (new Sch. B-2 effective January 31, 2021)
      Ord. No. 11818, § 1, 2-23-21 (new Sch. H-1 effective January 31, 2021)
      Ord. No. 11848, § 1, 6-22-21 (effective June 20, 2021)
      Ord. No. 11883, §§ 1-2, 11-9-21 (new Sch. F effective December 19, 2021)
      Ord. No. 11910, §§ 1-2, 2-23-22 (new Sch. F effective February 27, 2022)
      Ord. No. 11935, §§ 1-2, 6-7-22 (Sch. A-H effective June 19, 2022)
      Ord. No. 11973, §§ 1-2, 12-6-22 (effective December 18, 2022)
      Ord. No. 12012, § 2, 6-6-23 (effective July 2, 2023)
      Ord. No. 12101, § 2, 6-4-24 (effective June 30, 2024)
      Ord. No. 12173, § 3, 6-3-25 (effective July 1, 2025)
      Ord. No. 12192, § 1, 9-23-25
Sec. 10-32. Administration of plan.
   (a)   Under the direction and supervision of the city manager, the human
resources director shall administer the annual position-compensation plan which
is predicated on performance and skill based components and principles. A skill
based pay component of the position-compensation for any department will not be
implemented or administered without prior approval of a department proposal by
the human resource director. Consideration and implementation of a proposal for
a skill based component requires:
   (1)   That a comprehensive review of departmental work practices has been
undertaken. This review shall include the evaluation of work practices, the
identification of potential improvements that integrate organization change,
new work practices and use of new technologies and,
   (2)   That benefits and cost savings which will result from the utilization
of a skill based pay component for the department have been identified and
quantified.
   (3)   That there has been a job analysis identifying skill, job description,
skill objectives, training program supporting the acquisition of identified
skills, and skill based compensation structure.
   (4)   That the human resources is satisfied with and approves the proposed
skill based component to be appropriate for the classification involved.
   (b)   In no event shall a skill based pay component for a department be
approved if the proposal results in the compensation of positions in a city
classification both under the performance and skill based component of the
compensation plan.
(1953 Code, ch. 10, § 21; Ord. No. 7369, § 18, 3-12-90; Ord. No. 10003, § 3, 6-
28-04)
   Cross references – Duties of director of personnel pertaining to pensions, §
22-23; duties pertaining to group insurance, §
22-84.
Sec. 10-33. Language communication compensation.
   (a)   In addition to the compensation authorized by section
10-31, employees who use a language other than English, with proficiency at a
conversational level as verified by the director of the department of human
resources, a minimum of five (5) percent of the work week, or occupy a position
designated by an appointing authority and approved by the city manager as a
"language communication" position, shall receive extra compensation in the
amount of thirty dollars ($30.00) per pay period.
   (b)   Designation of a "language communication" position by the appointing
authority and its authorization by the city manager shall be pursuant to
procedures to be set forth in city administrative directives.
   (c)   The director of the department of human resources is responsible for
the administration of the language communication compensation program,
including, but not limited to, fixing: competency standards; verification
procedures for confirming five (5) percent language usage; and criteria to be
utilized by appointing authorities when designating "language communications"
positions.
(Ord. No. 7937, § 1, 10-26-92; Ord. No. 9540, § 1, 4-16-01; Ord. No. 9562, § 1,
6-11-01; Ord. No. 9727, § 2, 6-24-02; Ord. No. 10165, § 3, 6-14-05; Ord. No.
10426, § 2, 6-19-07; Ord. No. 10550, § 3, 6-17-08, eff. 7-1-08; Ord. No. 10675,
§ 2, 6-2-09, eff. 7-1-09; Ord. No. 10806, § 2, 6-15-10, eff. 7-1-10; Ord. No.
10900, § 2, 6-28-11, eff. 7-1-11; Ord. No. 10989, § 3, 6-5-12, eff. 7-1-12;
Ord. No. 11075, § 5, 5-21-13, eff. 7-1-13; Ord. No. 11134, § 2, 12-17-13; Ord.
No. 11180, § 2, 6-3-14, eff. 6-29-14; Ord. No. 11273, § 2, 6-9-15, eff. 6-28-
15; Ord. No. 11373, § 2, 6-7-16, eff. 6-26-16; Ord. No. 11558, § 2, 6-5-18,
eff. 6-24-18; Ord. No. 11611, § 3, 12-18-18)
   Editor’s note – Ord. No. 11180, § 2, adopted June 3, 2014, ratified,
reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year 2015. Appendix A and
accompanying schedules are implemented for all classified and unclassified
employees, effective June 29, 2014. Ord. No. 11273, § 2, adopted June 9, 2015,
ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year 2016. Appendix
A and accompanying schedules are implemented for all classified and
unclassified employees, effective June 28, 2015. Ord. No. 11373, § 2, adopted
June 7, 2016, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year
2017. Appendix A and accompanying schedules are implemented for all classified
and unclassified employees, effective June 26, 2016. Ord. No. 11464, § 2,
adopted June 6, 2017, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for
Fiscal Year 2018. Appendix A and accompanying schedules are implemented for all
classified and unclassified employees, effective June 25, 2017. Ord. No. 11659,
§ 2, adopted June 18, 2019, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section
for Fiscal Year 2020. Ord. No. 11848, § 2, adopted June 22, 2021, and Ord. No.
11910, § 3, adopted February 23, 2022, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this
section for Fiscal Year 2022. Appendix A and accompanying schedules are
implemented for all classified and unclassified employees, effective June 23,
2018.  Ord. No. 11935, § 2, adopted June 7, 2022, ratified, reaffirmed, and
reenacted this section for fiscal year 2023. Ord. No. 12012, § 2, adopted June
6, 2023, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for fiscal year 2024.
Ord. No. 12101, § 2, adopted June 4, 2024, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted
this section for fiscal year 2025. Ord. No. 12173, § 2, adopted June 3, 2025,
ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for fiscal year 2026.
Sec. 10-33.1. Proficiency pay for City of Tucson employees certified as
bilingual users of American Sign Language (ASL) or Spanish.
   (a)   City of Tucson employees who are certified as bilingual users of ASL
or Spanish, who use ASL or Spanish a minimum of five (5) percent of the work
week, or who occupy a position designated by the department appointing
authority and approved by the city manager as regularly requiring a certified
bilingual user of ASL or Spanish, will receive one hundred dollars ($100.00)
per pay period.
   (b)   Designation of a position as regularly requiring the use of a
certified bilingual user of ASL or Spanish by the appointing authority and if
authorized by the city manager, shall be pursuant to procedures to be set forth
in city administrative directives.
   (c)   Certified bilingual officers who are receiving compensation under this
section are not eligible for language communication compensation under section
10-33.
   (d)   The director of the department of human resources is responsible for
establishing and/or adopting certification standards to ensure that bilingual
ASL or Spanish proficiency is at a speed and technical level necessary to
accomplish all critical aspects of an employees’s duties in those languages.
The department of human resources is also responsible for the administration of
the certified ASL or Spanish proficiency program including but not limited to
verification procedures for confirming five (5) percent usage and criteria to
be utilized by appointing authorities when designating a position as requiring
certified bilingual user proficiency in ASL or Spanish language.
(Ord. No. 10165, § 4, 6-14-05; Ord. No. 10426, § 2, 6-19-07; Ord. No. 10550, §
2, 6-17-08; Ord. No. 10675, § 2, 6-2-09, eff. 7-1-09; Ord. No. 10806, § 2, 6-
15-10, eff. 7-1-10; Ord. No. 10900, § 2, 6-28-11, eff. 7-1-11; Ord. No. 10989,
§ 3, 6-5-12, eff. 7-1-12; Ord. No. 11075, § 5, 5-21-13, eff. 7-1-13; Ord. No.
11134, § 2, 12-17-13; Ord. No. 11180, § 2, 6-3-14, eff. 6-29-14; Ord. No.
11273, § 2, 6-9-15, eff. 6-28-15; Ord. No. 11373, § 2, 6-7-16, eff. 6-26-16;
Ord. No. 11558, § 2, 6-5-18, eff. 6-24-18; Ord. No. 11611, § 3, 12-18-18; Ord.
No. 11912, § 1, 2-23-22; Ord. No. 11969, § 1, 11-14-22)
   Editor’s note – Ord. No. 11180, § 2, adopted June 3, 2014, ratified,
reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year 2015. Appendix A and
accompanying schedules are implemented for all classified and unclassified
employees, effective June 29, 2014. Ord. No. 11273, § 2, adopted June 9, 2015,
ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year 2016. Appendix
A and accompanying schedules are implemented for all classified and
unclassified employees, effective June 28, 2015. Ord. No. 11373, § 2, adopted
June 7, 2016, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year
2017. Appendix A and accompanying schedules are implemented for all classified
and unclassified employees, effective June 26, 2016. Ord. No. 11464, § 2,
adopted June 6, 2017, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for
Fiscal Year 2018. Appendix A and accompanying schedules are implemented for all
classified and unclassified employees, effective June 25, 2017. Ord. No. 11659,
§ 2, adopted June 18, 2019, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section
for Fiscal Year 2020. Ord. No. 11848, § 2, adopted June 22, 2021, and Ord. No.
11910, § 3, adopted February 23, 2022, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this
section for Fiscal Year 2022. Appendix A and accompanying schedules are
implemented for all classified and unclassified employees, effective June 23,
2018. Ord. No. 11935, § 2, adopted June 7, 2022, ratified, reaffirmed, and
reenacted this section for fiscal year 2023.  Ord. No. 12012, § 2, adopted June
6, 2023, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for fiscal year 2024.
Ord. No. 12101, § 2, adopted June 4, 2024, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted
this section for fiscal year 2025. Ord. No. 12173, § 2, adopted June 3, 2025,
ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for fiscal year 2026.
Sec. 10-34. Incentive pay for fire prevention inspectors.
   In addition to the compensation authorized by Tucson Code section
10-31, compensation in the amount of ninety-two dollars and thirty-one cents
($92.31) per pay period shall be paid to full time employees holding positions
in the Fire Prevention Inspector Classification, Class Code 6412 or full time
non-commissioned fire personnel holding positions in the Code Inspector
Classification, Class Code 2570, who achieve and maintain any of the following
designations:
   Certified Fire Investigator, issued by the International Association of
Arson Investigators (AAI);
   Fire Investigation Technician, issued by International Association of Arson
Investigators (AAI);
   Certified Fire Inspector I, issued by International Code Council (ICC);
   Certified Fire Inspector II, issued by International Code Council (ICC).
   Compensation under this section will be awarded for only one certified
designation regardless of the number of certified designations held.
(Ord. No. 8957, § 1, 9-22-97; Ord. No. 9563, § 1, 6-11-01; Ord. No. 9727, § 2,
6-24-02; Ord. No. 10165, § 2, 6-14-05; Ord. No. 10426, § 2, 6-19-07; Ord. No.
10550, § 2, 6-17-08; Ord. No. 10675, § 2, 6-2-09, eff. 7-1-09; Ord. No. 10806,
§ 2, 6-15-10, eff. 7-1-10; Ord. No. 10900, § 2, 6-28-11, eff. 7-1-11; Ord. No.
10989, § 3, 6-5-12, eff. 7-1-12; Ord. No. 11075, § 5, 5-21-13, eff. 7-1-13;
Ord. No. 11134, § 2, 12-17-13; Ord. No. 11180, § 2, 6-3-14, eff. 6-29-14; Ord.
No. 11273, § 2, 6-9-15, eff. 6-28-15; Ord. No. 11373, §§ 2, 3, 6-7-16, eff. 6-
26-16; Ord. No. 11558, § 2, 6-5-18, eff. 6-24-18; Ord. No. 11611, § 3, 12-18-
18; Ord. No. 11848, § 3, 6-22-21)
   Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3965, § 5, adopted Dec. 18, 1972, amended this Code
by repealing former §
10-34, relative to the conversion of the salary range schedule to hourly,
biweekly and approximate annual rates. The section was derived from the
following: 1953 Code, ch. 10, § 35a; Ord. No. 2031, § 1, adopted May 16, 1960,
and Ord. No. 2401, § 2, adopted Jan. 7, 1963. Subsequently, Ord. No. 8957 added
a new §
10-34.
   Ord. No. 11180, § 2, adopted June 3, 2014, ratified, reaffirmed, and
reenacted this section for Fiscal Year 2015. Appendix A and accompanying
schedules are implemented for all classified and unclassified employees,
effective June 29, 2014. Ord. No. 11273, § 2, adopted June 9, 2015, ratified,
reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year 2016. Appendix A and
accompanying schedules are implemented for all classified and unclassified
employees, effective June 28, 2015. Ord. No. 11373, § 2, adopted June 7, 2016,
ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year 2017. Appendix
A and accompanying schedules are implemented for all classified and
unclassified employees, effective June 26, 2016. Ord. No. 11464, § 2, adopted
June 6, 2017, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year
2018. Appendix A and accompanying schedules are implemented for all classified
and unclassified employees, effective June 25, 2017. Ord. No. 11659, § 2,
adopted June 18, 2019, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for
Fiscal Year 2020. Appendix A and accompanying schedules are implemented for all
classified and unclassified employees, effective June 23, 2018. Ord. No. 11910,
§ 3, adopted February 23, 2022, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this
section for Fiscal Year 2022. Ord. No. 11935, § 2, adopted June 7, 2022,
ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for fiscal year 2023. Ord. No.
12012, § 2, adopted June 6, 2023, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this
section for fiscal year 2024. Ord. No. 12101, § 2, adopted June 4, 2024,
ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for fiscal year 2025. Ord. No.
12173, § 2, adopted June 3, 2025, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this
section for fiscal year 2026.
Sec. 10-34.1. Assignment and incentive pay for maintaining paramedic
certification and working as a paramedic.
   (a)   Paramedic assignment pay of two hundred forty-six dollars and twenty
cents ($246.20) per pay period will be paid to commissioned fire personnel who:
   (1)   Are promoted to and remain in the classification of paramedic; or
   (2)   Are in non-paramedic classifications, have completed new hire
probation, possess a national and/or state certification (EMT- P) and are
minimally available to work one (1) twenty-four-hour shift per month as a
paramedic, which work availability is subject to verification by the fire
chief.
   (b)   Paramedic assignment pay of one hundred twenty-three dollars and ten
cents ($123.10) per pay period will be paid to commissioned fire personnel in a
Fire Command position who possess a current National or State certification
(EMT-P).
(Ord. No. 9399, § 2, 6-12-00; Ord. No. 9522, § 1, 3-5-01; Ord. No. 9727, § 2,
6-24-02; Ord. No. 10165, § 2, 6-14-05; Ord. No. 10289, § 4, 6-27-06; Ord. No.
10426, § 2, 6-19-07; Ord. No. 10550, § 2, 6-17-08; Ord. No. 10675, § 3, 6-2-09,
eff. 7-1-09; Ord. No. 10806, § 2, 6-15-10, eff. 7-1-10; Ord. No. 10900, § 2, 6-
28-11, eff. 7-1-11; Ord. No. 10989, § 3, 6-5-12, eff. 7-1-12; Ord. No. 11075, §
5, 5-21-13, eff. 7-1-13; Ord. No. 11134, § 2, 12-17-13; Ord. No. 11180, § 2, 6-
3-14, eff. 6-29-14; Ord. No. 11273, § 2, 6-9-15, eff. 6-28-15; Ord. No. 11373,
§ 2, 6-7-16, eff. 6-26-16; Ord. No. 11558, § 2, 6-5-18, eff. 6-24-18; Ord. No.
11611, § 3, 12-18-18; Ord. No. 11970, § 1, 11-14-22; Ord. No. 12021, § 1, 8-8-
23)
   Editor’s note – Ord. No. 11180, § 2, adopted June 3, 2014, ratified,
reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year 2015. Appendix A and
accompanying schedules are implemented for all classified and unclassified
employees, effective June 29, 2014. Ord. No. 11273, § 2, adopted June 9, 2015,
ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year 2016. Appendix
A and accompanying schedules are implemented for all classified and
unclassified employees, effective June 28, 2015. Ord. No. 11373, § 2, adopted
June 7, 2016, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year
2017. Appendix A and accompanying schedules are implemented for all classified
and unclassified employees, effective June 26, 2016. Ord. No. 11464, § 2,
adopted June 6, 2017, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for
Fiscal Year 2018. Appendix A and accompanying schedules are implemented for all
classified and unclassified employees, effective June 25, 2017. Ord. No. 11659,
§ 2, adopted June 18, 2019, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section
for Fiscal Year 2020. Ord. No. 11848, § 2, adopted June 22, 2021, and Ord. No.
11910, § 3, adopted February 23, 2022, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this
section for Fiscal Year 2022. Appendix A and accompanying schedules are
implemented for all classified and unclassified employees, effective June 23,
2018. Ord. No. 11935, § 2, adopted June 7, 2022, ratified, reaffirmed, and
reenacted this section for fiscal year 2023. Ord. No. 12012, § 2, adopted June
6, 2023, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for fiscal year 2024.
Ord. No. 12101, § 2, adopted June 4, 2024, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted
this section for fiscal year 2025. Ord. No. 12173, § 2, adopted June 3, 2025,
ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for fiscal year 2026.
Sec. 10-34.2. Assignment pay for commissioned fire personnel assigned to a
Paramedic Truck.
   Assignment pay for commissioned fire personnel who are assigned to a
Paramedic Truck will begin the first pay period after implementation of the
program in fiscal year 2023 and remain in effect until July 1, 2025. The three
assignments are:
   1.   Paramedic (EMT-P) assigned to a dual-medic truck with a probationary
medic will be paid an additional two dollars ($2.00) per hour.
   2.   Paramedic (EMT-P) assigned to a single-medic truck (one and one) with
an EMT-B firefighter will be paid an additional two dollars ($2.00) per hour.
   3.   An EMT-B firefighter assigned to a single-medic truck (one and one)
will be paid an additional two dollars ($2.00) per hour.
(Ord. No. 11970, § 1, 11-14-22)
   Editor’s note – Ord. No. 12012, § 2, adopted June 6, 2023, ratified,
reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for fiscal year 2024. Ord. No. 12101, §
2, adopted June 4, 2024, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for
fiscal year 2025. Ord. No. 12173, § 2, adopted June 3, 2025, ratified,
reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for fiscal year 2026.
Sec. 10-34.3. Incentive pay for maintaining a Hazardous Materials certification
and assignment to a Hazardous Materials Team.
   Commissioned fire personnel who possess a Hazardous Material certification
and are assigned to a Hazardous Materials Team will receive assignment pay of
five per cent (5%) of their base pay. EC1 Captains are considered part of the
Hazardous Materials Team.
(Ord. No. 11970, § 1, 11-14-22)
   Editor’s note – Ord. No. 12012, § 2, adopted June 6, 2023, ratified,
reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for fiscal year 2024. Ord. No. 12101, §
2, adopted June 4, 2024, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for
fiscal year 2025. Ord. No. 12173, § 2, adopted June 3, 2025, ratified,
reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for fiscal year 2026.
Sec. 10-34.4. Incentive pay for maintaining a Personal Fitness Trainer (PEER)
certification and active participation in the program.
   Commissioned fire personnel who possess a PEER or PFT certification or its
equivalent as determined by the Tucson Fire Department Safety Division, and are
active participants in the program, will receive certification pay of forty-two
dollars and seventy cents ($42.70) per pay period.
(Ord. No. 11970, § 1, 11-14-22)
   Editor’s note – Ord. No. 12012, § 2, adopted June 6, 2023, ratified,
reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for fiscal year 2024. Ord. No. 12101, §
2, adopted June 4, 2024, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for
fiscal year 2025. Ord. No. 12173, § 2, adopted June 3, 2025, ratified,
reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for fiscal year 2026.
Sec. 10-34.5. Incentive pay for maintaining a Peer Operation Support Team
(POST) certification and active participation in the program.
   Commissioned fire personnel who possess a POST certification or its
equivalent as determined by the Tucson Fire Department Safety Division, working
under the guidance and supervision of the Tucson Fire Department contracted
clinical psychologist, and are active participants as trained peer supporters,
will receive certification pay of forty-two dollars and seventy cents ($42.70)
per pay period.
(Ord. No. 11970, § 1, 11-14-22)
   Editor’s note – Ord. No. 12012, § 2, adopted June 6, 2023, ratified,
reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for fiscal year 2024. Ord. No. 12101, §
2, adopted June 4, 2024, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for
fiscal year 2025. Ord. No. 12173, § 2, adopted June 3, 2025, ratified,
reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for fiscal year 2026.
Sec. 10-35. Fire chief call back shift pay.
   In addition to the compensation authorized by Tucson Code Section
10-31, compensation in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
twelve-hour shift worked outside of a normally scheduled shift shall be paid to
full time employees assigned to suppression duties who hold positions in the
Fire Chief Classification (Battalion Chief and Deputy Chief).
(Ord. No. 9091, § 1, 7-6-98; Ord. No. 9727, § 2, 6-24-02; Ord. No. 10165, § 2,
6-14-05; Ord. No. 10426, § 2, 6-19-07; Ord. No. 10550, § 2, 6-17-08; Ord. No.
10675, § 2, 6-2-09, eff. 7-1-09; Ord. No. 10806, § 2, 6-15-10, eff. 7-1-10;
Ord. No. 10900, § 2, 6-28-11, eff. 7-1-11; Ord. No. 10948, § 1, 12-5-11; Ord.
No. 10989, § 3, 6-5-12, eff. 7-1-12; Ord. No. 11075, § 5, 5-21-13, eff. 7-1-13;
Ord. No. 11134, § 2, 12-17-13; Ord. No. 11180, § 2, 6-3-14, eff. 6-29-14; Ord.
No. 11273, § 2, 6-9-15, eff. 6-28-15; Ord. No. 11373, § 2, 6-7-16, eff. 6-26-
16; Ord. No. 11558, § 2, 6-5-18, eff. 6-24-18; Ord. No. 11611, § 3, 12-18-18;
Ord. No. 11848, § 4, 6-22-21; Ord. No. 12074, § 1, 2-21-24, eff. 12-18-23)
   Editor’s note – Section 10-35, relating the rate of pay for a class of an
employee’s original appointment, derived from the 1953 Code, ch. 10, § 22, and
Ord. No. 1980, § 1, adopted Nov. 16, 1959, was repealed by § 1 of Ord. No.
7369, adopted Mar. 12, 1990. Subsequently, Ord. No. 9091, § 1, adopted July 6,
1998, added a new §
10-35.
   Ord. No. 11180, § 2, adopted June 3, 2014, ratified, reaffirmed, and
reenacted this section for Fiscal Year 2015. Appendix A and accompanying
schedules are implemented for all classified and unclassified employees,
effective June 29, 2014. Ord. No. 11273, § 2, adopted June 9, 2015, ratified,
reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year 2016. Appendix A and
accompanying schedules are implemented for all classified and unclassified
employees, effective June 28, 2015. Ord. No. 11373, § 2, adopted June 7, 2016,
ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year 2017. Appendix
A and accompanying schedules are implemented for all classified and
unclassified employees, effective June 26, 2016. Ord. No. 11464, § 2, adopted
June 6, 2017, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year
2018. Appendix A and accompanying schedules are implemented for all classified
and unclassified employees, effective June 25, 2017. Ord. No. 11659, § 2,
adopted June 18, 2019, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for
Fiscal Year 2020. Appendix A and accompanying schedules are implemented for all
classified and unclassified employees, effective June 23, 2018. Ord. No. 11910,
§ 3, adopted February 23, 2022, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this
section for Fiscal Year 2022. Ord. No. 11935, § 2, adopted June 7, 2022,
ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for fiscal year 2023. Ord. No.
12012, § 2, adopted June 6, 2023, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this
section for fiscal year 2024. Ord. No. 12101, § 2, adopted June 4, 2024,
ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for fiscal year 2025. Ord. No.
12173, § 2, adopted June 3, 2025, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this
section for fiscal year 2026.
Sec. 10-36. Probationary periods.
All original and promotional appointments of eligible persons to permanent
positions shall be made subject to a probationary period. Such probationary
period shall commence with the date of appointment, except for entrance into
the uniformed service of the police or fire department, when the probationary
period shall commence when the employee enters the police or fire training
academy. The length of probationary periods shall be as established by civil
service commission rules and regulations.
(1953 Code, ch. 10, § 23; Ord. No. 1980, § 2, 11-16-59; Ord. No. 5000, § 9, 6-
25-79; Ord. No. 5398, § 1, 6-29-81; Ord. No. 5598, § 1, 6-28-82; Ord. No. 6735,
§ 2, 7-6-87; Ord. No. 7004, § 5, 7-5-88; Ord. No. 7243, §§ 2, 3, 7-3-89)
Sec. 10-37. Reallocation.
   Sec. 10-37(1). Reallocation of positions compensated under skill based pay
components of the compensation plan.
   (a)   When a position is reallocated to a classification that is assigned to
a skill based pay structure and the incumbent's skill level is greater than the
incumbent's current pay level the incumbent shall receive a pay increase
commensurate with the skill pay level and the incumbent's anniversary date
shall be changed.
   (b)   When a position is reallocated to a classification that is assigned to
a skill based pay structure and the incumbent's skill level is equal to the
incumbent's current pay level or falls between two (2) points within the skill
level band the incumbent shall move to the higher level in the range. The
anniversary date shall not change. The incumbent must attain the assigned skill
level within the next six (6) months to retain the assigned pay level.
   (c)   When a position is reallocated to a classification that is assigned to
a skill based pay structure and the incumbent's current salary is higher than
the incumbent's skill pay level the incumbent shall enter the structure with no
change to current salary. The anniversary date shall not change. The incumbents
shall not receive any further salary increases until the skill level for the
assigned salary has been reached.
   Sec. 10-37(2). Reallocation of positions compensated under performance based
components of the compensation plan.
   (a)   When a position is reallocated to a classification that is assigned a
higher salary range, an incumbent's anniversary date shall be changed and
salary increased as though a promotion had occurred.
   (b)   When a position is reallocated to a classification assigned a lower
salary range, an incumbent's salary shall not change if it is equal to either a
step or a point within salary ranges but if falling between two (2) steps of a
range, the incumbent's salary will not change until the next pay increase at
which time the salary will move to the appropriate step within the salary
range. The anniversary date shall not change.
   (c)   When a position is reallocated to a classification assigned a lower
salary range an incumbent's salary shall not change if it is greater than the
maximum for the classification. The incumbent shall not receive any further
salary increases until salary ranges for the classification increase,
permitting salary increases under regular administration of the compensation
plan.
(Ord. No. 9399, § 3, 6-12-00; Ord. No. 9866, § 3, 6-23-03; Ord. No. 10003, § 3,
6-28-04; Ord. No. 10550, § 4, 6-17-08, eff. 7-1-08)
Sec. 10-37.1. Reserved.
   Editor's note – Ordinance No. 8712, § 3, adopted June 10, 1996, repealed §
10-37.1. Formerly, such section pertained to increases in compensation for the
pay for performance plan and derived from Ord. No. 8519, § 6, 6-12-95.
Sec. 10-37.2. Reserved.
   Editor's note – Ordinance No. 8712, § 3, adopted June 10, 1996, repealed §
10-37.2. Formerly, such section pertained to increases in compensation for the
recreation benchmark group and hourly classifications and derived from Ord. No.
8519, § 7, 6-12-95.
Sec. 10-38. Movement within salary ranges.
Movement within salary ranges shall be based upon performance components and or
predicated on acquisition of skills set forth in skill based pay components of
the compensation plan and also in accordance with the city managers directives
for compensation administration.
(Ord. No. 10003, § 4, 6-28-04)
Sec. 10-39. Increases for exceptionally meritorious service.
Notwithstanding any other provision of article II of chapter
10, no person compensated under a performance based component of the
compensation plan may receive more than one (1) performance based compensation
increase within a year, except for exceptionally meritorious service and then
only upon the recommendation of the department head and with the approval of
the city manager. Performance pay increases for exceptionally meritorious
service will not exceed five (5) percent in addition to the basic performance
based pay of five (5) percent or a total maximum of ten (10) percent in any
twelve (12) month time period. Persons compensated under a skill based
component of the compensation plan shall not receive increases for meritorious
service but may receive up to three (3) skill based pay level increases per
year as provided for by the structure of the skill based component of the
compensation plan.
(Ord. No. 8519, § 8, 6-12-95; Ord. No. 10003, § 5, 6-28-04; Ord. No. 10550, §
5, 6-17-08, eff. 7-1-08)
   Editor's note – Formerly, §
10-38.
Secs. 10-40. Reserved.
Sec. 10-41. Premium pay.
   (a)   In addition to the compensation authorized by section
10-31, eligible employees as defined below shall receive compensation as
premium pay, as provided in this Section.
   (b)   Premium pay will only become activated during the time period
commencing the first day of the pay period following an officially declared
local health emergency or officially declared local disaster and will end on
the last day of the pay period of the date the local emergency or local
disaster has been officially declared substantially eliminated. Premium pay is
not activated by a local health emergency or local disaster that was declared
on a date prior to September 9, 2020, even if that emergency continues in
effect on and after September 9, 2020.
   (c)   The director of human resources is responsible for the administration
of premium pay, including but not limited to establishing additional
eligibility criteria and designation of eligible positions, as deemed necessary
during an officially declared local health emergency or an officially declared
local disaster. Employees may be required to perform emergency work, in
addition to their regular assignments, depending on the nature of the emergency
or disaster and the need for additional personnel.
   (d)   City employees who are eligible to receive premium pay are limited to
employees for whom both of the following are true:
      (1)   The employee is required to report to the workplace to perform
functions the appointing authority has determined are essential for
departmental operations during an officially declared local health emergency or
officially declared local disaster; and
      (2)   performing this work during the declared emergency or disaster
presents greater risk or physical hardship than what is normally considered in
the classification of the position.
   (e)   Premium pay shall be paid at the rate of one hundred sixty dollars
($160) per pay period when the full pay period is worked under an officially
declared local health emergency or officially declared local disaster; OR
sixteen dollars ($16) per day when only certain days are worked under an
officially declared local health emergency or officially declared local
disaster.
(Ord. No. 11780, § 1, 9-9-20)
   Editor’s note – Ord. No. 11848, § 2, adopted June 22, 2021, and Ord. No.
11910, § 3, adopted February 23, 2022, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this
section for Fiscal Year 2022. Ord. No. 11935, § 2, adopted June 7, 2022,
ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for fiscal year 2023. Ord. No.
12012, § 2, adopted June 6, 2023, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this
section for fiscal year 2024. Ord. No. 12101, § 2, adopted June 4, 2024,
ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for fiscal year 2025. Ord. No.
12173, § 2, adopted June 3, 2025, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this
section for fiscal year 2026.
Secs. 10-42 – 10-44. Reserved.
   Editor’s note – Sections 10-40 – 10-43 were repealed by § 1 of Ord. No.
7369, adopted Mar. 12, 1990. Section 10-40 dealt with transfers to different
classes and was derived from the 1953 Code, ch. 10, § 26, and Ord. No. 5000, §
12. Section 10-41 dealt with reduction in pay on demotion to a lower class and
was derived from the 1953 Code, ch. 10, § 27, and Ord. Nos. 5000, § 13, and
5237, § 2. Section 10-42 dealt with pay upon reemployment or reinstatement
after separation and was derived from the 1953 Code, ch. 10, § 28, and Ord. No.
1980, § 3. Section 10-43 dealt with reallocation and was derived from Ord. No.
5000, § 15. Ord. No. 5000, § 16, adopted Jun 25, 1979, repealed § 10-44, which
pertained to the deduction of lodging, transportation, etc., from compensation
rates. The section had been derived from the 1953 Code, ch. 10, § 29.
Sec. 10-45. Computation of hourly rates.
Whenever it becomes necessary or desirable to compute compensation for service
on an hourly basis, payment for part-time, emergency, temporary, overtime, or
extra time service, and other similar cases, the computation shall be made by
the city finance director under the direction of the city manager by applying
any generally accepted payroll computation method for translating monthly
salaries into equivalent hourly rates. The same formula shall be applied to
compensation computations for all persons employed by the city.
(1953 Code, ch. 10, § 30; Ord. No. 7369, § 21, 3-12-90)
Sec. 10-46. Part-time employees to be paid by the hour.
Part-time employees shall be compensated at a rate only for the number of hours
worked.
(1953 Code, ch. 10, § 31)
Sec. 10-47. Referral compensation for recruiting commissioned police and fire
personnel, public safety communications personnel, and certain Information
Technology personnel.
   (a)   In addition to other compensation provided by Tucson Code Chapter 10,
Article II, City of Tucson employees who refer a police officer applicant who
is hired within one year of the referral shall receive five hundred dollars
($500.00), as provided in section (f) following.
   (b)   In addition to other compensation provided by Tucson Code Chapter 10,
Article II, commissioned firefighter personnel who refer a firefighter
applicant who is hired within one year of the referral shall receive two
hundred dollars ($200.00), as provided in section (f) following.
   (c)   In addition to other compensation provided by Tucson Code Chapter 10,
Article II, both commissioned and professional staff employed by the Tucson
Police Department are eligible for a tiered recruiting incentive of up to three
thousand dollars ($3,000.00). The tiered incentive requires the applicant/
candidate successfully complete the hiring process and start the academy (Tier
1, $1,000.00), successfully complete Field Training (Tier 2, $1,000.00), and
successfully complete probation and attain permanent employee status (Tier 3,
$1,000.00), as provided in section (f) following.
   (d)   In addition to other compensation provided by Tucson Code Chapter 10,
Article II, City of Tucson employees who refer a public safety communications
applicant are eligible for a tiered recruiting incentive of up to one thousand
five hundred dollars ($1,500.00). The tiered incentive requires the applicant/
candidate to successfully complete the hiring process and start the training
program (Tier 1, $500.00), successfully complete floor training (Tier 2,
$500.00), and successfully complete probation and attain permanent employee
status (Tier 3, $500.00), as provided in section (f) following.
   (e)   In addition to other compensation provided by Tucson Code Chapter 10,
Article II, City of Tucson employees who refer an Information Technology
applicant who is hired within one year of the referral shall receive five
hundred dollars ($500.00) as provided in section (f) following.
   (f)   The director of human resources is responsible for the administration
of recruiting referral compensation, including, but not limited to, providing
for criteria to determine an acceptable referral; establishing methods to match
referrals with hiring; and approving referral compensation. Payment of
recruiting referral compensation for firefighter referrals will occur upon the
applicant’s successful completion of the Academy.
(Ord. No. 9349, § 1, 2-7-00; Ord. No. 9405, § 1, 6-19-00; Ord. No. 9727, § 2,
6-24-02; Ord. No. 10165, § 2, 6-14-05; Ord. No. 10426, § 2, 6-19-07; Ord. No.
10558, § 2, 6-25-08, eff. 6-22-08; Ord. No. 10900, § 2, 6-28-11, eff. 7-1-11;
Ord. No. 11273, § 2, 6-9-15, eff. 6-28-15; Ord. No. 11373, § 2, 6-7-16, eff. 6-
26-16; Ord. No. 11558, § 2, 6-5-18, eff. 6-24-18; Ord. No. 11611, § 3, 12-18-
18; Ord. No. 11858, § 1, 8-10-21)
   Editor’s note – Ord. No. 10900, § 2, adopted June 28, 2011, ratified,
reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year 2012. Appendix A and
accompanying schedules are implemented for all classified and unclassified
employees, effective July 1, 2011. Ord. No. 11273, § 2, adopted June 9, 2015,
ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year 2016. Appendix
A and accompanying schedules are implemented for all classified and
unclassified employees, effective June 28, 2015. Ord. No. 11373, § 2, adopted
June 7, 2016, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year
2017. Appendix A and accompanying schedules are implemented for all classified
and unclassified employees, effective June 26, 2016. Ord. No. 11464, § 2,
adopted June 6, 2017, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for
Fiscal Year 2018. Appendix A and accompanying schedules are implemented for all
classified and unclassified employees, effective June 25, 2017. Ord. No. 11659,
§ 2, adopted June 18, 2019, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section
for Fiscal Year 2020. Ord. No. 11848, § 2, adopted June 22, 2021, and Ord. No.
11910, § 3, adopted February 23, 2022, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this
section for Fiscal Year 2022. Appendix A and accompanying schedules are
implemented for all classified and unclassified employees, effective June 23,
2018. Ord. No. 11935, § 2, adopted June 7, 2022, ratified, reaffirmed, and
reenacted this section for fiscal year 2023. Ord. No. 12012, § 2, adopted June
6, 2023, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for fiscal year 2024.
Ord. No. 12101, § 2, adopted June 4, 2024, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted
this section for fiscal year 2025. Ord. No. 12173, § 2, adopted June 3, 2025,
ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for fiscal year 2026.
Sec. 10-48. Supplement to military pay.
   City employees, who pursuant to state law are entitled to military leave
without loss of pay for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days in any two (2)
consecutive years and fire commissioned personnel who are entitled by section
22-90(4) to military leave not to exceed thirty (30) days in one (1) year,
will, when called to active duty which exceeds either of the preceding thirty
(30) day periods for a period that exceeds thirty (30) consecutive days,
receive pay to supplement their military base pay and allowances to the
equivalent of their regular rate of city pay during the following time period
and pursuant to the conditions hereafter provided:
   (1)   The supplemental pay will commence July 1, 2002, but pursuant to
Tucson Code section
10-31(1), shall expire annually subject to readoption and reenactment as part
of the annual compensation plan for the succeeding fiscal year.
   (2)   Supplemental military pay is an amount calculated to make the
employee’s military base pay and allowances equivalent to the monthly amount of
the employee’s regular rate of city pay as set forth in the adopted annual
compensation plan that the employee would have received, were the employee not
on active duty.
   (3)   The employee performs extended military service, meaning for a period
exceeding thirty (30) consecutive days.
   (4)   The thirty (30) day period of military leave for which the employee is
entitled to pay by state law or section
22-90(4) during military service has been or becomes exhausted during the
period of military service.
   (5)   The employee's base monthly military pay and allowances during any
qualifying period is less than the amount the employee would have received as
the employee's regular rate of pay per month from city employment were the
employee not on active duty and as provided for in the city annually adopted
compensation plan.
   (6)   The employee provides proof of military service, hostile fire/imminent
danger assignment, base military pay and allowances pursuant to procedures to
be established by the human resources director. The director shall certify that
the employee's base military pay and allowances received per month is less than
the amount the employee would have received as his regular rate of city pay per
month were the employee not on active duty before any payment of supplemental
military pay will be made to an employee.
(Ord. No. 9641, § 1, 12-10-01; Ord. No. 9709, § 1, 6-3-02; Ord. No. 9866, § 4,
6-23-03; Ord. No. 10003, § 6, 6-28-04; Ord. No. 10165, § 2, 6-14-05; Ord. No.
10426, § 2, 6-19-07; Ord. No. 10550, § 2, 6-17-08; Ord. No. 10675, § 2, 6-2-09,
eff. 7-1-09; Ord. No. 10806, §§ 2, 3, 6-15-10, eff. 7-1-10; Ord. No. 10814, §
1, 7-7-10; Ord. No. 10900, § 2, 6-28-11, eff. 7-1-11; Ord. No. 10989, § 3, 6-5-
12, eff. 7-1-12; Ord. No. 11075, § 5, 5-21-13, eff. 7-1-13; Ord. No. 11134, §
2, 12-17-13; Ord. No. 11180, § 2, 6-3-14, eff. 6-29-14; Ord. No. 11273, § 2, 6-
9-15, eff. 6-28-15; Ord. No. 11373, §§ 2, 4, 6-7-16, eff. 6-26-16; Ord. No.
11398, § 1, 9-7-16, eff. 6-26-16)
   Editor’s note – Ord. No. 11180, § 2, adopted June 3, 2014, ratified,
reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year 2015. Appendix A and
accompanying schedules are implemented for all classified and unclassified
employees, effective June 29, 2014. Ord. No. 11273, § 2, adopted June 9, 2015,
ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year 2016. Appendix
A and accompanying schedules are implemented for all classified and
unclassified employees, effective June 28, 2015. Ord. No. 11373, § 2, adopted
June 7, 2016, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year
2017. Appendix A and accompanying schedules are implemented for all classified
and unclassified employees, effective June 26, 2016. Ord. No. 11464, § 2,
adopted June 6, 2017, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for
Fiscal Year 2018. Appendix A and accompanying schedules are implemented for all
classified and unclassified employees, effective June 25, 2017. Ord. No. 11558,
§ 2, adopted June 5, 2018, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for
Fiscal Year 2019. Ord. No. 11611, § 3, adopted December 18, 2018, ratified,
reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year 2019. Ord. No. 11659, §
2, adopted June 18, 2019, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for
Fiscal Year 2020. Ord. No. 11848, § 2, adopted June 22, 2021, and Ord. No.
11910, § 3, adopted February 23, 2022, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this
section for Fiscal Year 2022. Appendix A and accompanying schedules are
implemented for all classified and unclassified employees, effective June 23,
2018. Ord. No. 11935, § 2, adopted June 7, 2022, ratified, reaffirmed, and
reenacted this section for fiscal year 2023. Ord. No. 12012, § 2, adopted June
6, 2023, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for fiscal year 2024.
Ord. No. 12101, § 2, adopted June 4, 2024, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted
this section for fiscal year 2025. Ord. No. 12173, § 2, adopted June 3, 2025,
ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for fiscal year 2026.
Sec. 10-49. Holiday and BOI pay for commissioned officers of the Tucson police
department of the position of lieutenant and assignment positions of captain
and assistant chief.
   (a)   In addition to the compensation authorized by section
10-31, commissioned officers of the position of lieutenant and assignment
positions of captain and assistant chief shall receive holiday pay for any
holiday worked which shall result in one (1) extra day of pay for that holiday.
   (b)   In addition to the compensation authorized by section
10-31, commissioned officers of the position of lieutenant and assignment
positions of captain and assistant chief shall receive one (1) day of board of
inquiry pay when called out to serve on a boards of inquiry. Board of inquiry
pay shall be equivalent to one (1) day of pay at the regular rate of pay for
the employee who is called out. No more than one (1) day of board of inquiry
pay shall be received by any employee for the same board.
(Ord. No. 10003, § 7, 6-28-04; Ord. No. 10165, § 2, 6-14-05; Ord. No. 10426, §
2, 6-19-07; Ord. No. 10550, § 2, 6-17-08; Ord. No. 10675, § 2, 6-2-09, eff. 7-
1-09; Ord. No. 10806, §§ 2, 3, 6-15-10, eff. 7-1-10; Ord. No. 10900, § 2, 6-28-
11, eff. 7-1-11; Ord. No. 10989, § 3, 6-5-12, eff. 7-1-12; Ord. No. 11075, § 5,
5-21-13, eff. 7-1-13; Ord. No. 11134, § 2, 12-17-13; Ord. No. 11180, § 2, 6-3-
14, eff. 6-29-14; Ord. No. 11273, § 2, 6-9-15, eff. 6-28-15; Ord. No. 11373, §
2, 6-7-16, eff. 6-26-16)
   Editor’s note – Ord. No. 11180, § 2, adopted June 3, 2014, ratified,
reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year 2015. Appendix A and
accompanying schedules are implemented for all classified and unclassified
employees, effective June 29, 2014. Ord. No. 11273, § 2, adopted June 9, 2015,
ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year 2016. Appendix
A and accompanying schedules are implemented for all classified and
unclassified employees, effective June 28, 2015. Ord. No. 11373, § 2, adopted
June 7, 2016, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year
2017. Appendix A and accompanying schedules are implemented for all classified
and unclassified employees, effective June 26, 2016. Ord. No. 11464, § 2,
adopted June 6, 2017, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for
Fiscal Year 2018. Appendix A and accompanying schedules are implemented for all
classified and unclassified employees, effective June 25, 2017. Ord. No. 11558,
§ 2, adopted June 5, 2018, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for
Fiscal Year 2019. Ord. No. 11611, § 3, adopted December 18, 2018, ratified,
reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year 2019. Ord. No. 11659, §
2, adopted June 18, 2019, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for
Fiscal Year 2020. Ord. No. 11848, § 2, adopted June 22, 2021, and Ord. No.
11910, § 3, adopted February 23, 2022, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this
section for Fiscal Year 2022. Appendix A and accompanying schedules are
implemented for all classified and unclassified employees, effective June 23,
2018. Ord. No. 11935, § 2, adopted June 7, 2022, ratified, reaffirmed, and
reenacted this section for fiscal year 2023. Ord. No. 12012, § 2, adopted June
6, 2023, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for fiscal year 2024.
Ord. No. 12101, § 2, adopted June 4, 2024, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted
this section for fiscal year 2025. Ord. No. 12173, § 2, adopted June 3, 2025,
ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for fiscal year 2026.
Sec. 10-50. Reserved.
   Editor's note – Prior to the reenactment of §
10-49 by Ord. No. 10003, Ord. No. 7369, § 1, adopted March 12, 1990, repealed §
10-49 relating to compensation of craftsmen in building trades, derived from
the 1953 Code, ch. 10, § 34, and §
10-50, declaring the state prevailing wage scale a public record, derived from
Ord. No. 2279, § 1, adopted March 19, 1962.
Sec. 10-51. Basic working hours; alternate work schedules for city employees
are authorized subject to city manager approval.
   (a)   The number of basic working hours for each full time employee shall be
forty (40) hours per week, except that in the fire department the work week may
be modified as permitted by the Fair Labor Standards Act, but such work week
shall not be less than forty (40) hours per week.
   (b)   Pursuant to A.R.S. § 23-391(B), city employees are authorized to work
forty (40) hours in fewer than five (5) working days subject to their
classification being approved by the city manager if, in his discretion, city
services can be maintained or improved.
   (c)   The city manager is also authorized, consistent with subsections (a)
and (b) above, to review and approve additional alternate work schedules for
city employees if the city manager decides, in his discretion, that city
services can be maintained or improved.
(1953 Code, ch. 10, § 38; Ord. No. 1980, § 8, 11-16-59; Ord. No. 3318, § 1, 9-
2-69; Ord. No. 5000, § 14, 6-25-79; Ord. No. 7369, § 22, 3-12-90; Ord. No.
9183, § 1, 1-4-99)
Sec. 10-52. Longevity compensation plan.
The longevity compensation plan is hereby adopted and is designed to reward
continuous satisfactory service in municipal employment in all classes of
positions both classified and unclassified according to the following schedule:
 
Years of Service                          Percent of Annual Salary of Longevity
                                          Premium
0 through 5th year                        0
Beginning of 6th year through end of 10th 4
year
Beginning of 11th year through end of     6
15th year
Beginning of 16th year through end of     8
20th year
Beginning of 21st year and following      10
 
Payment of longevity premium will be subject to the following:
   (1)   Years of service. These are considered as years of full-time service
as a city employee of any class beginning with the starting date of the
employee's first appointment. Any time served as a part-time employee (working
less than twenty-one (21) hours per week or less than forty-two (42) hours per
pay period) will not count toward eligibility for longevity pay. Any time in a
leave-without-pay status in excess of ten (10) continuous working days will not
count as time of service for longevity eligibility, but also will not be
considered as a break in service. Military leave will fully count toward
eligibility for longevity pay.
   (2)   Method of payment. The longevity premium will be paid in two (2) semi-
annual installments: Half of the annual amount on the payday for the pay period
in which June 1 falls, and half on the payday for the pay period in which
December 1 falls. This is done so as to provide additional funds when needed
most: around June 1 for vacation expenses, and around December 1 for holiday
expenses. Employees becoming eligible for longevity compensation for the first
time or becoming eligible for an increased increment will receive the first
longevity premiums or increment increase amount on a pro rata basis for the
period of eligibility in a method to be determined by the finance department.
   (3)   Percentage of annual pay. The amount of longevity pay will be based on
the stated fixed percentage of the salary actually received by the employee
during the six-month period immediately preceding the dates upon which
longevity payments shall be made, as set forth in subsection (2) hereof. For
purposes of this section the term "salary actually received by the employee"
shall not include salary received in excess of the base pay.
   (4)   Deductions. Longevity pay will be subject to all applicable taxes and
pension deductions. Such deductions will be made from longevity pay for amounts
withheld.
   (5)   Table. A table of longevity payments will be established by the
finance department showing semiannual longevity payment amounts at each pay
step for each "percentage of annual pay" and will be available for use of all
concerned.
   (6)   Determination of eligibility. The personnel department will be
responsible for the accurate determination twice each year of each employee's
length of service, including approved prior service credit, if any, and the
resulting eligibility for the proper annual percentage of longevity pay.
   (7)   Eligibility for benefits. The provisions of this section shall not be
applicable to any individual entering into employment with the city on or after
May 1, 1977.
(Ord. No. 3345, § 1, 10-16-69; Ord. No. 3597, § 1, 1-25-71; Ord. No. 4077, § 1,
8-6-73; Ord. No. 4330, § 1, 2-24-75; Ord. No. 4642, § 1, 5-2-77; Ord. No.
10426, § 2, 6-19-07; Ord. No. 10550, § 2, 6-17-08; Ord. No. 10675, § 2, 6-2-09,
eff. 7-1-09; Ord. No. 10806, § 2, 6-15-10, eff. 7-1-10; Ord. No. 10900, § 2, 6-
28-11, eff. 7-1-11; Ord. No. 10989, § 3, 6-5-12, eff. 7-1-12; Ord. No. 11075, §
5, 5-21-13, eff. 7-1-13; Ord. No. 11134, § 2, 12-17-13; Ord. No. 11180, § 2, 6-
3-14, eff. 6-29-14; Ord. No. 11273, § 2, 6-9-15, eff. 6-28-15; Ord. No. 11373,
§ 2, 6-7-16, eff. 6-26-16)
   Editor’s note – Ord. No. 11180, § 2, adopted June 3, 2014, ratified,
reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year 2015. Appendix A and
accompanying schedules are implemented for all classified and unclassified
employees, effective June 29, 2014. Ord. No. 11273, § 2, adopted June 9, 2015,
ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year 2016. Appendix
A and accompanying schedules are implemented for all classified and
unclassified employees, effective June 28, 2015. Ord. No. 11373, § 2, adopted
June 7, 2016, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year
2017. Appendix A and accompanying schedules are implemented for all classified
and unclassified employees, effective June 26, 2016. Ord. No. 11464, § 2,
adopted June 6, 2017, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for
Fiscal Year 2018. Appendix A and accompanying schedules are implemented for all
classified and unclassified employees, effective June 25, 2017. Ord. No. 11558,
§ 2, adopted June 5, 2018, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for
Fiscal Year 2019. Ord. No. 11611, § 3, adopted December 18, 2018, ratified,
reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year 2019. Ord. No. 11659, §
2, adopted June 18, 2019, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for
Fiscal Year 2020. Ord. No. 11848, § 2, adopted June 22, 2021, and Ord. No.
11910, § 3, adopted February 23, 2022, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this
section for Fiscal Year 2022. Appendix A and accompanying schedules are
implemented for all classified and unclassified employees, effective June 23,
2018. Ord. No. 11935, § 2, adopted June 7, 2022, ratified, reaffirmed, and
reenacted this section for fiscal year 2023. Ord. No. 12012, § 2, adopted June
6, 2023, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for fiscal year 2024.
Ord. No. 12101, § 2, adopted June 4, 2024, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted
this section for fiscal year 2025. Ord. No. 12173, § 2, adopted June 3, 2025,
ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for fiscal year 2026.
Sec. 10-53. Pipeline protection program; compensation.
   (a)   In addition to the compensation authorized by section
10-31, city water department employees, when assigned to the pipeline
protection program and receiving training in the pipeline protection skills
verified as necessary by the human resource director, shall receive a pay
increase of seven and one-half (7 1/2) percent calculated on the employee's
base salary as designated by the annual compensation plan.
   (b)   In addition to the compensation authorized by section
10-31, city water department employees, when assigned to the pipeline
protection program and fully trained in the pipeline protection skills verified
as necessary by the director of human resources, shall receive a pay increase
of ten (10) percent calculated on the employee's base salary as designated by
the annual compensation plan.
   (c)   In accordance with Rule VI Section 8 of the Rules and Regulations of
the Civil Service Commission of the City of Tucson, pipeline protection program
work assignments are temporary and at the discretion of the director of the
water department; assignment to and removal from the pipeline protection
program is not appealable to the city service commission.
   (d)   The director of human resources is responsible for the administration
of pipeline protection program compensation, including, but not limited to,
fixing competency and proficiency standards and setting criteria to be utilized
by the water department director when making a pipeline protection program
assignment.
(Ord. No. 9519, § 1, 2-26-01; Ord. No. 9727, § 2, 6-24-02; Ord. No. 10165, § 2,
6-14-05; Ord. No. 10426, § 2, 6-19-07; Ord. No. 10550, § 2, 6-17-08; Ord. No.
10675, § 2, 6-2-09, eff. 7-1-09; Ord. No. 10806, § 2, 6-15-10, eff. 7-1-10;
Ord. No. 10900, § 2, 6-28-11, eff. 7-1-11; Ord. No. 10989, § 3, 6-5-12, eff. 7-
1-12; Ord. No. 11075, § 5, 5-21-13, eff. 7-1-13; Ord. No. 11134, § 2, 12-17-13;
Ord. No. 11180, § 2, 6-3-14, eff. 6-29-14; Ord. No. 11273, § 2, 6-9-15, eff. 6-
28-15; Ord. No. 11373, § 2, 6-7-16, eff. 6-26-16)
   Editor’s note – Ord. No. 11180, § 2, adopted June 3, 2014, ratified,
reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year 2015. Appendix A and
accompanying schedules are implemented for all classified and unclassified
employees, effective June 29, 2014. Ord. No. 11273, § 2, adopted June 9, 2015,
ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year 2016. Appendix
A and accompanying schedules are implemented for all classified and
unclassified employees, effective June 28, 2015. Ord. No. 11373, § 2, adopted
June 7, 2016, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year
2017. Appendix A and accompanying schedules are implemented for all classified
and unclassified employees, effective June 26, 2016. Ord. No. 11464, § 2,
adopted June 6, 2017, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for
Fiscal Year 2018. Appendix A and accompanying schedules are implemented for all
classified and unclassified employees, effective June 25, 2017. Ord. No. 11558,
§ 2, adopted June 5, 2018, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for
Fiscal Year 2019. Ord. No. 11611, § 3, adopted December 18, 2018, ratified,
reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year 2019. Ord. No. 11659, §
2, adopted June 18, 2019, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for
Fiscal Year 2020. Ord. No. 11848, § 2, adopted June 22, 2021, and Ord. No.
11910, § 3, adopted February 23, 2022, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this
section for Fiscal Year 2022. Appendix A and accompanying schedules are
implemented for all classified and unclassified employees, effective June 23,
2018. Ord. No. 11935, § 2, adopted June 7, 2022, ratified, reaffirmed, and
reenacted this section for fiscal year 2023. Ord. No. 12012, § 2, adopted June
6, 2023, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for fiscal year 2024.
Ord. No. 12101, § 2, adopted June 4, 2024, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted
this section for fiscal year 2025. Ord. No. 12173, § 2, adopted June 3, 2025,
ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for fiscal year 2026.
Sec. 10-53.1. Permanent and probationary city civil service employees and
elected officials and appointed employees downtown allowance.
   (a)   An allowance of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per month shall be paid
to permanent city civil service employees and elected officials and appointed
employees working in the downtown city area bounded by 6th Street as the
Northern Border, 12 Street as the Southern Border, I-10 as the Western Border
and 4th Avenue as the Eastern Border, subject to the exception of subparagraph
(b) following.
   (b)   Permanent and probationary city civil service employees and elected
officials and appointed employees, working within the downtown boundaries of
subparagraph (a) who utilize an assigned marked city vehicle for all or part of
their commute, are provided parking by a city department, or receive a vehicle
allowance instead of an assigned city vehicle are excepted from the allowance.
Additionally, permanent and probationary employees and appointed employees of
the Tucson Police Department, Fire Department and the Tucson Convention Center
are excepted from the allowance.
(Ord. No. 9558, § 1, 6-11-01; Ord. No. 9608, § 1, 10-1-01; Ord. No. 9727, § 2,
6-24-02; Ord. No. 10165, § 2, 6-14-05; Ord. No. 10426, § 2, 6-19-07; Ord. No.
10550, § 2, 6-17-08; Ord. No. 10633, § 1, 2-10-09, eff. 1-1-09; Ord. No. 10675,
§ 4, 6-2-09, eff. 7-1-09; Ord. No. 10806, § 2, 6-15-10, eff. 7-1-10; Ord. No.
10900, § 2, 6-28-11, eff. 7-1-11; Ord. No. 10989, § 3, 6-5-12, eff. 7-1-12;
Ord. No. 11075, § 5, 5-21-13, eff. 7-1-13; Ord. No. 11134, § 2, 12-17-13; Ord.
No. 11180, § 2, 6-3-14, eff. 6-29-14; Ord. No. 11273, § 2, 6-9-15, eff. 6-28-
15; Ord. No. 11373, § 2, 6-7-16, eff. 6-26-16)
   Editor’s note – Ord. No. 11180, § 2, adopted June 3, 2014, ratified,
reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year 2015. Appendix A and
accompanying schedules are implemented for all classified and unclassified
employees, effective June 29, 2014. Ord. No. 11273, § 2, adopted June 9, 2015,
ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year 2016. Appendix
A and accompanying schedules are implemented for all classified and
unclassified employees, effective June 28, 2015. Ord. No. 11373, § 2, adopted
June 7, 2016, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year
2017. Appendix A and accompanying schedules are implemented for all classified
and unclassified employees, effective June 26, 2016. Ord. No. 11464, § 2,
adopted June 6, 2017, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for
Fiscal Year 2018. Appendix A and accompanying schedules are implemented for all
classified and unclassified employees, effective June 25, 2017. Ord. No. 11558,
§ 2, adopted June 5, 2018, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for
Fiscal Year 2019. Ord. No. 11611, § 3, adopted December 18, 2018, ratified,
reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year 2019. Ord. No. 11659, §
2, adopted June 18, 2019, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for
Fiscal Year 2020. Ord. No. 11848, § 2, adopted June 22, 2021, and Ord. No.
11910, § 3, adopted February 23, 2022, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this
section for Fiscal Year 2022. Appendix A and accompanying schedules are
implemented for all classified and unclassified employees, effective June 23,
2018. Ord. No. 11935, § 2, adopted June 7, 2022, ratified, reaffirmed, and
reenacted this section for fiscal year 2023. Ord. No. 12012, § 2, adopted June
6, 2023, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for fiscal year 2024.
Ord. No. 12101, § 2, adopted June 4, 2024, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted
this section for fiscal year 2025. Ord. No. 12173, § 2, adopted June 3, 2025,
ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for fiscal year 2026.
Sec. 10-53.2. Maintenance management program, assignment and incentive pay
compensation.
   (a)   City water department employees assigned to the maintenance management
program team shall receive incentive pay of three hundred dollars ($300.00)
provided the team fully achieves quarterly team performance metrics, as
verified by the director of human resources.
   (b)   Maintenance management program work assignments are at the discretion
of the director of the water department; assignment to and removal from the
maintenance management program is not appealable to the civil service
commission
   (c)   The director of human resources is responsible for the administration
of incentive pay associated with the maintenance management program. The human
resources director shall fix competency and proficiency standards, verify and
competencies and set criteria to be utilized by the water department director
when making a maintenance management program assignment and verify that
performance team metrics are met before any quarterly incentive payment is
made.
   (d)   This section is subject to annual readoption and reenactment by the
mayor.
(Ord. No. 9797, § 1, 12-9-02; Ord. No. 10003, § 8, 6-28-04; Ord. No. 10165, §
2, 6-14-05; Ord. No. 10426, § 2, 6-19-07; Ord. No. 10550, § 2, 6-17-08; Ord.
No. 10675, § 2, 6-2-09, eff. 7-1-09; Ord. No. 10806, § 2, 6-15-10, eff. 7-1-10;
Ord. No. 10900, § 2, 6-28-11, eff. 7-1-11; Ord. No. 10989, § 3, 6-5-12, eff. 7-
1-12; Ord. No. 11075, § 5, 5-21-13, eff. 7-1-13; Ord. No. 11134, § 2, 12-17-13;
Ord. No. 11180, § 2, 6-3-14, eff. 6-29-14; Ord. No. 11273, § 2, 6-9-15, eff. 6-
28-15; Ord. No. 11373, § 2, 6-7-16, eff. 6-26-16)
   Editor’s note – Ord. No. 11180, § 2, adopted June 3, 2014, ratified,
reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year 2015. Appendix A and
accompanying schedules are implemented for all classified and unclassified
employees, effective June 29, 2014. Ord. No. 11273, § 2, adopted June 9, 2015,
ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year 2016. Appendix
A and accompanying schedules are implemented for all classified and
unclassified employees, effective June 28, 2015. Ord. No. 11373, § 2, adopted
June 7, 2016, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year
2017. Appendix A and accompanying schedules are implemented for all classified
and unclassified employees, effective June 26, 2016. Ord. No. 11464, § 2,
adopted June 6, 2017, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for
Fiscal Year 2018. Appendix A and accompanying schedules are implemented for all
classified and unclassified employees, effective June 25, 2017. Ord. No. 11558,
§ 2, adopted June 5, 2018, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for
Fiscal Year 2019. Ord. No. 11611, § 3, adopted December 18, 2018, ratified,
reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year 2019. Ord. No. 11659, §
2, adopted June 18, 2019, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for
Fiscal Year 2020. Ord. No. 11848, § 2, adopted June 22, 2021, and Ord. No.
11910, § 3, adopted February 23, 2022, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this
section for Fiscal Year 2022. Appendix A and accompanying schedules are
implemented for all classified and unclassified employees, effective June 23,
2018. Ord. No. 11935, § 2, adopted June 7, 2022, ratified, reaffirmed, and
reenacted this section for fiscal year 2023. Ord. No. 12012, § 2, adopted June
6, 2023, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for fiscal year 2024.
Ord. No. 12101, § 2, adopted June 4, 2024, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted
this section for fiscal year 2025. Ord. No. 12173, § 2, adopted June 3, 2025,
ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for fiscal year 2026.
Sec. 10-53.3. Career enhancement program (CEP) incentive pay for commissioned
police personnel through rank of captain.
   (a)   A career enhancement program (CEP) with a biannual compensation
incentive for educational attainment, participation in special assignments and
fitness levels is authorized. It shall be developed and administered by the
police department with the human resources director having program oversight
and control. This oversight and control shall include approval of any
competency and proficiency standards, educational standards and other such
criteria. The human resources department shall verify that program requirements
are met and/or maintained before any biannual compensation is made to anyone
authorized to participate in the CEP.
   (b)   There shall be three (3) levels of graduated CEP pay based on points:
   (1)   Level One, 20 points . . . . . $150.00
   (2)   Level Two, 30 points . . . . . $250.00
   (3)   Level Three, 40 points . . . . . $350.00
   (c)   Commissioned police personnel through rank of captain participating in
the CEP will receive CEP biannual incentive compensation dependent on CEP
points attained. Compensation will be paid biannually on the second payday in
March and September, except for the first payment after commencement of the
program, which shall be paid on the second payday of June, 2005. To be eligible
for the biannual payments, points must be attained prior to the cutoff date for
submitting the form for processing payment. The form must be correctly
submitted no later than February 28, for the March payment and August 31 for
the September payment, except that the form for the first payment after
commencement of the program must be submitted no later than April 1, of 2005.
   (d)   Annual compensation recommendations for CEP will be on a total
compensation basis and not on top of or in excess of the salary/benefits budget
and will be addressed through the normal budgeting process and is subject to
annual re-adoption and reenactment by the mayor and council as part of the
annual compensation plan.
(Ord. No. 10136, § 1, 3-22-05; Ord. No. 10165, § 2, 6-14-05; Ord. No. 10426, §
2, 6-19-07; Ord. No. 10550, § 2, 6-17-08; Ord. No. 10675, § 2, 6-2-09, eff. 7-
1-09; Ord. No. 10806, § 2, 6-15-10, eff. 7-1-10; Ord. No. 10900, § 2, 6-28-11,
eff. 7-1-11; Ord. No. 10989, § 3, 6-5-12, eff. 7-1-12; Ord. No. 11075, § 5, 5-
21-13, eff. 7-1-13; Ord. No. 11134, § 2, 12-17-13; Ord. No. 11180, § 2, 6-3-14,
eff. 6-29-14; Ord. No. 11273, § 2, 6-9-15, eff. 6-28-15; Ord. No. 11373, § 2,
6-7-16, eff. 6-26-16)
   Editor’s note – Ord. No. 11180, § 2, adopted June 3, 2014, ratified,
reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year 2015. Appendix A and
accompanying schedules are implemented for all classified and unclassified
employees, effective June 29, 2014. Ord. No. 11273, § 2, adopted June 9, 2015,
ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year 2016. Appendix
A and accompanying schedules are implemented for all classified and
unclassified employees, effective June 28, 2015. Ord. No. 11373, § 2, adopted
June 7, 2016, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year
2017. Appendix A and accompanying schedules are implemented for all classified
and unclassified employees, effective June 26, 2016. Ord. No. 11464, § 2,
adopted June 6, 2017, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for
Fiscal Year 2018. Appendix A and accompanying schedules are implemented for all
classified and unclassified employees, effective June 25, 2017. Ord. No. 11558,
§ 2, adopted June 5, 2018, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for
Fiscal Year 2019. Ord. No. 11611, § 3, adopted December 18, 2018, ratified,
reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year 2019. Ord. No. 11659, §
2, adopted June 18, 2019, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for
Fiscal Year 2020. Ord. No. 11848, § 2, adopted June 22, 2021, and Ord. No.
11910, § 3, adopted February 23, 2022, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this
section for Fiscal Year 2022. Appendix A and accompanying schedules are
implemented for all classified and unclassified employees, effective June 23,
2018. Ord. No. 11935, § 2, adopted June 7, 2022, ratified, reaffirmed, and
reenacted this section for fiscal year 2023. Ord. No. 12012, § 2, adopted June
6, 2023, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for fiscal year 2024.
Ord. No. 12101, § 2, adopted June 4, 2024, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted
this section for fiscal year 2025. Ord. No. 12173, § 2, adopted June 3, 2025,
ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for fiscal year 2026.
Sec. 10-53.4. Reserved.
   Editor’s note – Section 10-53.4, additional compensation for certain public
safety command staff, was repealed by § 6 of Ord. No. 11848, adopted 6-22-21,
effective 6-20-21.
Sec. 10-53.5. Honor guard assignment pay for fire commissioned personnel.
   Commissioned fire guard personnel assigned to the Tucson Fire Department
Honor Guard by the fire chief shall receive twenty-five dollars and thirty
cents ($25.30) per pay period in addition to compensation provided by the
Annual Compensation Plan Schedules.
(Ord. No. 10289, § 6, 6-27-06; Ord. No. 10426, § 2, 6-19-07; Ord. No. 10550, §
2, 6-17-08; Ord. No. 10675, § 2, 6-2-09, eff. 7-1-09; Ord. No. 10806, § 2, 6-
15-10, eff. 7-1-10; Ord. No. 10900, § 2, 6-28-11, eff. 7-1-11; Ord. No. 10989,
§ 3, 6-5-12, eff. 7-1-12; Ord. No. 11075, § 5, 5-21-13, eff. 7-1-13; Ord. No.
11134, § 2, 12-17-13; Ord. No. 11180, § 2, 6-3-14, eff. 6-29-14; Ord. No.
11273, § 2, 6-9-15, eff. 6-28-15; Ord. No. 11373, § 2, 6-7-16, eff. 6-26-16)
   Editor’s note – Ord. No. 11180, § 2, adopted June 3, 2014, ratified,
reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year 2015. Appendix A and
accompanying schedules are implemented for all classified and unclassified
employees, effective June 29, 2014. Ord. No. 11273, § 2, adopted June 9, 2015,
ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year 2016. Appendix
A and accompanying schedules are implemented for all classified and
unclassified employees, effective June 28, 2015. Ord. No. 11373, § 2, adopted
June 7, 2016, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year
2017. Appendix A and accompanying schedules are implemented for all classified
and unclassified employees, effective June 26, 2016. Ord. No. 11464, § 2,
adopted June 6, 2017, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for
Fiscal Year 2018. Appendix A and accompanying schedules are implemented for all
classified and unclassified employees, effective June 25, 2017. Ord. No. 11558,
§ 2, adopted June 5, 2018, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for
Fiscal Year 2019. Ord. No. 11611, § 3, adopted December 18, 2018, ratified,
reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year 2019. Ord. No. 11659, §
2, adopted June 18, 2019, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for
Fiscal Year 2020. Ord. No. 11848, § 2, adopted June 22, 2021, and Ord. No.
11910, § 3, adopted February 23, 2022, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this
section for Fiscal Year 2022. Appendix A and accompanying schedules are
implemented for all classified and unclassified employees, effective June 23,
2018. Ord. No. 11935, § 2, adopted June 7, 2022, ratified, reaffirmed, and
reenacted this section for fiscal year 2023. Ord. No. 12012, § 2, adopted June
6, 2023, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for fiscal year 2024.
Ord. No. 12101, § 2, adopted June 4, 2024, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted
this section for fiscal year 2025. Ord. No. 12173, § 2, adopted June 3, 2025,
ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for fiscal year 2026.
Sec. 10-53.6. Reserved.
   Editor’s note – Section 10-53.6, additional compensation to defray
housekeeping costs for commissioned fire personnel, was repealed by § 4 of Ord.
No. 11291, adopted August 5, 2015, effective July 12, 2015. The section had
been derived from Ord. Nos. 10426, 10558, and 11273.
Sec. 10-53.7. Certified crane operator assignment and incentive pay program.
   (a)   In addition to the compensation authorized by section
10-31, city water department employees, trained, certified, and licensed for
the operation and maintenance of telescopic boom cranes (TSS) boom truck fixed
cab (BTF), shall receive a pay increase of five dollars per hour ($5.00) added
to the employee's base salary as designated by the annual compensation plan
when assigned to and during the operation of the telescopic boom cranes.
   (b)   Telescopic boom crane operation work assignments are temporary and at
the discretion of the director of the water department; assignment to and
removal from (TSS) (BTF) crane operation is not appealable to the city civil
service commission.
   (c)   The director of human resources is responsible for the administration
of certified crane operator and assignment compensation, including, but not
limited to, fixing competency and proficiency standards and setting criteria to
be utilized by the water department director when making a certified crane
operator assignment.
(Ord. No. 11240, § 1, 2-4-15; Ord. No. 11273, § 2, 6-9-15, eff. 6-28-15; Ord.
No. 11373, § 2, 6-7-16, eff. 6-26-16)
   Editor’s note – Ord. No. 11273, § 2, adopted June 9, 2015, ratified,
reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year 2016. Appendix A and
accompanying schedules are implemented for all classified and unclassified
employees, effective June 28, 2015. Ord. No. 11373, § 2, adopted June 7, 2016,
ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year 2017. Appendix
A and accompanying schedules are implemented for all classified and
unclassified employees, effective June 26, 2016. Ord. No. 11464, § 2, adopted
June 6, 2017, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year
2018. Appendix A and accompanying schedules are implemented for all classified
and unclassified employees, effective June 25, 2017. Ord. No. 11558, § 2,
adopted June 5, 2018, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for
Fiscal Year 2019. Ord. No. 11611, § 3, adopted December 18, 2018, ratified,
reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year 2019. Ord. No. 11659, §
2, adopted June 18, 2019, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for
Fiscal Year 2020. Ord. No. 11848, § 2, adopted June 22, 2021, and Ord. No.
11910, § 3, adopted February 23, 2022, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this
section for Fiscal Year 2022. Appendix A and accompanying schedules are
implemented for all classified and unclassified employees, effective June 23,
2018. Ord. No. 11935, § 2, adopted June 7, 2022, ratified, reaffirmed, and
reenacted this section for fiscal year 2023. Ord. No. 12012, § 2, adopted June
6, 2023, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for fiscal year 2024.
Ord. No. 12101, § 2, adopted June 4, 2024, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted
this section for fiscal year 2025. Ord. No. 12173, § 2, adopted June 3, 2025,
ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for fiscal year 2026.
Sec. 10-53.8.   Certified compressed natural gas inspector assignment and
incentive pay program.
   (a)   In addition to the compensation authorized by section 10-31,
compensation in the amount of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per pay period
shall be paid to general services department employees certified as Compressed
Natural Gas (CNG) Inspectors, accepted in the CNG Inspection program, and
assigned to perform CNG inspections.
   (b)   Assignment to the CNG program is temporary and at the discretion of
the director of the general services department; assignment to and removal from
the CNG Program is not appealable to the city civil service commission.
   (c)   The director of human resources is responsible for the administration
of certified Compressed Natural Gas Inspector and assignment compensation,
including, but not limited to, fixing competency and proficiency standards and
setting criteria to be utilized by the general services department director
when making a CNG inspector assignment.
(Ord. No. 11280, § 1, 6-23-15, eff. 7-1-15; Ord. No. 11373, § 2, 6-7-16, eff.
6-26-16; Ord. No. 11972, § 1, 12-6-22)
   Ord. No. 11373, § 2, adopted June 7, 2016, ratified, reaffirmed, and
reenacted this section for Fiscal Year 2017. Ord. No. 11848, § 2, adopted June
22, 2021, and Ord. No. 11910, § 3, adopted February 23, 2022, ratified,
reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for Fiscal Year 2022. Appendix A and
accompanying schedules are implemented for all classified and unclassified
employees, effective June 26, 2016. Ord. No. 11935, § 2, adopted June 7, 2022,
ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for fiscal year 2023. Ord. No.
12012, § 2, adopted June 6, 2023, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this
section for fiscal year 2024. Ord. No. 12101, § 2, adopted June 4, 2024,
ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for fiscal year 2025. Ord. No.
12173, § 2, adopted June 3, 2025, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this
section for fiscal year 2026.
Sec. 10-53.9.    Tool enhancement allowance.
   (a)   In addition to the compensation authorized by section
10-31, eligible fleet services employees in the environmental general services
department, who are required to purchase tools, shall receive an increase in
compensation from the current three hundred dollars ($300.00) annual allowance
to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for the remainder of fiscal year 2023; the
additional seven hundred dollars ($700.00) will be paid on January 5, 2023. In
fiscal year 2024, the tool allowance for eligible fleet services employees will
increase to one thousand two hundred fifty dollars ($1,250.00). In fiscal year
2025 the annual yearly tool allowance for eligible fleet service employees will
be increased to one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00). The tool
enhancement allowance will be paid in August of each year.
   (b)   In addition to the compensation authorized by section 10-31, eligible
senior fleet service technicians and senior heavy equipment mechanics in the
Tucson water department's maintenance division equipment shop, who are required
to obtain the tools necessary for their position, and maintain them in good
operational condition, shall receive an increase in compensation from the
current three hundred dollars ($300.00) annual allowance to one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) for the remainder of fiscal year 2023; the additional seven
hundred dollars ($700.00) will be paid on January 5, 2023. In fiscal year 2024,
the tool allowance for eligible fleet services employees will increase to one
thousand two hundred fifty dollars ($1,250.00). In fiscal year 2025 the annual
yearly tool allowance for eligible fleet service employees will be increased to
one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00). The tool enhancement allowance
will be paid in August of each year.
   (c)   In addition to the compensation authorized by section
10-31, eligible emergency vehicle technicians in the fire department's fire
fleet maintenance division, who are required to obtain the tools necessary for
their position, and maintain them in good operational condition, shall receive
in fiscal year 2024, one thousand two hundred fifty dollars ($1,250.00). In
fiscal year 2025 the annual yearly tool allowance for eligible fleet service
employees will be increased to one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00).
The tool enhancement allowance will be paid in August of each year.
   (d)   The director of human resources is responsible for the administration
of the tool enhancement allowance including, but not limited to, establishing
eligibility criteria and designation of positions.
(Ord. No. 11709, § 1, 11-6-19, eff. 10-17-19; Ord. No. 11952, § 1, 8-9-22, eff.
9-9-22; Ord. No. 11972, § 2, 12-6-22; Ord. No. 12012, § 4, 6-6-23, eff. 7-2-23)
   Editor’s note—Ord. No. 11848, § 2, adopted June 22, 2021, and Ord. No.
11910, § 3, adopted February 23, 2022, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this
section for Fiscal Year 2022. Ord. No. 11935, § 2, adopted June 7, 2022,
ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for fiscal year 2023. Ord. No.
12012, § 2, adopted June 6, 2023, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this
section for fiscal year 2024. Ord. No. 12101, § 2, adopted June 4, 2024,
ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this section for fiscal year 2025. Ord. No.
12173, § 2, adopted June 3, 2025, ratified, reaffirmed, and reenacted this
section for fiscal year 2026.
Sec. 10-53.10.    Solid waste equipment operator (SWEO) tier assignment
program.
   In addition to the compensation authorized by Tucson Code Section 10-31,
effective December 18, 2022, eligible SWEO employees with a valid Class A or
Class B commercial driver's license (CDL), who meet the training and
certification requirements to operate the following pieces of equipment;
automated side loaders (ASL), front-end loaders (FL), rear-loaders (RL), roll-
off units (RO), skid steers (SS), and transport units, shall receive a pay
increase of up to five dollars ($5.00) per hour added to the employee's base
salary as designated by the annual compensation plan when assigned to either
Tier 2 or Tier 3 of the assignment pay tier program.
   The SWEO assignment pay tier program provides eligible employees the ability
to attain additional skills to operate more than one (1) type of equipment
essential to the refuse collection unit. Through an established training
program, SWEO gain new skills, enhancing the department's flexibility and
alleviating the overburdening of specific units.
   (a)   Tier 1: Basic assignment (Class B CDL), no Class A CDL, no assignment
pay.
      1.   SWEO can operate one (1) basic piece of equipment (ASL, FL, RL, RO).
   (b)   Tier 2: Two dollars and fifty cents ($2.50) per hour assignment pay.
      1.   SWEO with a Class B CDL has skills necessary to operate two (2)
pieces of equipment (ASL, FL, RL, RO).
      2.   SWEO with a Class A CDL has skills necessary to operate one (1)
basic or assigned piece of equipment (ASL, FL, RL, RO).
   (c)   Tier 3: Five dollars ($5.00) per hour assignment pay.
      1.   SWEO with a Class B CDL has skills necessary for operation of three
(3) pieces of equipment (ASL, FL, RL, RO).
      2.   SWEO with a Class A CDL has skills necessary for operation of two
(2) basic or assigned pieces of equipment (ASL, FL, RL, RO).
   (d)   Tier assignments are not permanent and are at the discretion of the
director of the environmental and general services department; assignment to
and removal from a tier are not appealable to the city civil service
commission.
   (e)   The director of human resources is responsible for the administration
of the tier assignment pay program compensation, including but not limited to
determining competency and proficiency standards and setting criteria for the
environmental and general services department director when making an SWEO tier
assignment.
(Ord. No. 11972, § 3, 12-6-22)
Sec. 10-53.11.   Certification pay for automotive service excellence (ASE).
   In addition to the compensation authorized by Tucson Code Section 10-31,
eligible fleet service employees trained and certified within the ASE program
will receive a pay increase of fifty-seven cents ($.57) per hour for each
certification obtained with a maximum of four (4) certifications per employee
(two dollars and twenty-eight cents ($2.28) per hour) per year, while
participating in the program.
   (a)   To receive ASE certifications, eligible fleet services employees must
comply with all ASE requirements and re-test every five (5) years to maintain
the certification. The city will pay the registration and testing fee(s)
associated with each approved ASE certification or renewal.
   (b)   Eligible fleet service employees are responsible for tracking the
expiration date(s) of their ASE certification(s). Loss of any ASE certification
must immediately be reported to human resources. Failing to maintain any ASE
certification will result in the loss of certification pay. Loss of
certification pay for failing to maintain or renew any ASE certification is not
appealable to the city civil service commission.
(Ord. No. 11972, § 3, 12-6-22)
ARTICLE III.
RESERVED
Sec. 10-54. Reserved.
   Editor's note – Section 10-54, the executive pay plan, was repealed by § 1
of Ord. No. 7383, adopted Mar. 19, 1990. The section had been derived from Ord.
Nos. 4850, 4940, 4985, 5164, 5399, 5599, 5798, 6040, 6264, 6735, 7004, 7243,
7275. See now §
10-31.
Chapter 10A
COMMUNITY AFFAIRS
Art. I.   Historical Commission, §§ 10A-1--10A-9
Art. II.   Tucson Youth and Delinquency Prevention Council, §§ 10A-10--10A-20
Art. III.   Veterans' Affairs Committee, §§ 10A-21--10A-30
Art. IV.   Founding Date of City of Tucson, §§ 10A-31--10A-40
Art. V.   Redistricting Advisory Committee, §§ 10A-41--10A-49
Art. VI.   Tucson Transit Advisory Committee, §§ 10A-50 – 10A-74
Art. VII.   Commission on Disability Issues, §§ 10A-75--10A-85
Art. VIII.   Community Police Advisory Review Board, §§ 10A-86--10A-99
Art. IX.   Commemorations and Observances, §§ 10A-100--10A-109
Art. X.   Commission on Equitable Housing and Development, §§ 10A-110 – 10A-119
Art. XI.   Independent Audit and Performance Commission, §§ 10A-120--10A-129
Art. XII.   Tucson-Pima County Bicycle Advisory Committee, §§ 10A-130--10A-132
Art. XIII.   Terms and Conditions of Membership on Boards, Committees and
Commissions and Filing of Rules, §§ 10A- 133--10A-144
Art. XIV.   Park Tucson Commission, §§ 10A-145--10A-159
Art. XV.   Stormwater Advisory Committee (SAC) and Stormwater Technical
Advisory Committee (STAC), §§ 10A-160-- 10A-169
Art. XVI.   Reserved, §§ 10A-170--10A-179
Art. XVII.   Landscape Advisory Committee, §§ 10A-180--10A-189
Art. XVIII.   Small Business Commission, §§ 10A-190--10A-199
Art. XIX.   Reserved, §§ 10A-200 – 10A-209
Art. XX.   Commission on Climate, Energy, and Sustainability (CCES), §§ 10A-210
– 10A-219
Art. XXI.   Reserved, §§ 10A-220--10A-229
Art. XXII.   Reserved, §§ 10A-230--10A-239
Art. XXIII.   Complete Streets Coordinating Council, §§ 10A-240 – 10A-247
Art. XXIV.   Commission on Food Security, Heritage, and Economy (CFSHE), §§
10A-250 – 10A-255
Article I. Historical Commission
Sec.
10A-1.   Tucson-Pima County Historical Commission: Created; membership;
vacancies; officers; quorum; terms; compensation; rules and regulations.
Sec.
10A-2.   Commission expenses and expenditures.
Sec.
10A-3.   Functions and purposes of the commission.
Secs.
10A-4--10A-9. Reserved.
Article II. Tucson Youth and Delinquency Prevention Council
Sec.
10A-10.   Created.
Sec.
10A-11.   Membership.
Sec.
10A-12.   Organization.
Sec.
10A-13.   Reports.
Sec.
10A-14.   Limitation of powers.
Sec.
10A-15.   Functions and purposes.
Secs.
10A-16--10A-20. Reserved.
Article III. Veterans' Affairs Committee
Sec.
10A-21.   Created.
Sec.
10A-22.   Membership.
Sec.
10A-23.   Committee organization.
Sec.
10A-24.   Reports.
Sec.
10A-25.   Limitation of power.
Sec.
10A-26.   Functions and purposes.
Secs.
10A-27--10A-30. Reserved.
Article IV. Founding Date of City of Tucson
Sec.
10A-31.   Founding date established.
Sec.
10A-32.   Bicentennial anniversary celebration.
Secs.
10A-33--10A-40. Reserved.
Article V. Redistricting Advisory Committee
Sec.
10A-41.   Potential redistricting year.
Sec.
10A-42.   Redistricting Advisory Committee established.
Sec.
10A-43.   Membership composition; qualifications and terms.
Sec.
10A-44.   City clerk attendance, committee duties and functions.
Sec.
10A-45.   Committee recommendation submitted.
Secs.
10A-46 – 10A-49. Reserved.
Article VI. Tucson Transit Advisory Committee
Sec.
10A-50.   Creation.
Sec.
10A-51.   Composition; appointment of members; limitation on concurrent
service; applicability of Tucson Code Chapter 10A, Article XIII.
Sec.
10A-52.   Functions, purposes, powers, and duties.
Sec.
10A-53.   Organization.
Sec.
10A-54.   Staff support.
Sec.
10A-55.   Limitation of powers.
Sec.
10A-56.   Sunset clause.
Secs.
10A-57 – 10A-74. Reserved.
Article VII. Commission on Disability Issues
Sec.
10A-75.   Creation.
Sec.
10A-76.   Functions and purposes.
Sec.
10A-77.   Membership composition, terms and qualifications.
Sec.
10A-78.   Commission organization.
Sec.
10A-79.   Limitation of powers.
Secs.
10A-80--10A-85. Reserved.
Article VIII. Community Police Advisory Review Board
Sec.
10A-86.   Declaration of policy.
Sec.
10A-87.   Creation.
Sec.
10A-88.   Citizen complaints and concerns: powers and duties.
Sec.
10A-89.   Community-police partnership: powers and duties.
Sec.
10A-90.   Composition, appointment, terms, and attendance.
Sec.
10A-91.   Board organization.
Sec.
10A-92.   Reports.
Sec.
10A-93.   Limitations of powers.
Sec.
10A-94.   Training.
Sec.
10A-95.   Cooperation.
Secs.
10A-96--10A-99. Reserved.
Article IX. Commemorations and Observances
Sec.
10A-100.   American Indian Awareness Days.
Sec.
10A-101.   Martin Luther King, Jr. Day.
Secs.
10A-102--10A-109. Reserved.
Article X. Commission on Equitable Housing and Development
Sec.
10A-110.   Creation.
Sec.
10A-111.   Declaration of purpose.
Sec.
10A-112.   Membership composition; nomination and appointment; qualifications;
terms of office and reappointment; removal; concurrent service not permitted;
applicability of Tucson Code Chapter 10A, Article XIII.
Sec.
10A-113.   Functions, purposes, powers, and duties.
Sec.
10A-114.   Staff support.
Sec.
10A-115.   Commission organization and rules.
Sec.
10A-116.   Limitation of powers.
Sec.
10A-117.   Sunset clause.
Secs.
10A-118, 10A-119. Reserved.
Article XI. Independent Audit and Performance Commission
Sec.
10A-120.   Creation of independent audit and performance commission.
Sec.
10A-121.   Membership composition; appointment and terms; compensation;
removal.
Sec.
10A-122.   Functions and duties.
Sec.
10A-123.   Commission organization; meetings; reports.
Sec.
10A-124.   Limitation of powers.
Sec.
10A-125.   Staff support; ex officio member.
Secs.
10A-126--10A-129. Reserved.
Article XII. Tucson-Pima County Bicycle Advisory Committee
Sec.
10A-130.   Created; membership; vacancies; quorum; terms; compensation.
Sec.
10A-131.   Functions and purposes.
Sec.
10A-132.   Limitation of powers.
Article XIII. Terms and Conditions of Membership on Boards, Committees and
Commissions and Filing of Rules
Sec.
10A-133.   Applicability.
Sec.
10A-134.   Terms and removal.
Sec.
10A-135.   Effective date.
Sec.
10A-136.   Rules and regulations of commissions, boards, departments to be
filed.
Sec.
10A-137.   Nonvoting, advisory members.
Sec.
10A-138.   Citizens Advisory Planning Committee zoning code revision
subcommittee.
Sec.
10A-139.   Requirements for creation of boards, committees, and commissions;
annual reports.
Sec.
10A-140.   Quorum requirements for boards, committees, and commissions.
Secs.
10A-141 – 10A-144. Reserved.
Article XIV. Park Tucson Commission
Sec.
10A-145.   Declaration of policy.
Sec.
10A-146.   Park Tucson commission created.
Sec.
10A-147.   Membership composition; appointment; terms.
Sec.
10A-148.   Functions and purposes.
Sec.
10A-149.   Commission organization.
Sec.
10A-150.   Commission reports.
Sec.
10A-151.   Limitation of powers.
Secs.
10A-152--10A-159. Reserved.
Article XV. Stormwater Advisory Committee (SAC) and Stormwater Technical
Advisory Committee (STAC)
Sec.
10A-160.   Creation.
Secs.
10A-161--10A-169. Reserved.
Article XVI. Technology Policy Advisory Committee
Secs.
10A-170--10A-179. Reserved.
Article XVII. Landscape Advisory Committee
Sec.
10A-180.   Creation.
Sec.
10A-181.   Membership composition, appointment, officers, and terms.
Sec.
10A-182.   Purpose of the committee.
Sec.
10A-183.   Limitation of powers.
Secs.
10A-184--10A-189. Reserved.
Article XVIII. Small, Minority and Women-Owned Business Commission
Sec.
10A-190.   Creation.
Sec.
10A-191.   Membership composition, appointment, officers, and terms.
Sec.
10A-192.   Reports.
Sec.
10A-193.   Limitation of powers.
Sec.
10A-194.   Staff support.
Secs.
10A-195--10A-199. Reserved.
Article XIX. Reserved
Secs. 10A-200 – 10A-209. Reserved.
Article XX. Commission on Climate, Energy, and Sustainability (CCES)
Sec.
10A-210.   Creation.
Sec.
10A-211.   Membership composition; nomination and appointment; qualifications;
terms of office and reappointment; removal; concurrent service not permitted;
applicability of Tucson Code Chapter 10A, Article XIII.
Sec.
10A-212.   Functions, purposes, powers, and duties.
Sec.
10A-213.   Staff support.
Sec.
10A-214.   Commission organization and rules.
Sec.
10A-215.   Limitation of powers.
Secs.
10A-216--10A-219. Reserved.
Article XXI. Reserved
Secs.
10A-220--10A-229. Reserved.
Article XXII. Reserved
Secs.
10A-230--10A-239. Reserved.
Article XXIII. Complete Streets Coordinating Council
Sec.
10A-240.   Creation.
Sec.
10A-241.   Declaration of purpose.
Sec.
10A-242.   Membership composition; nomination and appointment; qualifications;
terms of office and reappointment; replacement and removal; concurrent service;
applicability of Tucson Code Chapter 10A, Article XIII.
Sec.
10A-243.   Functions, purposes, powers, and duties.
Sec.
10A-244.   Staff support.
Sec.
10A-245.   Commission organization and rules.
Sec.
10A-246.   Limitation of powers.
Sec.
10A-247.   Sunset clause.
Art. XXIV. Commission on Food Security, Heritage, and Economy (CFSHE)
Sec.
10A-250.   Creation.
Sec.
10A-251.    Membership composition; qualifications; terms and reappointment.
Sec.
10A-252.   Functions and purposes.
Sec.
10A-253.   Committee organization and rules.
Sec.
10A-254.   Staff support; minutes.
Sec.
10A-255.   Limitation of powers.
ARTICLE I.
HISTORICAL COMMISSION*
__________
*   Editors Note: Ord. No. 4196, §§ 1, 2, adopted July 8, 1974, amended this
Code by repealing former art. I, §§ 10A-1--10A-8, and enacting in lieu thereof
new art. I, §§ 10A-1--10A-3, as herein set out. Former art. I pertained to the
historical commission and was derived from Ord. No. 3712, § 1, adopted Sept. 7,
1971, and Ord. No. 3986, § 2, adopted Feb. 5, 1973.
__________
Sec. 10A-1. Tucson-Pima County Historical Commission: Created; membership;
vacancies; officers; quorum; terms; compensation; rules and regulations.
   (a)   There is created, in joint action with Pima County and the Town of
South Tucson, an agency to be called the "Tucson-Pima County Historical
Commission." The commission shall consist of twenty-three (23) persons, of
which ten (10) shall represent Pima County, twelve (12) the City of Tucson, and
one (1) the Town of South Tucson. The membership of the commission shall not be
employees of the county, city or town.
   (b)   Each member of the mayor and council shall appoint one (1) member of
the commission who shall be a resident of the city. Five (5) additional
members, who shall reside in the city, shall be jointly appointed by the mayor
and council, and shall be qualified in the following areas of expertise:
   (1)   One (1) as an architect, or architectural historian;
   (2)   One (1) as a historian, or cultural anthropologist;
   (3)   One (1) as an archaeologist;
   (4)   One (1) as a land use planner, urban planner, landscape architect, or
cultural geographer;
   (5)   One (1) as a realtor, developer, or appraiser.
   (c)   The term of those members appointed by individual members of the mayor
and council shall be coterminous with that of the appointing elected official.
Of the members appointed jointly by the mayor and council, three (3) shall
serve for a term of two (2) years, and two (2) shall serve for a term of four
(4) years. The term of office shall be determined by the drawing of lots at the
first regular meeting of the commission. Thereafter, members shall serve a term
of four (4) years.
   (d)   If a member fails to attend three (3) consecutive regularly scheduled
meetings of the commission, that member's appointment is terminated.
   (e)   An appointment to fill a vacancy resulting other than from expiration
of a term shall be for the unexpired term only.
   (f)   The commission shall elect from its membership a chairperson and a
vice- chairperson who shall serve for terms of one (1) year. The vice-
chairperson shall act as chairperson in the absence or disability of the
chairperson, or in the event of a vacancy in that office.
   (g)   Members of the commission shall serve without compensation.
   (h)   A majority of the members of the commission shall constitute a quorum.
The concurrence of the majority of the members constituting a quorum shall be
the act of the commission.
   (i)   The Historical Commission may appoint a subcommittee for the purpose
of review and recommendation on City of Tucson Historic District review of an
alteration, new construction, or demolition case on behalf of the Historical
Commission. The subcommittee shall be comprised of at least five members from
the Historical Commission that are City residents and consist of the following:
one (1) member who is a registered architect; two (2) members who have special
qualifications in the fields of architecture, architectural history, history,
archeology, urban planning, landscape architecture, cultural anthropology, or
cultural geography; and one (1) member who is either a licensed contractor,
certified appraiser, real estate licensee, or from another profession if the
member has extensive experience in historical preservation.
   (j)   The commission shall adopt rules and regulations for its operations
consistent with this chapter and the Tucson-Pima County Historical Commission
ordinance and Code provisions of Pima County and the Town of South Tucson.
(Ord. No. 4196, § 2, 7-8-74; Ord. No. 7087, § 1, 11-7-88; Ord. No. 8441, § 4,
1-23-95; Ord. No. 8621, § 1, 12-18-95)
Sec. 10A-2. Commission expenses and expenditures.
   (a)   All expenses of the commission shall be paid from such funds as may be
appropriated by the county, city and town from time to time for such purposes.
   (b)   The city shall pay fifty (50) percent of the expenses of the
commission.
   (c)   On or before March 1 of each year, the commission shall submit to the
governing bodies of the county, city and town a detailed budget requesting
funds for the next fiscal year commencing on July 1.
   (d)   The commission shall maintain adequate books of record regarding all
money received and expended, which shall be subject to audit by the governing
bodies of the county, city and town.
   (e)   The commission shall file with the governing bodies of the county,
city and town a financial report showing all funds received and all
expenditures made and any unpaid indebtedness, within sixty (60) days of the
end of each fiscal year, in such form as may be required by the governing
bodies of the county, city and town.
   (f)   The city clerk shall provide administrative assistance to the
commission in accordance with budgetary provisions.
(Ord. No. 4196, § 2, 7-8-74; Ord. No. 8621, § 2, 12-18-95)
Sec. 10A-3. Functions and purposes of the commission.
The duties, powers and functions of the commission shall be:
   (1)   To confer with and advise the governing bodies of the county, city and
town concerning various existing historical structures, sites, areas and
districts in the community, and to compile and assimilate information and data
relating thereto.
   (2)   To recommend which buildings, sites, areas or districts are to be
designated as historical and what changes should be made to encourage and
create historic character in an area.
   (3)   To encourage the beautification of the county, city and town and
advise the governing bodies on matters affecting the beauty and culture of the
county, city and town.
   (4)   To act as the official agency for the planning of the local and
national bicentennial anniversary celebrations and to work with and advise the
county, city and town on said projects.
   (5)   To develop and encourage united community interest, understanding and
effort toward obtaining the objectives of the commission, especially by
providing public information and education on historic preservation.
   (6)   To stimulate and encourage the cooperation of other groups towards the
objectives of the commission.
   (7)   To encourage enhancement of historic districts and landmarks by
providing advise to the county, city, and town on appropriate rehabilitation
and compatible new construction.
   (8)   To work to prevent and discourage unwanted demolition of historic
buildings and structures or destruction of archeological resources.
   (9)   To cooperate with all federal, state, county and municipal agencies
and nongovernmental organizations.
   (10)   To render an annual report of its activities to the governing bodies
of the county, city and town on or before March 15 of each year. To file
minutes of commission meetings with the governing bodies of the county, city
and town.
   (11)   To recommend such action as it deems necessary or desirable to
accomplish the above functions and to effectuate its policies.
(Ord. No. 4196, § 2, 7-8-74; Ord. No. 8441, § 5, 1-23-95)
Secs. 10A-4--10A-9. Reserved.
ARTICLE II.
TUCSON YOUTH AND DELINQUENCY PREVENTION COUNCIL*
__________
*   Editors Note: Ord. No. 3785, § 1, enacted Jan. 24, 1972, repealed former
article II, "Tucson Youth Council," §§ 10A-1--10A-15, derived from Ord. No.
3540, § 1, enacted Oct. 19, 1970. Section 2 of Ord. No. 3785 added art. II, §§
10A-10--10A-15, as herein set out. Original art. II, §§ 10A-10--10A-20,
pertaining to the Mexican- Tucson International Exchange Commission, derived
from Ord. No. 3083, § 1, adopted Feb. 5, 1968, was repealed by Ord. No. 3121, §
1, enacted Apr. 22, 1968.
__________
Sec. 10A-10. Created.
There is hereby created the City of Tucson Youth and Delinquency Prevention
Council [hereafter, "council"] whose members shall be selected in the manner
hereinafter provided, subject to approval by the mayor and city council.
(Ord. No. 3785, § 2, 1-24-72)
Sec. 10A-11. Membership.
The council voting membership shall be composed of two (2) full-time student
representatives from each senior high school and other similar youth-oriented
school and organization, each junior college in the Tucson metropolitan area,
and two (2) full-time student representatives from the University of Arizona.
One (1) representative shall be selected by the faculty, and one (1)
representative shall be selected by the student body, of each educational
institution represented. Other similar youth organizations shall select their
representatives in a similar manner. All members shall be residents of the
Tucson Metropolitan Area and between the ages of fourteen (14) and twenty-five
(25) years. Initially, and until June 30, 1972, the voting membership shall
include such members of the Mayor's Youth Council and the Tucson Youth Council,
both of which existed during certain periods prior to the enactment of this
section, as the mayor shall appoint. These members may be reappointed for one
(1) year. All other memberships shall be for a term of two (2) years and shall
expire on December 31. These members may be reselected or reelected, as the
case may be, for one (1) year. Vacancies in such regular membership shall be
filled in the same manner for the unexpired portion of the term concerned.
(Ord. No. 3785, § 2, 1-24-72)
Sec. 10A-12. Organization.
The members of the council shall serve without compensation. They shall elect
by majority vote the council executive officers, including a chairman, two (2)
vice-chairmen, secretary, treasurer and such other officers as they shall deem
proper; adopt a constitution and bylaws; and meet at such times and places as
determined by the council, but not less often than monthly.
(Ord. No. 3785, § 2, 1-24-72)
Sec. 10A-13. Reports.
The council shall render to the mayor and council of the city a semi-annual
report on or before July 31 and January 31 of each year and shall submit
additional reports and recommendations as requested by the mayor and council.
The constitution and bylaws, as well as amendments thereof, and all minutes of
the council and committee meetings shall be filed with the city clerk.
(Ord. No. 3785, § 2, 1-24-72)
Sec. 10A-14. Limitation of powers.
Neither the council nor any member thereof may incur city expenses without
submitting a request to the city manager and receiving prior authorization by
the mayor and council, nor may either the council nor any member thereof
obligate the city in any manner or form, except that the city manager is hereby
authorized and directed to provide stationery and postage as may be necessary
to prepare proposed agenda notices, minutes of meetings, and other business
communications of the council, and distribute copies of the same. The manager
is also authorized to allow use of the city council chambers to the council as
a meeting place.
(Ord. No. 3785, § 2, 1-24-72)
Sec. 10A-15. Functions and purposes.
The functions and purposes of the council shall be:
   (1)   To meet regularly as a representative organization of the youth of the
Tucson community.
   (2)   To provide a common forum for discussion and coordination of youth
activities.
   (3)   To provide a direct and effective voice for the youth of the Tucson
community in their communications with the mayor and council.
   (4)   To confer with and advise the mayor and council on matters of concern
to the youth of the Tucson community and to compile, receive and disseminate
information and data relating thereto.
   (5)   To recommend and encourage action programs and legislation beneficial
to the community youth.
   (6)   To develop and encourage participation by youth in the community in
matters of interest to them and to foster community understanding and support
of the projects, aims and goals of the youth council and in such manner to
promote the general welfare, interests and well- being of the citizens of the
Tucson community.
   (7)   Development of a council which will have as its primary responsibility
the prevention of juvenile delinquency and as its goal resolution of the needs
and problems of the youth.
   (8)   To involve youth in assisting in the planning, operation and
evaluation of the local youth service system as consumers of those services.
   (9)   To eliminate the polarization between youth and older persons involved
in administration of the youth service system.
   (10)   To create, through the mechanisms of the council, a means of
assistance in the screening and utilizing of federal, state and local funds for
use in community wide neighborhood delinquency prevention programs, locally
planned and administered, and evaluated at all levels of government.
(Ord. No. 3785, § 2, 1-24-72)
Secs. 10A-16--10A-20. Reserved.
ARTICLE III.
VETERANS' AFFAIRS COMMITTEE
Sec. 10A-21. Created.
There is hereby created a veterans' affairs committee of the City of Tucson,
whose members shall be members of the Veterans of World War I, the American
Legion, the Veterans of Foreign Wars, the Jewish War Veterans, the Disabled
American Veterans, and such other affiliated or similar veterans' organizations
as request membership, and receive approval of the mayor and council. The
committee membership shall be composed of those duly appointed or elected
delegates from the veterans' organizations aforementioned, upon their approval
by the committee and ratification by the mayor and council, and such additional
delegates from the member organizations as the mayor and council may appoint.
(Ord. No. 3180, § 1, 11-12-68)
Sec. 10A-22. Membership.
All appointments to the veterans' affairs committee shall be for a term of four
(4) years and shall expire on December 31. Vacancies shall be filled in the
same manner as appointments, for the unexpired term of the vacancy.
(Ord. No. 3180, § 1, 11-12-68; Ord. No. 7267, § 1, 8-7-89)
   Editors Note: Section 1 of Ord. No. 7267, adopted Aug. 7, 1989, increased
the term of office in this section from 3 to 4 years. Section 2 specified that
these members who were serving 3-year terms prior to the enactment of the
ordinance would have their terms extended to 4 years.
Sec. 10A-23. Committee organization.
The members of the veterans' affairs committee shall serve without
compensation, shall appoint their own officers, including a chairman and such
other officers and subcommittee chairmen as they shall deem proper, adopt their
own rules and bylaws, and shall meet at such times and places as determined by
the committee but not less often than annually.
(Ord. No. 3180, § 1, 11-12-68)
Sec. 10A-24. Reports.
The veterans' affairs committee shall render to the mayor and council an annual
report on or before December 31 and submit additional reports and
recommendations as it determines or as requested by the mayor and council.
Minutes of committee meetings shall be filed with the city clerk.
(Ord. No. 3180, § 1, 11-12-68)
Sec. 10A-25. Limitation of power.
Neither the veterans' affairs committee nor any member thereof, nor any
veterans' organization may incur city expenses without submitting a request to
the city manager and prior authorization of the mayor and council, nor may any
such person or organization obligate the city in any manner or form; except
that the city manager is hereby authorized and directed to provide such
secretarial service, stationery and postage as may be necessary to prepared
proposed agenda and notices, keep, transcribe and reproduce minutes of meetings
and distribute copies of the same.
(Ord. No. 3180, § 1, 11-12-68)
Sec. 10A-26. Functions and purposes.
Functions and purposes of the veterans' affairs committee shall be:
   (1)   To meet regularly as the representative organization of all affiliated
veterans' organizations in the metropolitan area of the city.
   (2)   To provide a common forum to the member organization for discussion
and coordination of activities.
   (3)   To achieve cooperation and efficiency in promoting the activities,
interest and goals of member organizations.
   (4)   To confer with and advise the mayor and council concerning matters of
interest to veterans and the member organizations, and to compile, receive and
disseminate information and data relating thereto.
   (5)   To develop and encourage united community understanding, effort and
support of the common projects, aims and goals of the member organizations and
in such manner to promote the general welfare, interests and well-being of the
citizens of the city.
   (6)   To accept donations and use them in support of activities such as
Operation Exodus, the Four Chaplains Memorial Ceremony, and other veterans’
ceremonies, activities, and causes, all under the following conditions:
   (A)   Neither the city, nor any member of city staff, shall be involved in
any way in the committee’s financial activities.
   (B)   The committee must coordinate its own fundraising; be responsible for
the accounting, administration, and expenditure of funds that are raised; and
maintain an account at a financial institution to facilitate the receipt,
preservation, and expenditure of the funds resulting from donations.
   (C)   The committee must designate its treasurer or a third-party fiscal
agent to handle the funds.
   (D)   The committee’s treasurer is responsible for providing accounting
documentation regarding the funds whenever it is requested by the members of
the committee or the city clerk.
   (E)   Tucson Code Section 10A-25 is unaffected by this authorization and
remains in full force and effect.
(Ord. No. 3180, § 1, 11-12-68; Ord. No. 8517, § 1, 6-12-95; Ord. No. 11544, §
1, 5-8-18)
Secs. 10A-27--10A-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV.
FOUNDING DATE OF CITY OF TUCSON
Sec. 10A-31. Founding date established.
The founding date of the City of Tucson is established as August 20, 1775.
(Ord. No. 3986, § 1, 2-5-73)
Sec. 10A-32. Bicentennial anniversary celebration.
A bicentennial anniversary celebration of the founding of the city is hereby
authorized to be prepared and carried forward by the city manager, with the
assistance of the Tucson Historical Committee, who shall submit to the mayor
and council a report on the proposed project and estimated budget therefor.
(Ord. No. 3986, § 1, 2-5-73)
Secs. 10A-33--10A-40. Reserved.
ARTICLE V.
REDISTRICTING ADVISORY COMMITTEE
__________
   *Editor’s note – Former Article V, §§ 10A-41 – 10A-43, relating to the
Tucson Commission of the Arts and Culture, derived from Ord. No. 4357, § 1,
adopted May 27, 1975, and Ord. No. 5933, § 1, adopted Dec. 19, 1983, was
repealed by Ord. No. 6024, effective June 25, 1984.
__________
Sec. 10A-41. Potential redistricting year.
   As used in this article, "potential redistricting year" means a year in
which the redistricting of wards is permitted under the Charter, or whenever
redistricting is otherwise mandated by law.
(Ord. No. 11354, § 1, 5-3-16)
Sec. 10A-42. Redistricting Advisory Committee established.
   In each potential redistricting year, the mayor and council shall by
resolution naming its members, establish a Redistricting Advisory Committee
(the "Committee").
(Ord. No. 11354, § 1, 5-3-16)
   Editor’s note – For the 2020 Redistricting Advisory Committee, the
provisions of this section are superseded by Ord. No. 11785, adopted Sept. 22,
2020. Pursuant to Ord. No. 11958, adopted Sept. 27, 2022, §§ 10A-42 and 10A-45
are superseded and shall not apply to the 2022 Committee, which shall consist
of the members listed in Exhibit A to Ord. No. 11958.
Sec. 10A-43. Membership composition; qualifications and terms.
   (a)   Appointment. The Committee shall consist of one (1) voting member
appointed by the mayor and one (1) voting member appointed by each
councilmember.
   (b)   Qualifications. All members of the Committee shall be qualified city
electors, and none shall hold any elective public office, either by election or
by appointment, at any time during their membership on the Committee.
   (c)   Precinct committeeperson allowed. For purposes of this article, the
office of precinct committeeperson shall not be considered an elective public
office.
   (d)   Terms. The provisions of Tucson Code Chapter 10A, Article XIII shall
govern the Committee, except as otherwise provided in this article.
   (e)   Exemption. The Committee shall be exempt from the provisions of Tucson
Code Section
10A-134(c).
   (f)   Expiration of terms. The terms of the Committee and its members shall
automatically expire on December 31st of the potential redistricting year in
which the Committee is appointed; except that the mayor and council may by
resolution extend the Committee's term in the event that they deem such
extension beneficial to the city.
   (g)   Disqualification from election to office.  Committee members shall be
disqualified from election to the office of councilmember for a period of four
(4) years from December 31st of the potential redistricting year in which the
Committee is appointed.
(Ord. No. 11354, § 1, 5-3-16)
Sec. 10A-44. City clerk attendance, committee duties and functions.
   (a)   City clerk to attend meetings. The city clerk or the city clerk's
designee(s), shall attend all Committee meetings, and shall provide the
Committee with relevant and necessary information.
   (b)   Duties and functions of the Committee. The duties and functions of the
Committee shall be as follows:
   (1)   To review all relevant data, including but not limited to U.S. Census
data, and recommend in writing to the mayor and council whether redistricting
is necessary in the potential redistricting year in which the Committee is
appointed. The review shall consider the following factors and objectives:
   (A)   Maintain a Maximum Population Deviation (MPD) across the city's six
(6) wards that is no greater than 10%.
   (B)   Maintain established and recognizable ward boundaries with a minimum
of disruption, except as may be necessary to achieve the other factors and
objectives as listed in this section.
   (C)   Sustain the compactness and contiguity of the wards as they presently
exist, except as may be necessary to achieve the other factors and objectives
as listed in this section.
   (D)   Maintain ethnic balance so as to not dilute the minority vote
(hereafter, "dilution"). As part of any redistricting recommendation, the
Committee shall consider and examine the potential of dilution that may occur
with any recommended redistricting, including but not limited to dilution that
may occur or may have previously existed through "packing" and/or "fragmenting"
of minority voting power. "Packing" means the practice of packing minority
voting blocs into one or a small number of districts/wards to minimize their
influence; and "fragmenting" means the practice of fragmenting the minority
voters among several districts/wards where a bloc-voting majority can routinely
outvote them. As part of this evaluation, the Committee shall give preference
to redistricting options that will advance "rough proportionality" of minority
voting power. For the purposes of this section, "rough proportionality" means
the establishment of districts/wards where the number of wards in which
minority groups constitute a majority percentage of the voting age population
is roughly proportional to the minority voters' share of the overall voting age
population. As an example, if the citywide minority share of the voting age
population is 50%, then under the concept of "rough proportionality" the number
of wards where minority groups constitute a majority percentage of the voting
age population should approximate 50% of the total number of wards. The
Committee shall also give preference to redistricting options that reduce
dilution that may otherwise exist from prior "packing" or "fragmenting." The
purpose of this evaluation by the Committee is to provide that the members of
the city's minority groups do not have less opportunity than other members of
the electorate to participate in the electoral process and to elect
representatives of their choice.
   (E)   Where possible, realign precincts having populations represented by
more than one ward.
   (2)   If it finds, pursuant to subsection (1) above, that redistricting is
necessary, then to review all relevant data, hold at least one (1) public
hearing, and such other public hearings as it deems necessary, gather
information and opinions from the public, and thereafter make recommendations
in writing to the mayor and council concerning the manner in which
redistricting should occur in order to best comply with the Charter.
   (3)   To make such other recommendation(s) relating to redistricting as
deemed necessary or desirable.
(Ord. No. 11354, § 1, 5-3-16; Ord. No. 11950, § 1, 8-9-22; Ord. No. 12119, § 6,
8-27-24)
Sec. 10A-45. Committee recommendation submitted.
   The Committee's written recommendation(s) shall be submitted to the mayor
and council no later than October 1st of the potential redistricting year in
which the Committee is appointed.
(Ord. No. 11354, § 1, 5-3-16)
   Editor’s note – For the 2020 Redistricting Advisory Committee, the
provisions of this section are superseded by Ord. No. 11785, adopted Sept. 22,
2020. Pursuant to Ord. No. 11958, adopted Sept. 27, 2022, §§ 10A-42 and 10A-45
are superseded and shall not apply to the 2022 Committee, which shall submit
its written recommendations to the Mayor and Council no later than Nov. 30,
2022.
Secs. 10A-46 – 10A-49. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI.
TUCSON TRANSIT ADVISORY COMMITTEE†
__________
*   Editors Note: Article VI, §§ 10A-51--10A-64, relating to the Tucson Women's
Commission, derived from Ord. No. 4416, §§ 1--9, adopted December 8, 1975; Ord.
No. 4770, § 1, adopted March 13, 1978; Ord. No. 7021, § 1, adopted September 6,
1988; and Ord. No. 7266, § 1, adopted August 7, 1989; was repealed by Ord. No.
7845, § 1, adopted June 22, 1992.
__________
Sec. 10A-50.   Creation.
   Pursuant to Tucson Charter
Chapter XXIV, § 1 and Tucson Code §
10A-139(a), the Tucson Transit Advisory Committee (TTAC) is created and
established as an on-going mayor and council advisory committee.
(Ord. No. 12023, § 3, 8-8-23)
Sec. 10A-51.   Composition; appointment of members; limitation on concurrent
service; applicability of Tucson Code Chapter 10A, Article XIII.
   (a)   Composition.  The TTAC shall consist of eleven (11) voting members who
shall serve without compensation:
   (b)   Appointment of members.
   (1)   The mayor and each council member shall appoint one (1) member for a
total of seven (7) voting members.
   (2)   The city manager shall appoint four (4) members, seeking to provide
one (1) member representing each of the following:
   a.   Disability community; and
   b.   University of Arizona parking and transportation department.
   (3)   One (1) member shall be designated as a non-voting staff
representative from Pima Association of Governments/Regional Transportation
Authority.
   (c)   Limitation on concurrent service. Consistent with Tucson Code §
10A-134(c), voting members of the TTAC may not serve on more than two (2) city
bodies at a time.
   (d)   Applicability of Tucson Code Chapter 10A, Article XIII. Except as
otherwise specifically provided in this article, all provisions of Tucson Code
Chapter 10A, Article XIII apply to the TTAC. Notwithstanding any provision of
Tucson Code Section
10A-134(b) to the contrary, any members appointed to the TTAC who were serving
on the Transit Task Force (TTF) at the time of its dissolution pursuant to
Ordinance 12023 shall nonetheless be eligible to serve up to eight (8) years on
the TTAC.
(Ord. No. 12023, § 3, 8-8-23; Ord. No. 12051, § 1, 10-17-23)
Sec. 10A-52.    Functions, purposes, powers, and duties.
   The TTAC shall evaluate and monitor the city transit system's performance,
budget, existing and potential revenue sources, and ridership-building efforts;
and shall support the integration of transit into the regional mobility
network.
   The TTAC shall forward to the mayor and council reports and recommendations
on topics as it deems necessary and as requested by the mayor and council.
Tucson Code §
10A-139(b)(5), which requires the filing of an annual report with the city
clerk summarizing a board's activities during the previous year, does not apply
to the TTAC.
   The department of transportation and mobility will bring major projects to
the TTAC for review.
(Ord. No. 12023, § 3, 8-8-23)
Sec. 10A-53.   Organization.
   (a)   Chair and vice-chair. The TTAC shall select a chair and a vice-chair
from among its members, who shall serve for one-year terms. The vice-chair
shall act as chair in the absence or disability of the chair, or in the event
of a vacancy in that office.
   (b)   Meetings. The TTAC shall meet once each month, or more frequently as
may be necessary.
   (c)   Subcommittees. The TTAC may form subcommittees as may be necessary to
carry out its duties and functions.
   (d)   Quorum. TTAC is a Category 1 committee. A quorum shall consist of a
majority of the members currently appointed and serving.
(Ord. No. 12023, § 3, 8-8-23)
Sec. 10A-54.   Staff support.
   The department of transportation and mobility shall provide staff support to
the TTAC.
(Ord. No. 12023, § 3, 8-8-23)
Sec. 10A-55.   Limitation of powers.
   Neither the TTAC nor any member thereof may incur city expenses or obligate
the city in any way without prior authorization from the mayor and council.
(Ord. No. 12023, § 3, 8-8-23)
Sec. 10A-56.   Sunset clause.
   Tucson Code Section
10A-139(b)(1)'s presumptive two (2) year sunset date does not apply to the
TTAC. The TTAC shall cease to exist forty-eight (48) months after the effective
date of this ordinance. The term of the TTAC may be extended by an ordinance of
the mayor and council.
(Ord. No. 12023, § 3, 8-8-23)
Secs. 10A-57 – 10A-74. Reserved.
ARTICLE VII.
COMMISSION ON DISABILITY ISSUES*
__________
*   Editors Note: Section 1 of Ord. No. 7174, adopted Apr. 17, 1989, changed
the title of art. VII from "Commission on the Handicapped" to "Commission on
Disability Issues"; and § 2 made the same change in the text.
__________
Sec. 10A-75. Creation.
There is hereby established an entity to be called the "commission on
disability issues."
(Ord. No. 4960, § 1, 4-9-79; Ord. No. 7174, § 2, 4-17-89)
Sec. 10A-76. Functions and purposes.
   The functions and purposes, powers and duties of the commission on
disability issues shall be to:
   (a)   Act as the official advisory body to the mayor and council on the
priority of concerns faced by individuals with disabilities within the Tucson
community.
   (b)   Work to formulate policies and recommend activities that address the
needs and concerns of individuals with disabilities.
   (c)   Work with city departments and outside agencies and organizations to
ensure equitable delivery of services and initiate new ones that benefit
individuals with disabilities.
   (d)   Support and sponsor community programs and projects that promote
public awareness of the problems of individuals with disabilities.
   (e)   Serve as a liaison between the city and other community agencies
serving individuals with disabilities.
(Ord. No. 4960, § 1, 4-9-79; Ord. No. 7174, § 2, 4-17-89; Ord. No. 10871, § 1,
1-19-11)
Sec. 10A-77. Membership composition, terms and qualifications.
   (a)   Appointment. The commission on disability issues shall be composed of
eleven (11) members, who shall serve without compensation as follows: The mayor
and each council member shall individually appoint one (1) member of the
commission. In addition, the city manager shall appoint four (4) members of the
commission.
   (b)   Terms.
   (1)   The term of those commission members appointed by the mayor and
council individually shall be coterminous with that of the appointing elected
official.
   (2)   The term of those commission members appointed by the city manager
shall be for a term of four (4) years.
   (c)   Qualifications.
   (1)   The seven (7) members of the commission on disability issues appointed
individually by the mayor and council shall be individuals with disabilities;
that is, persons who have a physical or mental impairment which substantially
limits one (1) or more of their major life activities.
   (2)   The four (4) members of the commission on disability issues appointed
by the city manager shall be representatives of agencies and employers
dedicated to serving the needs of individuals with disabilities or persons
possessing special expertise in dealing with the problems of individuals with
disabilities.
(Ord. No. 4960, § 1, 4-9-79; Ord. No. 7174, § 2, 4-17-89; Ord. No. 7264, § 1,
8-7-89; Ord. No. 7820, § 1, 5-18-92; Ord. No. 10871, § 1, 1-19-11; Ord. No.
11355, § 1, 5-3-16)
   Editors Note: Section 1 of Ord. No. 7264, adopted Aug. 7, 1989, increased
the term of office in subsection (b)(2) from 3 to 4 years. Section 2 specified
that these members who were serving 3-year terms prior to the enactment of the
ordinance would have their terms extended to 4 years.
Sec. 10A-78. Commission organization.
The commission on disability issues chairperson shall be elected by a majority
of the commissioners. The commissioners shall adopt rules and regulations in
relation to the commission's powers and duties. Procedural matters shall be
governed by Robert's Rules of Order.
(Ord. No. 4960, § 1, 4-9-79; Ord. No. 7174, § 2, 4-17-89)
Sec. 10A-79. Limitation of powers.
Neither the commission on disability issues nor any member thereof may incur
city expenses or obligate the city in any way without prior authorization by
the mayor and council.
(Ord. No. 4960, § 1, 4-9-79; Ord. No. 7174, § 2, 4-17-89)
Secs. 10A-80--10A-85. Reserved.
ARTICLE VIII.
COMMUNITY POLICE ADVISORY REVIEW BOARD*
__________
*   Editors Note: Ordinance No. 8843, § 1, adopted March 24, 1997, repealed §§
10A-86--10A-93 and added new §§ 10A-86--10A-95. Formerly, such sections
pertained to similar provisions and derived from Ord. No. 5123, § 2, 3-24-80;
Ord. No. 7935, § 1, 11-2-92.
__________
Sec. 10A-86. Declaration of policy.
It is the policy of the city to foster and encourage a citizen police
partnership in the prevention of crime and to develop and maintain positive
communications and mutual understanding and trust between the police and the
community. The mayor and council find that the partnership between police and
citizens is strongest when citizens are confident that the internal
investigation of citizen complaints against the police department is fair and
just. The mayor and council further find that such confidence is best achieved
by opening the internal investigative process to public review and comment.
(Ord. No. 8843, § 1, 3-24-97)
Sec. 10A-87. Creation.
In order to promote the goals and objectives of the above-stated policy, there
is hereby established an entity to be called the “community police advisory
review board.”
(Ord. No. 8843, § 1, 3-24-97; Ord. No. 11537, § 2, 4-3-18)
Sec. 10A-88. Citizen complaints and concerns: powers and duties.
The community police advisory review board is authorized to:
   (a)   Refer citizens who wish to file complaints against the city police
department to the department's office of professional standards or to the
office of the independent police auditor.
   (b)   Conduct public outreach to educate the community of the role of the
office of professional standards and the office of the independent police
auditor in the investigation of complaints against the city police department
or one of its officers.
   (c)   Request that the independent police auditor monitor a particular
citizen complaint being investigated by the city police department.
   (d)   Request from the city police department a review of completed action
taken by the department on a citizen complaint or a review of incidents which
create community concern or controversy.
   (e)   Request from the independent police auditor a review of completed
action taken by the independent police auditor on a citizen complaint.
   (f)   Review completed investigations of citizen complaints alleging police
officer misconduct in order to comment on the fairness and thoroughness of an
investigation and to report any concerns regarding the investigation to the
chief of police, the independent police auditor, the city manager and/or the
mayor and council.
   (g)   Provide comments and recommendations to the chief of police, the
independent police auditor, the city manager and/or the mayor and council on
the citizen complaint review process.
   (h)   Provide comments and recommendations to the chief of police, the
independent police auditor, the city manager and/or mayor and council on police
department policy, procedure, and practice.
(Ord. No. 8843, § 1, 3-24-97; Ord. No. 11537, § 2, 4-3-18)
Sec. 10A-89. Community-police partnership: powers and duties.
The community police advisory review board shall have the authority to:
   (a)   Consult with the governing body from time to time as may be required
by the mayor and council.
   (b)   Assist the police in achieving a greater understanding of the nature
and causes of complex community problems in the area of human relations, with
special emphasis on the advancement and improvement of relations between police
and community minority groups.
   (c)   Study, examine, and recommend methods, approaches, and techniques to
encourage and develop an active citizen police partnership in the prevention of
crime.
   (d)   Promote cooperative citizen-police programs and approaches to the
solutions of community crime problems, emphasizing the principle that the
administration of justice is a responsibility which requires total community
involvement.
   (e)   Recommend procedures, programs, and/or legislation to enhance
cooperation among citizens of the community and police.
   (f)   Strive to strengthen and ensure, throughout the community, the
application of the principle of equal protection under the law for all persons.
   (g)   Consult and cooperate with federal,state, city, and other public
agencies, commissions, and committees on matters within the board's charge.
   (h)   At the discretion and express direction of the mayor and council,
assume and undertake such other tasks or duties as will facilitate the
accomplishment of these goals and objectives, except as hereinafter provided.
(Ord. No. 8843, § 1, 3-24-97; Ord. No. 11537, § 2, 4-3-18)
Sec. 10A-90. Composition, appointment, terms, and attendance.
   (a)   Composition and qualifications. The community police advisory review
board shall be composed of ten (10) members. All voting members shall be
residents of the city and shall not have ever been convicted of a felony. No
voting member shall currently be a peace officer.
   (b)   Appointment. The mayor and each councilmember shall appoint one (1)
voting member of the board. Should an appointment not be made within thirty
(30) days of when the position becomes available, the appointment can be made
by a majority vote of the mayor and council. The city manager, the chief of
police, and the police employee's labor representation group, recognized by the
city, shall each designate a representative to serve on the board as a
continuing ex-officio, nonvoting member. In the event that there is no police
employee's labor representation group recognized by the city, the chief of
police shall designate one (1) commissioned officer within the department who
holds a rank no greater than sergeant to serve on the board as a continuing ex-
officio, nonvoting member.
   (c)   Diversity of advisory members. As provided in section
10A-137 the board may appoint up to four (4) additional nonvoting advisory
members. The appointment of advisory members shall be made so as to enhance the
diversity of the board. Advisory members are required to meet the same
qualifications as appointed, voting members.
   (d)   Term. All appointments shall be for four-year terms, except that
members appointed by the mayor and each councilmember shall not serve beyond
the term of the mayor or councilmember making such appointment. Ex-officio
members serve at the pleasure of the individual or group they represent. As per
Tucson Code, section
10A-137, the term of advisory members is not to exceed two (2) years.
   (e)   Attendance. A member (to include advisory members) of the board who
misses four (4) consecutive meetings for any reason or who fails to attend for
any reason at least forty (40) percent of the meetings called in a calendar
year is automatically removed as a member of the board.
(Ord. No. 8843, § 1, 3-24-97; Ord. No. 9928, § 1, 1-26-04; Ord. No. 11537, § 2,
4-3-18)
Sec. 10A-91. Board organization.
The community police advisory review board chairperson and vice-chairperson
shall be selected by a majority of those members appointed by the mayor and
council. The board shall adopt rules and regulations relating to its powers and
duties, may appoint from its members such standing or special committees as
determined necessary, and shall meet at such times and places throughout the
city as determined by the board.
(Ord. No. 8843, § 1, 3-24-97; Ord. No. 11537, § 2, 4-3-18)
Sec. 10A-92. Reports.
The community police advisory review board shall report to the mayor and
council annually and shall report to the mayor and council annually and shall
submit such additional reports as it deems necessary or as requested by the
mayor and council. The board’s annual report shall be filed on or before
February 1.
(Ord. No. 8843, § 1, 3-24-97; Ord. No. 9928, § 1, 1-26-04; Ord. No. 11537, § 2,
4-3-18)
Sec. 10A-93. Limitations of powers.
Neither the community police advisory review board nor any member thereof,
except as otherwise authorized by law, shall:
   (a)   Incur city expense or obligate the city in any way without prior
authorization of the mayor and council.
   (b)   Except for the chairperson who is the official spokesperson for the
board, make any written or oral report of any committee activity to any
individual or body other than to the mayor and council.
   (c)   Independently investigate citizen complaints against the police
department or individual police officers by questioning witnesses or otherwise.
   (d)   Conduct any activity which might constitute or be construed as a
quasi-judicial review of police actions.
   (e)   Conduct any activity which might constitute or be construed as
establishment of city policy.
   (f)   Violate the confidentiality of any information related to matters
involving pending or forthcoming civil or criminal litigation.
   (g)   Review or comment on the investigation of a citizen complaint where
criminal charges are under investigation or pending until the case has reached
a final disposition, except in those instances where the police department has
determined that the citizen complaint is not related to the investigation or
prosecution of the criminal charge against the citizen and has completed action
on the citizen complaint and any other criminal charges have reached a final
disposition.
(Ord. No. 8843, § 1, 3-24-97; Ord. No. 9928, § 1, 1-26-04; Ord. No. 11537, § 2,
4-3-18)
Sec. 10A-94. Training.
   (a)   Initial comprehensive training shall be provided to each voting and
advisory board member prior to reviewing any cases. Such training shall be
mandatory and shall be designed and implemented by the board's training
committee, the independent police auditor and the police department. Such
training should include, but shall not be limited to, familiarization with:
   (1)   City police department operations;
   (2)   Police review structures and issues;
   (3)   Surveys of citizen concerns;
   (4)   Police training programs;
   (5)   Confidentiality;
   (6)   Citizen participation;
   (7)   History of citizen-police oversight in the United States and Tucson;
   (8)   Race, community relations, and law enforcement; and
   (9)   Police employee organization issues and concerns.
   (b)   After appointment to the board, voting and advisory members are
required to pursue forty-eight (48) hours of educational opportunities annually
and report these to the chairperson. For purposes of this section, educational
opportunities shall be defined as:
   (1)   Ride-alongs (recommended): One (1) ride-along per quarter for a
minimum of four (4) hours;
   (2)   Police department's citizen academy;
   (3)   Work on board committees; and
   (4)   Other training directed toward becoming knowledgeable with the
procedures and practices of the city police department or otherwise designed to
increase the board member's skills in reviewing and evaluating citizen
complaints.
(Ord. No. 8843, § 1, 3-24-97; Ord. No. 9928, § 1, 1-26-04)
Sec. 10A-95. Cooperation.
The various city officers and employees are hereby authorized and directed to
perform all acts necessary or desirable to give effect to this article. The
city manager is hereby authorized and directed to provide or make provisions
for such services as are reasonably needed to support the community police
advisory review board’s activities.
(Ord. No. 8843, § 1, 3-24-97; Ord. No. 11537, § 2, 4-3-18)
Secs. 10A-96--10A-99. Reserved.
ARTICLE IX.
COMMEMORATIONS AND OBSERVANCES*
__________
*   Editors Note: Ord. No. 5027, § 1, adopted Sept. 4, 1979, amended the Code
by adding art. VII, § 10A-70. Inasmuch as Ord. No. 4960, § 1, adopted Apr. 9,
1979, had previously added art. VII, and Ord. No. 5123, § 2, adopted Mar. 24,
1980, subsequently added art. VIII, the provisions of Ord. No. 5027, at the
direction of the city, have been designated as art. IX, 10A-100.
__________
Sec. 10A-100. American Indian Awareness Days.
The mayor shall annually issue a proclamation designating the week commencing
with the fourth Monday in September as American Indian Awareness Days,
recommending that the citizens of the community hold appropriate exercises
commemorative of the American Indians.
(Ord. No. 5027, § 1, 9-4-79)
Sec. 10A-101. Martin Luther King, Jr., Day.
The mayor shall annually issue, on or before the third Monday in January of
each year, a proclamation designating this day as Martin Luther King, Jr., Day,
and recommending that the citizens of the community hold appropriate exercises
commemorative of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.
(Ord. No. 5699, § 1, 1-17-83; Ord. No. 7469, § 1, 9-4-90)
Secs. 10A-102--10A-109. Reserved.
ARTICLE X.
COMMISSION ON EQUITABLE HOUSING AND DEVELOPMENT. **
Sec. 10A-110.   Creation.
   Pursuant to Tucson Charter Chapter XXIV, § 1 and Tucson Code § 10A-139(a),
the commission on equitable housing and development ("CEHD") is created as an
on-going mayor and council advisory commission.
(Ord. No. 11769, passed 7-7-20)
Sec. 10A-111.   Declaration of Purpose.
   The City of Tucson envisions "A Home for Everyone" in the Tucson region.
Tucson, like other cities across the U.S., must contend with an inadequate
number of affordable housing units and high rates of poverty. With the input of
community values, we will identify solutions that will promote affordability
and prevent displacement; as well as, promote social responsibility from both
developers and landlords within the City of Tucson in order to assist those in
vulnerable housing situations. In addition, with the ongoing revitalization of
the downtown area, there has been a variety of housing related impacts that
concern neighborhoods and long-time residents.
   Challenges such as homelessness, the preservation of neighborhood cultural
assets, the number of "housing cost burdened" households paying more than 30%
of their income for housing and historical racial inequities are linked to
housing affordability, poverty, and involuntary displacement. Therefore, on
June 9, 2020, the City of Tucson mayor and council provided direction to
establish a commission to develop strategies to address these pressing issues.
(Ord. No. 11769, passed 7-7-20)
Sec. 10A-112.   Membership composition; nomination and appointment;
qualifications; terms of office and reappointment; removal; concurrent service
not permitted; applicability of Tucson Code Chapter 10A, Article XIII.
   (a)   Composition. The CEHD shall consist of fifteen (15) voting members and
four (4) non-voting ex-officio members, who shall serve without compensation.
   All members must be qualified to represent one or more focus areas as more
particularly described in subsection (c)(4) below:
      (1)   Housing
      (2)   Neighborhoods
      (3)   Equity, diversity, and inclusivity
      (4)   Economic vitality
      (5)   Cultural vitality
      (6)   Tucson Youth ages 18-24
   (b)   Nomination and appointment:
      (1)   Seven (7) voting members shall be appointed through: (a)
recommendation by at least two (2) members of mayor and council; and (b)
appointment by the full mayor and council acting as a body.
      (2)   Five (5) voting members shall be appointed by the director of
housing and community development (HCD). Two (2) of these appointments shall
include:
         (A)   a nonprofit partner, knowledgeable regarding nonprofit
development and fair housing policy; and
         (B)   a developer, knowledgeable regarding the housing development
process generally and with a proven track record of completed (i.e., built)
affordable housing projects;
EXCEPT THAT any members already serving as non-governmental, ex-officio members
under either of the two categories described in (A) and (B) above as of July
12, 2022 shall automatically transition to be voting members and continue to
serve, subject always to all provisions of Tucson Code Chapter 10A regarding
terms of office, reappointment, replacement, and removal.
      (3)   Three (3) voting members shall be representatives from the
following organizations, appointed by those organizations:
         (A)   Direct Advocacy and Resource Center (formerly the Direct Center
for Independence);
         (B)   Pima Council on Aging;
         (C)   Pima County Community Land Trust.
      (4)    Ex-officio (non-voting) members of the CEHD: The following shall
be invited to attend CEHD meetings, and assist the CEHD, as ex-officio, non-
voting members who shall not count toward creating or meeting any quorum
requirement:
         (A)   Pima County Housing Center;
         (B)   City of South Tucson;
         (C)   City of Tucson planning and development services department;
         (D)   City of Tucson housing and community development department.
   (c)   Qualifications:
      (1)   Members should, to the extent possible, represent the geographic,
demographic, and economic diversity of the community.
      (2)   Desired qualifications include relevant background, knowledge, and/
or expertise in one or more of the following focus areas that relate to the
commission's functions and purposes.
      (3)   All members shall reside or have a place of business within the
City of Tucson.
      (4)   Every focus area shall be represented by one or more members of the
CEHD, based on the information provided in the application:
         (A)   Housing: affordable housing developers and/or property managers;
nonprofit housing providers that provide services like: home repair, tenant
based rental assistance, homeownership counseling; organizations that support
and advocate for tenants like: fair housing, legal aid, tenant organizations,
advocacy agencies; former employees of housing and community development
agencies or similar organizations.
         (B)   Neighborhoods: individuals with expertise in planning, creative
place-making, historic preservation, mixed-use development, infill development,
strategies to combat gentrification/displacement; member of a neighborhood
association or other neighborhood-based organization.
         (C)   Equity, diversity, and inclusivity: low-income individuals,
members of communities of color, LGBTQ communities, refugees, immigrants, non-
English speakers, formerly incarcerated people, residents without a home,
seniors, veterans, and persons with disabilities.
         (D)   Economic vitality: local business owners, professionals in the
fields of finance, real estate, development, homebuilding, business districts,
economic development, or workforce development.
         (E)   Cultural vitality is the practice of creating, disseminating,
validating, and supporting arts and culture as a dimension of everyday
community life.
   (d)   Terms of office and reappointment. Members appointed by the mayor and
council shall serve four (4) year terms. Members appointed by the housing and
community development director shall serve four (4) year terms from the time of
appointment, in accordance with Tucson City Code, Chapter 10A. Members may
serve no more than two (2) consecutive four (4) year terms (eight (8) years in
total).
   (e)   Replacement and removal. Except for those replacement appointments of
representatives made by the organizations listed in subsection (b)(3) above,
all replacement appointments shall be made by the appointing authority using an
application process with consideration of the focus areas.
   (f)   Concurrent service. Consistent with Tucson Code §
10A-134(c), members of the CEHD can serve concurrently on up to two (2) city
boards, committees, or commissions.
   (g)   Applicability of Tucson Code Chapter 10A, Article XIII. Except as
otherwise specifically provided in this article, all provisions of Tucson Code
Chapter 10A, Article XIII apply to the CEHD.
(Ord. No. 11769, passed 7-7-20; Ord. No. 11851, § 1, passed 7-7-21; Ord. No.
11946, § 1, passed 7-12-22)
Sec. 10A-113.   Functions, purposes, powers, and duties.
   (a)   The mission of the CEHD shall be to provide advice to the mayor and
council regarding how the city can best:
      (1)   Focus on increasing city investment in housing.
         (A)   potential bonding
         (B)   land/ housing acquisition
         (C)   land banking
         (D)   CDBG, HOME, Section 8, public housing
         (E)   Cultural vitality
      (2)   Preserve affordability while increasing housing production/ stock
         (A)   Development
         (B)   Policy
         (C)   CDBG focus
         (D)   Land trust
         (E)   County owned tax lien properties
      (3)   Protect our barrios and communities from rapid change and
displacement as well as structural disinvestment and substandard housing
through the promotion of equitable housing models.
         (A)   Community education about homebuyer programs/ rental assistance/
anti-eviction programs
         (B)   Using city owned land to retain affordability
         (C)   City funded estate acquisitions
         (D)   Property tax home buying
         (E)   Revisiting existing policy and procedure for implicit or
explicit bias
         (F)   Housing coop
         (G)   Potential public oversight committee
      (4)   Facilitate equitable conversations and solutions that will
incorporate voices in a collaborative environment. These voices include the
following and facilitated by the commission:
         (A)   Community members
         (B)   Nonprofits
         (C)   Former/currently homeless
         (D)   Developers
         (E)   Potential public oversight committee
         (F)   Higher education
      (5)   Provide measurable and well-defined goals to address housing
shortfalls for those who have, currently and will experience housing
insecurity. The goals will be informed by:
         (A)   City housing study
         (B)   Homeless count
         (C)   Census data
         (D)   HCD yearly reporting-eviction data
         (E)   Manufactured housing study with Habitat for Humanity
         (F)   Landlord/ Pima County Court eviction info
         (G)   Poverty and urban stress report
         (H)   Opportunity indexing
         (I)   Planning and development services equity audit
         (J)   School district information about students (moving/relocating)
   (b)   In performing its mission as described in subsection (a) above, the
CEHD shall focus on carrying out the following functions:
      (1)   Review data (quantitative and qualitative), needs assessments, and
additional information to explore strategies and develop recommendations for
mayor and council consideration for the five (5) focus areas:
         (A)   Housing
         (B)   Neighborhoods
         (C)   Equity, diversity, and inclusivity
         (D)   Economic vitality
         (E)   Cultural vitality
      (2)   Identify innovative best practices or new ideas for developing low-
cost and more affordable housing, preventing and mitigating involuntary
displacement.
      (3)   Identify new capital resources and make them available for
affordable housing and homelessness programs.
      (4)   Identify and work toward eliminating institutional and regulatory
barriers to affordable housing and job security.
      (5)   Provide recommendations on the priorities for the use of HUD
entitlement programs included in the HUD five (5) year consolidated plan and
HUD annual action plan as well as the Tucson public housing authority
administrative plan.
      (6)   Review the goals and policies of the Tucson Housing Trust Fund and
make recommendations to Mayor and Council; provide advice relating to the goals
and policies of the Tucson Housing Trust Fund to the staff managing the Tucson
Housing Trust Fund; and promote resource development and funding alternatives
for the Tucson Housing Trust Fund.
(Ord. No. 11769, passed 7-7-20; Ord. No. 12143, § 1, passed 2-4-25)
Sec. 10A-114.    Staff support.
   The City of Tucson housing and community development department shall
provide staff support to the CEHD.
(Ord. No. 11769, passed 7-7-20)
Sec. 10A-115.   Commission organization and rules.
   (a)    Chairperson. The chairperson of the CEHD will be voted by the
commission, and the chairperson will also be in charge of facilitating
conversation and meetings.
   The structure of the housing and community development commission:
      (1)   follows best practices in collaborative decision making and
centering the conversation around equity
      (2)   includes representation from key stakeholder groups mentioned above
      (3)   brings accountability to the City of Tucson
      (4)   empowers community decision making
   (b)   Bylaws. It is recommended that within one year from the first meeting,
that the CEHD adopt bylaws for its operations. These shall be consistent with
the Tucson Charter, Tucson Code, and other legal authority. Consistent with
Tucson Code §
10A-136, any bylaws adopted by the CEHD shall be filed with the city clerk.
Once adopted, the bylaws may be reviewed periodically to determine whether
revisions may be warranted.
   (c)   Meetings. The CEHD shall choose its own meeting dates, times, and
places. Legal action reports and minutes of committee meetings shall be filed
with the city clerk.
   (d)   Quorum. A quorum shall consist of five (5) voting members.
   (e)   Quarterly reports. The CEHD shall produce, in partnership with staff,
minutes of all meetings for public distribution. Updates and recommendations
will be presented to the mayor and council quarterly or four (4) times a year.
(Ord. No. 11769, passed 7-7-20)
Sec. 10A-116. Limitation of powers.
   Neither the CEHD nor any of its members may incur governmental expenses, or
obligate the city in any way, without prior authorization of the mayor and
council.
(Ord. No. 11769, passed 7-7-20)
Sec. 10A-117. Sunset clause.
   The CEHD shall cease to exist on July 12, 2026. The term of the CEHD may be
extended by an ordinance of the mayor and council. If extended, the mayor and
council should review and revise, as appropriate, the composition, nomination
and appointment, and the functions, purposes, powers, and duties of the CEHD to
ensure that the body continues to operate effectively.
(Ord. No. 11769, passed 7-7-20; Ord. No. 11946, § 1, passed 7-12-22)
Secs. 10A-118, 10A-119. Reserved.
__________
   *Editor’s note – Ord. No. 5027, § 1, adopted Sept. 4, 1979, amended the Code
by adding art. VII, § 10A-70. Inasmuch as Ord. No. 4960, § 1, adopted Apr. 9,
1979, had previously added art. VII, and Ord. No. 5123, § 2, adopted Mar. 24,
1980, subsequently added art. VIII, the provisions of Ord. No. 5027, at the
direction of the city, have been designated as art. IX, 10A-100.
   **Editor’s note – Ord. No. 11496, § 3, adopted Oct. 24, 2017, repealed Art.
X, §§ 10A-110 – 10A-113, which pertained to the Tucson-Pima County Metropolitan
Energy Commission and derived from Ord. No. 5218, § 1, adopted Sept. 8, 1980.
Ord. No. 11769, passed 7-7-20, created a new Art. X, §§ 10A110 – 10A-117,
Commission on Equitable Housing and Development.
ARTICLE XI.
INDEPENDENT AUDIT AND PERFORMANCE COMMISSION
Sec. 10A-120. Creation of independent audit and performance commission.
The Independent Audit and Performance Commission ("commission") is established.
(Ord. No. 10598, § 1, 10-21-08)
Sec. 10A-121. Membership composition; appointment and terms; compensation;
removal.
   (a)   Composition. The commission shall be composed of seven (7) members
("commissioners"), with one member appointed by the mayor and each
councilmember.
   (b)   Qualifications. All members of the commission shall reside in the City
of Tucson. Notwithstanding section
10A-134(c), persons that serve on another city board, committee or commission
are not disqualified from serving as members of the commission. Each member
shall have not less than ten (10) years of financial or executive experience;
or not less than five (5) years of such experience plus another five (5) years
of experience in a comparable field such as project management, grant
administration, compliance reporting or data analysis.
   (c)   Appointments. The mayor and each councilmember shall appoint one
member of the Commission.
   (d)   Terms. Each commissioner shall serve for a term of four (4) years and
may be re- appointed for one additional term of four (4) years.
   (e)   Compensation. The commissioners shall serve without compensation.
   (f)   Removal. The commissioners are subject to section
10A-134(e). In addition, the commissioners may be removed prior to the
expiration of their terms by the mayor and council.
(Ord. No. 10598, § 1, 10-21-08)
Sec. 10A-122. Functions and duties.
   The commission shall have the following authority, functions and duties:
   (1)   To review and provide comment to the city manager and to the mayor and
council relating to the city's annual audit plan.
   (2)   Upon direction from the mayor and council or the city manager or upon
a majority vote of the commissioners, to provide independent appraisal of city
programs, policies and functions in order to help management perform more
efficiently and effectively, and/or to recommend that the mayor and council
commission an independent firm to perform such an appraisal.
   (3)   Upon direction from the mayor and council or the city manager or upon
a majority vote of the commissioners, to examine financial reports, various
records and procedures to determine compliance with applicable ordinances,
regulations, policies and contractual provisions; and/or to recommend that the
mayor and council commission an independent firm to perform such examination.
   (4)   Upon direction from the mayor and council or the city manager or upon
a majority vote of the commissioners, to evaluate the city's internal control
structure and recommend improvements that will help to safeguard the city's
assets.
   (5)   To perform other functions upon express direction by the mayor and
council.
(Ord. No. 10598, § 1, 10-21-08; Ord. No. 11232, § 1, 12-16-14)
Sec. 10A-123. Commission organization; meetings; reports.
   (a)   Chair. The commission shall appoint one of its members to serve as the
chair of the commission, and another member to serve as vice-chair of the
commission.
   (b)   Bylaws and meetings. The commission shall adopt bylaws for its
operations that are consistent with this chapter and other legal authority and
file them with the city clerk.
   (c)   The commission may form subcommittees as may be necessary to carry out
its duties and functions.
   (d)   The commission shall meet once each month, or more frequently as may
be necessary.
   (e)   The commission shall provide reports to the mayor and council not less
than every six (6) months, and more frequently upon express request by the
mayor and council.
(Ord. No. 10598, § 1, 10-21-08)
Sec. 10A-124. Limitation of powers.
The commission and its members may incur governmental expenses only with prior
authorization of the mayor and council, and may not obligate the city in any
form.
(Ord. No. 10598, § 1, 10-21-08)
Sec. 10A-125. Staff support; ex officio member.
The city manager shall provide staff support to the commission, and shall
provide the commission with information and documents as may be necessary for
the commission to fulfill its functions and duties. The city's internal audit
manager, or that person's designee, shall serve as an ex officio, non-voting
member of the commission and shall provide technical support to the commission.
The ex officio member shall not count towards or affect the quorum requirements
of the commission.
(Ord. No. 10598, § 1, 10-21-08)
Secs. 10A-126--10A-129. Reserved.
ARTICLE XII.
TUCSON-PIMA COUNTY BICYCLE ADVISORY COMMITTEE
Sec. 10A-130. Created; membership; vacancies; quorum; terms; compensation.
   (a)   There is created, in concert with Pima County, an organization to be
called the "Tucson-Pima County Bicycle Advisory Committee." The committee shall
consist of seventeen (17) members, seven (7) of which shall represent the city
and ten (10) of which shall represent the county.
   (b)   Employees of the city or the county shall not be members of the
committee, except that the city and the county may each appoint one (1) staff
person to serve as an ex officio, nonvoting member of the committee. Other
municipalities and governmental entities located in Pima County, such as the
University of Arizona, Pima Community College, and Davis-Monthan Air Force
Base, may participate in the Tucson-Pima County Bicycle Advisory Committee by
appointing one (1) voting member of the committee who shall serve in addition
to the seventeen (17) members provided for in subsection (a).
   (c)   Appointment of Members:
   (1)   Each member of the mayor and council shall appoint one (1) member.
   (2)   The county members of the committee shall be proposed by the
transportation department and approved by a majority of the board of
supervisors.
   (d)   Term:
   (1)   The term of each of the city members of the commission shall be
coterminous with the term of the appointing mayor and council member.
   (2)   The county members of the committee shall serve a term of two (2)
years from the time of that member's appointment.
   (e)   An appointment to fill a vacancy resulting other than from expiration
of a term shall be for the unexpired term only.
   (f)   The committee shall elect from its membership a chairperson and vice-
chairperson who shall serve for terms of one (1) year. The vice-chairperson
shall act as chairperson in the absence or disability of the chairperson, or in
the event a vacancy occurs in that office.
   (g)   Members of the committee shall serve without compensation.
   (h)   A majority of the members of the committee shall constitute a quorum.
The concurrence of the majority of the members constituting a quorum shall be
the act of the committee.
   (i)   The committee shall adopt rules and regulations for its operations
that are consistent with this article and other legal authority.
(Ord. No. 6731, § 2, 7-6-87; Ord. No. 7020, § 1, 9-6-88; Ord. No. 7096, § 1,
11-28-88)
Sec. 10A-131. Functions and purposes.
The duties, powers and functions of the committee shall be:
   (1)   To confer with and advise the governing bodies of the city and county
on community concerns relating to bicycling.
   (2)   To organize community programs and projects to provide information and
education to the community on bicycling.
   (3)   To review and make recommendations on proposed local, state and
federal legislation relating to bicycling.
   (4)   To act as an official advisory agency to the city and the county
governing bodies for technical questions and concerns related to bicycling.
   (5)   To render an annual report of committee activities to the governing
bodies of the city and county, and to file minutes of committee meetings with
the two (2) governing bodies.
   (6)   To recommend such action to the governing bodies of the city and
county as the committee deems necessary or desirable to accomplish the above
functions, and to put its policies into practice.
(Ord. No. 6731, § 2, 7-67)
Sec. 10A-132. Limitation of powers.
Neither the committee nor any member thereof shall incur expenses or obligate
the city and/or the county in any way without prior authorization from the
mayor and council and the board of supervisors.
(Ord. No. 6731, § 2, 7-6-87)
ARTICLE XIII.
TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF MEMBERSHIP ON BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS AND
FILING OF RULES
Sec. 10A-133. Applicability.
   (a)   The provisions of this article shall apply to all boards, committees
and commissions of the city, notwithstanding any other ordinance or resolution
unless specifically exempted from the provisions hereof, or except when they
conflict with the Charter, Arizona Revised Statutes, intergovernmental
agreements, or corporate articles or bylaws of instrumentalities of the city.
Where there is a conflict, the applicable provisions of the Charter, Arizona
Revised Statutes, intergovernmental agreement, or corporate articles or bylaws
shall prevail.
   (b)   The provisions of this article do not apply to the Industrial
Development Authority of the City of Tucson, Arizona.
(Ord. No. 7018, § 2, 9-6-88; Ord. No. 10734, § 1, 12-7-09)
Sec. 10A-134. Terms and removal.
   (a)   The terms of members of a body shall be coterminous with the terms of
office of the mayor or members of the city council who appointed them, or until
their successors on the body are appointed, except such members may be removed
with or without cause prior to the expiration of their term by the mayor or
members of the city council who appointed them or by such mayor’s or member of
the city council’s successor in office.
   (b)   Members of such bodies shall be eligible for reappointment; but in no
event may any individual serve more than a total of eight (8) continuous years
on the same body, except as otherwise provided by this subsection. Once a
member has served eight (8) years on a body, he or she may not be reappointed
to that body until after a break in service of at least one (1) continuous
year. Whenever a body is dissolved and reconstituted, time previously spent in
office shall count towards the eight (8) year limitation. The following
committees are exempt from the eight (8) year service limitation: the Uniform
Fire Code Committee, the Outdoor Lighting Code Committee, the Tucson-Pima
County Joint Consolidated Code Committee, the 2012 Bond Oversight Commission,
2017 Public Safety Tax Oversight Commission, and the Environmental Services
Advisory Committee. Additionally, members of the Industrial Development
Authority Board and the Civil Service Commission may serve two (2) complete
consecutive six (6) year terms before a break in service is required. The term
limits imposed by this section apply only to those members of a body appointed
by the City of Tucson.
   (c)   Appointees, except for advisory members and members of the technical
code committees named herein, may not serve on more than two (2) bodies at a
time.
   (d)   The terms of office of members of a body serving unspecified terms
shall be four (4) years commencing December 31, 1988, subject to the eight (8)
year continuous service limitation.
   (e)   A member of a body, except for advisory members, who misses four (4)
consecutive meetings for any reason or who fails to attend for any reason at
least forty (40) percent of the meetings called in a calendar year is
automatically and immediately removed as a member of the body.
   (f)   No city employee may serve on a body except in a nonvoting, ex officio
capacity.
   (g)   Except as provided in subsection (h), should the appointment of a
member of a body authorized to be appointed by the mayor, a member of the
council, or the city manager (hereafter referred to as the “appointing
authority”) fail to be made within thirty (30) days after the expiration of the
term of the member or thirty (30) days after a vacancy occurs, the appointment
may be made by the mayor and council.
   (h)   Prior to the expiration of the term of members of bodies referred to
in subsection (g), or within thirty (30) days after a vacancy on such a body
occurs, the appointing authority may request an extension of time from the
mayor and council to make the appointment.
(Ord. No. 7018, § 2, 9-6-88; Ord. No. 7260, § 1, 8-7-89; Ord. No. 10064, § 1,
10-18-04; Ord. No. 10950, § 3, 12-20-11, eff. 1-20-12; Ord. No. 11508, § 10,
eff. 1-4-18; Ord. No. 11599, § 1, 12-4-18; Ord. No. 11607, § 1, 12-4-18; Ord.
No. 12148, § 1, 3-18-25)
Sec. 10A-135. Effective date.
   (a)   The term of office for those members of a body who will have served
eight (8) or more years continuously on a body as of December 31, 1988, will
end on December 31, 1988, regardless of whether the member is serving a
specified or unspecified term.
   (b)   The term of office for those voting members of a body who are city
employees will end on December 31, 1988.
(Ord. No. 7018, § 2, 9-6-88)
Sec. 10A-136. Rules and regulations of commissions, boards, departments to be
filed.
Two (2) copies of all rules and regulations of general application and future
effect of every commission, board or department of the city, affecting the
rights or procedure available to the public, including amendments and repeals
thereof, shall be filed with the city clerk. All such rules and regulations,
including amendments or repeals thereof, not so filed shall be of no force or
effect.
It is hereby made the duty of the chairman of each commission or board of the
city or the head of each department of the city to file such copies of such
rules and regulations and of all repeals and amendments thereof in true and
correct form with the city clerk.
(Ord. No. 7018, § 2, 9-6-88)
   Cross References: Filing of regulations of building board of appeals
required, §
6-13.
Sec. 10A-137. Nonvoting, advisory members.
   (a)   Except as provided in section
10A-138, the chairperson of a body may, with the consent of a majority of the
regular members of the body, appoint no more than four (4) advisory members to
the body. Advisory members may be appointed for a period not to exceed two (2)
years.
   (b)   Such advisory members shall have the right to be present at all
meetings and to take part in the deliberations, but shall be nonvoting and
shall not be counted in determining whether a quorum is present.
(Ord. No. 7079, § 1, 10-24-88; Ord. No. 8023, § 1, 4-12-93)
Sec. 10A-138. Citizens Advisory Planning Committee zoning code revision
subcommittee.
The Citizens Advisory Planning Committee (CAPC) zoning code revision
subcommittee is hereby established. The members of the CAPC zoning code
revision subcommittee shall:
   (1)   Be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of a concurring vote of a
simple majority of the CAPC;
   (2)   Not be subject to the number, term, quorum or voting restrictions of
sections
10A-134 and
10A-137.
(Ord. No. 8023, § 2, 4-12-93)
Sec. 10A-139. Requirements for creation of boards, committees, and commissions;
annual reports.
   (a)   Boards established by ordinance or resolution. All city boards,
committees, and commissions (hereinafter collectively referred to in this
section as "board") that serve an on-going advisory or quasi-judicial function
shall be established by ordinance adopted by the mayor and council. All other
city boards that are intended to serve for a limited time for the purpose of
advising the mayor and council on a specific issue shall be established by a
resolution adopted by the mayor and council.
   (b)   Resolution contents. Except as provided in subsection (d), the
resolution referred to in subsection (a) shall contain the following
provisions:
   (1)   Sunset clause. Unless mandated by the resolution to have a longer
term, the board shall automatically terminate twenty-four (24) months after the
effective date of the resolution.
   (2)   Staff support. Unless otherwise specified and budgeted, support for
all boards shall be limited to complying with the requirements of the open
meeting law.
   (3)   Strategic plan. The mission, responsibilities, and functions of the
board shall be specified and consistent with the city's strategic plan.
   (4)   Outside financial support. The mayor and council shall approve any
application for financial support outside of the city, and the county for joint
city-Pima County boards, before the board may apply for the same. Any such
financial support shall include funds for administrative assistance.
   (c)   Annual report. Each board shall file an annual report with the city
clerk by March 1st of each year summarizing the board's previous year's
activities.
   (d)   Exceptions. The mayor and council may exempt a board from any of the
provisions of subsections (b) or (c) above by specifically designating the
provision to be exempted in the ordinance or resolution creating the board and
specifying the alternative, if any, to the provision.
(Ord. No. 9943, § 1, 3-22-04; Ord. No. 10810, § 1, 6-22-10)
   Editor's note – It should be noted that § 2 of Ord. No. 9943 states that the
provisions of §
10A-139 shall not apply to boards, committees, or commissions existing on the
effective date of this ordinance (March 22, 2004).
Sec. 10A-140.   Quorum requirements for boards, committees, and commissions.
   (a)   The following boards, committees, and commissions (BCCs) are
designated as "Category 1," for which a majority of the members currently
appointed and serving shall constitute a quorum.
   ·   2017 Public Safety Tax Oversight Commission (PSTOC)
   ·   2018 Parks + Connections Bond Oversight Commission (PCBOC)
   ·   Citizen's Commission on Public Service and Compensation (CCPSC)
   ·   Commission on Climate, Energy, and Sustainability (CCES)
   ·   Commission on Disability Issues (CODI)
   ·   Commission on Equitable Housing and Development (CEHD)
   ·   Commission on Food Security, Heritage, and Economy (CFSHE)
   ·   Complete Streets Coordinating Council (CSCC)
   ·   Convention Center Commission, Tucson (TCCC)
   ·   Economic and Workforce Development Selection Committee (EWDSC)
   ·   Environmental Services Advisory Committee (ESAC)
   ·   Grant Road Corridor Planning Task Force (GRCPTF)
   ·   Greens Committee, Tucson (TGC)
   ·   Human Relations Commission (HRC)
   ·   Independent Audit and Performance Commission (IAPC)
   ·   Independent Oversight and Accountability Commission (IOAC)
   ·   Landscape Advisory Committee (LAC)
   ·   Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, and Queer Issues, Tucson Commission
on (LGBTQ+)
   ·   Magistrates Merit Selection Commission, City (CMMSC)
   ·   Park Tucson Commission (PTC)
   ·   Parks and Recreation Commission, Tucson (TPRC)
   ·   Pedestrian Advisory Committee (PAC)
   ·   Police Advisory Review Board, Community (CPARB)
   ·   Redistricting Advisory Committee (RAC)
   ·   Small, Minority, and Women-Owned Business Commission (SMWBC)
   ·   Transit Task Force (TTF)
   ·   Veterans' Affairs Committee (VAC)
   ·   Water Advisory Committee, Citizens' (CWAC)
   (b)   The following BCCs are designated "Category 2," for which a majority
of the authorized membership shall constitute a quorum.
   (i)   BCCs created by state statute
   ·   Industrial Development Authority (IDA) (A.R.S. § 35-701 et seq.)
   ·   Fire Public Safety Personnel Retirement System Board, Tucson (TFPSPRSB)
(A.R.S. § 38-847)
   ·   Police Public Safety Personnel Retirement System Board, Tucson
(TPPSPRSB) (A.R.S. § 38-847)
   (ii)   Joint City/County BCCs
   ·   Art and Community Design Committee, Public (PACDC)
   ·   Bicycle Advisory Committee, Tucson-Pima County (TPCBAC)
   ·   Consolidated Code Committee, Tucson-Pima County Joint (TPCJCC)
   ·   Fire Code Review Committee (FCRC)
   ·   Historical Commission, Tucson-Pima County (TPCHC)
   ·   Outdoor Lighting Code Committee (OLCC)
   ·   Metropolitan Education Commission (MEC)
   ·   Women's Commission, Pima County/Tucson (PCTWC)
   (iii)   Historic Zone Advisory Boards (BCCs authorized by the UDC/State
Historic Preservation Provisions)
   ·   Armory Park Historic Zone Advisory Board (APHZAB)
   ·   Barrio Historico Historic Zone Advisory Board (BHHZAB)
   ·   El Presidio Historic Zone Advisory Board (EPHZAB)
   ·   Fort Lowell Historic Zone Advisory Board (FLHZAB)
   ·   West University Historic Zone Advisory Board (WUHZAB)
   (iv)   Quasi-Judicial BCCs
   ·   Board of Adjustment (BAJ)
   ·   Civil Service Commission (CSC)
   ·   Design Review Board (DRB)
   ·   Planning Commission (PC)
   ·   Water Service Area Review Board (WSARB) (all voting members also city
employees)
   (v)   City Finance-related BCCs / CFO or BSD Director Voting Member
   ·   PARS 115 Trust Board (115 TRUST)
   ·   Self-Insured Health Benefits Trust (SHBT)
   ·   Self-Insured Risk Trust Fund (TRUST)
   (vi)   City Employee Financial and Retirement-related BCCs
   ·   Deferred Compensation Plan Management Board, City of Tucson (CEDCMB)
   ·   Fire Public Safety Personnel Retirement System Board, Tucson (TFPSPRSB)
(see also Category 2(a))
   ·   Police Public Safety Personnel Retirement System Board, Tucson
(TPPSPRSB) (see also Category 2(a))
   ·   Tucson Supplemental Retirement System Board of Trustees (TSRS)
   (c)   The designation of any BCCs created subsequent to the enactment of
this section as either "Category 1" or "Category 2" shall, to the extent
practicable, occur on the basis of the following criteria:
   (i)   Category 1:
   (1)   are created pursuant to, and exclusively subject to, the mayor and
council's authority granted by Tucson Charter
Chapter XXIV, Section 1; and
   (2)   consistent with (1), have members appointed, and are administered,
solely by the city, with no members or administrative support provided by Pima
County or any other non-city governmental entity; and
   (3)   serve a purely advisory function, but provide important input to the
mayor and council in their areas of responsibility, such that more flexible
quorum requirements will assist their fulfilling that function; and
   (4)   have a voting membership consisting exclusively or largely of
appointed citizens serving voluntarily, with city employees serving only as
nonvoting, ex officio members who cannot be counted in achieving quorum.
   (ii)   Category 2:
   (1)   are created under authority of state law, rather than the Tucson
Charter, or else are created jointly with Pima County or other non-city
governmental entity; and/or
   (2)   are not purely advisory, but rather engage in some level of
independent decision making that may be subject to formal administrative or
judicial appeal, or have other potential legal or financial consequences for
the city; and/or
   (3)   make decisions that directly impact the finances of the city, its
employees, or both, creating potential legal or financial consequence for the
city; and/or
   (4)   often have a voting membership consisting in whole or in part of
managerial-level or other city employees who can be counted in achieving
quorum.
   (d)   Formal designation of a BCC as "Category 1" or "Category 2" may occur
either through amendment of this section to add that particular BCC to one of
the lists set forth in subsections (a) or (b) of this section, or by
specification of that BCC's quorum category in its creating ordinance or
resolution.
(Ord. No. 12024, § 1, 8-8-23)
Secs. 10A-141 – 10A-144. Reserved.
ARTICLE XIV.
PARK TUCSON COMMISSION*
__________
   *Editor's note – Ord. No. 10418, § 1, adopted June 12, 2007, amended Art.
XIV in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. XIV, §§ 10A-145--
10A-151, pertained to Transportation Enterprise Area Management (TEAM)
Oversight Commission, and derived from Ord. No. 8904, § 1, adopted August 4,
1997; Ord. No. 9053, §§ 1, 2, adopted May 4, 1998; Ord. No. 9190, § 1, adopted
Jan. 11, 1999.
__________
Sec. 10A-145. Declaration of policy.
   (a)   It is the policy of the city to enhance the quality of life and
stimulate economic development within the area defined by the City Center
Strategic Vision Plan by creating a partnership between the city and the
community that efficiently and creatively utilizes parking resources to improve
the overall accessibility and environment of the region. Park Tucson will be
responsible for focusing, coordinating, and supporting the city’s role in
parking issues.
   (b)   The primary funding source for this program is parking revenues.
Therefore, the city will establish, upon adoption of this article, a “Park
Tucson reserve of fund” account within the general fund to enable monies
generated by Park Tucson to be carried forward from year to year to be
reinvested into parking and other related public improvement projects within
the city center as approved by the mayor and council.
   (c)   Although the primary focus of Park Tucson will be within the city
center, mayor and council may direct Park Tucson to implement and manage self-
supporting parking programs in other areas of the city should the need arise.
The city manager or the manager's designee may enter into agreements with
private property owners to operate and manage parking lots and parking
structures, so long as Park Tucson covers its anticipated costs out of
anticipated revenues from the agreements.
(Ord. No. 10418, § 1, 6-12-07; Ord. No. 10918, § 1, 8-9-11; Ord. No. 11400, §
1, 9-20-16)
Sec. 10A-146. Park Tucson commission created.
There is hereby created an entity to be called the Park Tucson Commission.
(Ord. No. 10418, § 1, 6-12-07; Ord. No. 11400, § 1, 9-20-16)
Sec. 10A-147. Membership composition; appointment; terms.
   (a)   Appointment. The Park Tucson Commission shall be composed of fifteen
(15) members who shall serve without compensation as follows:
   (1)   The city manager will make two (2) appointments.
   (2)   Councilmembers from Wards I, II, III, IV, V, and VI will each appoint
one (1) neighborhood representative.
   (3)   The following organizations will each make one (1) appointment:
      a.   Fourth Avenue Merchants Association (FAMA).
      b.   University of Arizona.
      c.   Downtown Tucson Partnership.
      d.   Campus Community Relations Commission (CCRC).
      e.   Marshall Foundation/Main Gate Square.
      f.   Visit Tucson.
      g.   Tucson Metro Chamber.
   (b)   Terms. The commissioners who are first appointed shall be designated
to serve for staggered terms, so that the terms of three (3) commissioners
shall expire after one (1) year; the terms of three (3) commissioners shall
expire after two (2) years; the terms of four (4) commissioners shall expire
after three (3) years; and the terms of five (5) commissioners shall expire
after four (4) years. Each commissioner’s initial term will be determined by
drawing lots at the commission’s first meeting. All appointments thereafter
shall be for four-year terms, except that council-members’ neighborhood
representative appointments shall not serve beyond the term of the
councilmember making such appointment.
(Ord. No. 10418, § 1, 6-12-07; Ord. No. 10918, § 1, 8-9-11; Ord. No. 11161, §
1, 4-23-14; Ord. No. 11400, § 1, 9-20-16; Ord. No. 11725, § 1, 2-4-20)
Sec. 10A-148. Functions and purposes.
   The functions, purposes, powers, and duties of the Park Tucson commission
are to:
   (a)   Advise the Park Tucson administrator on matters related to the
integration of on-street and off-street parking with pedestrian, bicycle, and
transit programs, special events, and capital improvement district projects
within the city;
   (b)   Assist the Park Tucson administrator in developing parking enhancement
projects for the city;
   (c)   Review on an ongoing basis existing city and neighborhood parking
programs and signage programs, pedestrian, bicycle, and transit programs and
make recommendations to Park Tucson administrator for future programs and/or
revisions to existing programs;
   (d)   Monitor the progress of installation, construction, operation,
replacement, maintenance, repair, and improvement of the property and
improvements used for parking in the city;
   (e)   Annually review and recommend the proposed annual budget for the Park
Tucson program;
   (f)   Recommend revisions to the schedule of user charges for the use of
parking facilities provided or furnished by the city, including the placement,
times, and rates for on-street, metered parking as well as recommending changes
in penalties, interest, collection costs, and other charges for delinquencies
in payment of such charges to the Park Tucson administrator;
   (g)   Consult with the mayor and council when requested on specific parking
issues which may develop in the future;
   (h)   Study the city's specialized parking permit programs and recommend
expansion, modification, and/or other changes to the Park Tucson administrator;
   (i)   Assist the city in coordinating the efforts of merchants and property
owners in promoting common plans of action and facilitation of parking, urban
design, communications and quality of life improvements in downtown Tucson.
However, the commission shall not engage in any anti-competitive practice or
discourage any person from locating any legal business in any particular place;
   (j)   Work with other city and county commissions on issues of mutual
interest and concern relating to transportation and parking enhancement.
   (k)   Recommend such action as it deems necessary or desirable to accomplish
the above functions.
(Ord. No. 10418, § 1, 6-12-07; Ord. No. 10918, § 1, 8-9-11; Ord. No. 11400, §
1, 9-20-16)
Sec. 10A-149. Commission organization.
   (a)   The commission shall select a chair and a vice-chair from among its
members, who shall serve for one-year terms. The vice-chair shall act as chair
in the absence or disability of the chair, or in the event of a vacancy in that
office.
   (b)   The commission shall adopt rules and bylaws for its operations that
are consistent with this chapter and other legal authority, and shall meet at
such times and places as determined by the commission.
   (c)   The bylaws and all minutes of commission meetings shall be filed with
the city clerk.
(Ord. No. 10418, § 1, 6-12-07)
Sec. 10A-150. Commission reports.
   The commission shall submit such reports and recommendations as it deems
appropriate or as requested by the Park Tucson administrator and/or mayor and
council.
(Ord. No. 10418, § 1, 6-12-07; Ord. No. 10918, § 1, 8-9-11; Ord. No. 11400, §
1, 9-20-16)
Sec. 10A-151. Limitation of powers.
Neither the commission nor any member thereof may incur city expenses or
obligate the city in any way without prior authorization from the mayor and
council.
(Ord. No. 10418, § 1, 6-12-07; Ord. No. 11400, § 1, 9-20-16)
Secs. 10A-152--10A-159. Reserved.
ARTICLE XV.
STORMWATER ADVISORY COMMITTEE (SAC) AND STORMWATER TECHNICAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE
(STAC)*
__________
   *Editor's note – Ord. No. 11016, § 2, adopted September 5, 2012, repealed
former §§ 10A-160 – 10A-164, relating to the stormwater advisory committee and
the stormwater technical advisory committee and deriving from Ord. No. 9582, §
1, adopted August 6, 2001.
__________
Sec. 10A-160. Creation.
   (a)   The director of the planning and development service department (PDSD
director) shall administratively create a stormwater advisory committee (SAC),
a stormwater technical advisory committee (STAC), or both, in any specific
instance where review, conclusions, recommendations, or any other advice or
action by SAC or STAC is authorized or required by any provision of the Tucson
Code, including, but not limited to,
chapter 23 (Land Use Code), sections 2.8.6.2.D, 2.8.6.4.B, or 2.8.6.8.A;
section
23A-62(4); section
26-12; or section
29-19; or by any regulations or policies promulgated under authority of the
Tucson Code.
   (b)   The provisions of Tucson Code chapter 10A, article XIII (sections
10A-133 through
10A-139 inclusive) shall not apply to any SAC or STAC administratively created
by the PDSD director under this section. In creating any SAC or STAC under this
section, however, the PDSD director shall, as necessary and to the extent
practicable in the particular instance, include members with one or more of the
following areas of expertise or interest:
   (1)   Registered professional civil engineers, licensed by the State of
Arizona during the term of their membership;
   (2)   Surface water hydrologists or water quality specialists;
   (3)   Professional environmental consultants with a degree or expertise in
biology or ecology;
   (4)   Professional land use planners;
   (5)   Water resources scientists, affiliated with either a local university
program or a state or federal government agency which regulates water
resources; and
   (6)   Advocates for the preservation of washes.
   (c)   The director of the planning and development services department shall
cooperate and regularly communicate with the director of the transportation
department on matters related to this committee.
(Ord. No. 11016, § 3, 9-5-12)
Secs. 10A-161--10A-169. Reserved.
ARTICLE XVI.
RESERVED*
__________
   *Editor's note – Article XVI, §§ 10A-170 – 10A-174, relating to the
Technology Policy Advisory Committee, derived from Ord. No. 10176, § 1, adopted
July 6, 2005, as amended by Ord. No. 10315, § 1, adopted September 6, 2006, was
repealed by Ord. No. 10843, § 2, adopted October 19, 2010.
__________
Secs. 10A-170--10A-179. Reserved.
ARTICLE XVII.
LANDSCAPE ADVISORY COMMITTEE
Sec. 10A-180. Creation.
The landscape advisory committee (hereafter referred to as the "committee") is
created. The committee shall consist of eleven (11) members appointed as
provided in this article and subject to the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 10180, § 1, 7-6-05)
Sec. 10A-181. Membership composition, appointment, officers, and terms.
   (a)   Composition. The committee shall be composed of eleven (11) members.
Of the eleven (11) members, one (1) member shall be chosen to represent each of
the following areas or occupations: business community, ecologist, educator,
landscape contractor, landscape architect, horticulturist/arborist, urban
planner/architect, water conservation specialist, and neighborhood
representatives (two (2) members). The remaining member shall be chosen from
representatives from related non-profit corporations, other jurisdictions or
agencies to fulfill the need to broaden representation and to ensure better
coordination. Members must reside or work within Pima County and shall serve
without compensation.
   (b)   Nomination and appointment. The mayor and council shall appoint the
members of the committee based on recommendations from the city manager.
   (c)   Terms. Each member shall serve a term of four (4) years and may be
reappointed by the mayor and council for one (1) additional four-year term. An
appointment to fill a vacancy resulting other than from expiration of a term
shall be for the unexpired term only.
   (d)   Officers. The committee shall elect from its membership a chairperson,
vice- chairperson, and secretary who shall serve for terms of one (1) year. The
vice-chairperson shall act as chairperson in the absence or disability of the
chairperson or in the event a vacancy occurs in that office.
   (e)   Bylaws. The committee shall adopt bylaws for its operations that are
consistent with this article and other legal authority. The bylaws and minutes
of committee meetings shall be filed with the city clerk.
(Ord. No. 10180, § 1, 7-6-05)
Sec. 10A-182. Purpose of the committee.
The purpose of the committee shall be to advise the mayor and council on issues
pertaining to the policies, planning, design, management, and promotion of
public education of the city's landscape and vegetation resources.
(Ord. No. 10180, § 1, 7-6-05)
Sec. 10A-183. Limitation of powers.
Neither the committee nor any member thereof shall incur expenses or obligate
the city in any way without prior authorization from the mayor and council.
(Ord. No. 10180, § 1, 7-6-05)
Secs. 10A-184--10A-189. Reserved.
ARTICLE XVIII.
SMALL, MINORITY AND WOMEN-OWNED BUSINESS COMMISSION*
__________
*Editor's note: Former Article XVIII, §§ 10A-190 – 10A-192, relating to the
Small Business Commission, derived from Ord. No. 10207, § 2, adopted October
18, 2005, was repealed by Ord. No. 10765, § 2, adopted May 11, 2010.
__________
Sec. 10A-190. Creation.
There is established the small, minority and women-owned business commission
("commission"). The commission shall consist of fourteen (14) members. All
members of the commission shall serve without compensation.
(Ord. No. 10785, § 5, 5-11-10)
Sec. 10A-191. Membership composition, appointment, officers, and terms.
   (a)   Appointment, qualifications, and term.
   (1)   Appointment. The mayor shall appoint two (2) at-large members. Each
member of the council shall appoint two (2) members: one (1) at-large and one
(1) by ward. The commission members should represent different segments of the
business community, with broad and culturally diverse representation essential.
Consideration should be given to appointing members who are certified small,
minority, or women-owned    business enterprise firms.
   (2)   Qualifications.
   (A)   At-large members must be: (i) business owners or managers from
companies located within the City of Tucson having no more than one hundred
(100) full-time employees; or (ii) representatives from an organization located
within the City of Tucson that represents the interests of small business
(e.g., chambers of commerce, trade associations, economic and business
development organizations).
   (B)   Members appointed by ward must be business owners or managers from
companies with no more than one hundred (100) full-time employees, where either
(i) the company is located within the geographical boundaries of the ward, or
(ii) the member resides in the ward.
   (3)   Terms. The terms of the members appointed by the mayor and council as
a whole shall be coterminous with the elected official making the appointment,
or until their successors are appointed. Members of the commission shall be
eligible for reappointment; but in no event may an individual serve more than a
total of eight (8) continuous years.
   (4)   Vacancies. Vacancies on the commission shall be filled by appointment
in the same manner in which the members are initially appointed. Appointments
to a vacant position shall be for the unexpired portion of the term.
   (5)   Removal. A member of the commission who misses four (4) consecutive
meetings for any reason or who fails to attend for any reason at least forty
(40) percent of the meetings called in a calendar year shall be automatically
removed from the commission.
   (6)   Quorum. A majority of the fourteen (14) authorized members of the
commission shall constitute a quorum.
   (7)   Ex officio member. A member of the Pima County Small Business
Commission shall be an ex officio member of the commission.
   (b)   Commission officers and rules. The commission shall elect its own
officers and may adopt rules and regulations in relation to its functioning
consistent with this chapter and other legal authority and file them with the
city clerk. The commission shall meet at such times and places as it
determines.
   (c)   Subcommittees. The commission may form subcommittees as may be
necessary to carry out its duties and functions.
   (d)   Purposes of the commission. The purposes of the commission shall be
to:
   (1)   Monitor the effectiveness of the city's small, minority and women-
owned business enterprise program in increasing small, minority and women-owned
business participation in city contracts.
   (2)   Monitor local practices and policies, which may have discriminatory
impact on minority and women-owned businesses in the contracting and
procurement of construction, goods, general services, and professional services
with the City of Tucson.
   (3)   Facilitate communication between the city and small businesses.
   (4)   Evaluate city policies and regulations for their impact on small
businesses and to make recommendations to streamline and/or modify such
regulations as deemed necessary.
   (5)   Sponsor and conduct educational forums, hearings, and workshops on
topics of concern to small, minority and women-owned businesses.
   (6)   Recommend to mayor and council for consideration alternative measures
or legislation to encourage small, minority and women-owned business
participation.
   (7)   Request of any city department information and or other assistance for
the purpose of furthering the objectives of the commission.
   (8)   At the discretion and express direction of the mayor and council,
assume and undertake such other tasks or duties as would facilitate the goals
and objectives of the commission.
(Ord. No. 10785, § 5, 5-11-10)
Sec. 10A-192. Reports.
The commission shall report to the mayor and council annually, and shall submit
such additional reports as it deems necessary or as requested by the mayor and
council. The board's annual report shall be filed with the city clerk's office
on or before March 1st.
(Ord. No. 10785, § 5, 5-11-10)
Sec. 10A-193. Limitation of powers.
Neither the commission nor any member thereof may incur city expenses or
obligate the city in any way without prior authorization of mayor and council.
(Ord. No. 10785, § 5, 5-11-10)
Sec. 10A-194. Staff support.
The city manager's office, department of finance and office of equal
opportunity programs shall provide staff to support the functions of the
commission and to maintain minutes of its meetings. Minutes of meetings are to
be filed with the city clerk.
(Ord. No. 10785, § 5, 5-11-10)
Secs. 10A-195--10A-199. Reserved.
ARTICLE XIX.
RESERVED*
   *Editor’s note – Former Article XIX, §§ 10A-200 – 10A-204, relating to the
Resource Planning Advisory Committee, derived from Ord. No. 10310, § 1, adopted
August 8, 2006, was repealed by Ord. No. 11509, § 2, adopted December 19, 2017.
Secs. 10A-200 – 10A-209. Reserved.
ARTICLE XX.
COMMISSION ON CLIMATE, ENERGY, AND SUSTAINABILITY (CCES)**
   **Editor’s note – Ord. No. 11496, § 3, adopted Oct. 24, 2017, repealed Art.
XX, §§ 10A-210 – 10A-219, which pertained to the Climate Change Committee and
derived from Ord. No. 10591, § 1, adopted Oct. 7, 2008. Ord. No. 11496, § 4,
added a new Art. XX, Commission on Climate, Energy, and Sustainability (CCES).
Sec. 10A-210. Creation.
Pursuant to Tucson Charter chapter XXIV, § 1 and Tucson Code §
10A-139(a), the commission on climate, energy, and sustainability ("CCES") is
created as an on-going mayor and council advisory commission.
(Ord. No. 11496, § 4, 10-24-17)
Sec. 10A-211. Membership composition; nomination and appointment;
qualifications; terms of office and reappointment; removal; concurrent service
not permitted; applicability of Tucson Code chapter 10A, article XIII.
   (a)   Composition. The CCES shall consist of eleven (11) voting members, who
shall serve without compensation.
   (b)   Nomination and appointment.
   (1)   One (1) member by the mayor and each council member.
   (2)   Two (2) members appointed by the city manager.
   (3)   Two (2) members appointed by the city manager representing the
following categories:
   (A)   One (1) member from a national or local environmental organization
with a focus on combating or adapting to climate change.
   (B)   One (1) member representing utilities.
   (c)   Qualifications.
   (1)   Members must live within the City of Tucson limits.
   (2)   The commission's membership should represent the geographic,
demographic, and economic diversity of the community.
   (3)   Desired qualifications include, but are not limited to knowledge,
expertise, and/or representation of the following fields and interests, as they
relate to the commission's functions and purposes:
   (a)    Business sector
   (b)   Built environment
   (c)   Climate/environmental justice
   (d)   Energy/management (e.g. renewables, efficiency, storage)
   (e)   Food/agriculture
   (f)   Land use
   (g)   Local economy
   (h)   Smart Cities
   (i)   Sustainability practice, planning and/or policy
   (j)   Transportation (e.g. transit, electrification of transportation)
   (k)   Utilities
   (l)   Water management
   (d)   Terms of office and reappointment. Members appointed by the mayor and
each council member shall serve terms coterminous with the appointing official.
Members appointed by the city manager shall serve four (4) year terms from the
time of appointment, in accordance with Tucson City Code, chapter 10A. Members
may serve no more than two (2) consecutive four (4) year terms (eight (8)
years).
   (e)   Removal. If a member fails to attend three (3) consecutive regularly
scheduled meetings of the commission, that member's appointment is terminated.
   (f)   Concurrent service not permitted. Consistent with Tucson Code §
10A-134(c), members of the CCES may not serve concurrently on other city
boards, committees, or commissions.
   (g)   Applicability of Tucson Code chapter 10A, article XIII. Except as
otherwise specifically provided in this article, all provisions of Tucson Code
chapter 10A, article XIII apply to the CCES.
(Ord. No. 11496, § 4, 10-24-17)
Sec. 10A-212. Functions, purposes, powers, and duties.
The CCES shall advise the mayor and council on:
   (a)   The most effective and efficient methods of meeting the climate/
energy/sustainability goals outlined in the city's general plan.
   (b)   Methods for improving the city's climate and environmental impact and
adaptability in its operations; and
   (c)   Achieving the incremental as well as transformative systemic outcomes
necessary to respond to climate, energy, and broader sustainability challenges
in our region.
(Ord. No. 11496, § 4, 10-24-17)
Sec. 10A-213. Staff support.
The environmental and general services department (EGSD) or its successor shall
provide staff support to the CCES.
(Ord. No. 11496, § 4, 10-24-17)
Sec. 10A-214. Commission organization and rules.
   (a)   Chairperson. The CCES shall select from among its members a chair who
shall serve a two (2) year term. The chair shall have responsibility for
scheduling, presiding at, and directing the conduct of business at all CCES
meetings.
   (b)   By-laws. The CCES may adopt bylaws for its operations that are
consistent with this Tucson Charter, Tucson Code, and other legal authority.
Consistent with Tucson Code §
10A-136, any bylaws adopted by the CCES shall be filed with the city clerk.
   (c)   Meetings. The CCES shall choose its own meeting dates, times, and
places. Legal action reports and minutes of committee meetings shall be filed
with the city clerk.
   (d)   Quorum. A quorum shall consist of six (6) voting members.
   (e)   Annual Report. The CCES shall submit an annual report to mayor and
council each year.
(Ord. No. 11496, § 4, 10-24-17)
Sec. 10A-215. Limitation of powers.
Neither the CCES nor any of its members may incur governmental expenses, or
obligate the city in any way, without prior authorization of the mayor and
council.
(Ord. No. 11496, § 4, 10-24-17)
Secs. 10A-216--10A-219. Reserved.
ARTICLE XXI.
RESERVED*
__________
   *Editor's note – Ord. No. 10955, § 2, adopted Jan. 10, 2012, repealed Art.
XXI, §§ 10A-220 – 10A-225, which pertained to the Tucson housing trust fund
citizens advisory committee and derived from Ord. No. 10337, § 1, adopted Nov.
14, 2006.
__________
Secs. 10A-220--10A-229. Reserved.
ARTICLE XXII.
RESERVED*
__________
   *Editor's note – Ord. No. 10591, § 3, adopted Oct. 7, 2008, repealed Art.
XXII, §§ 10A-230--10A-234, which pertained to environmental accords/green
cities declaration and sustainability committee and derived from Ord. No.
10367, § 1, adopted Dec. 19, 2006.
__________
Secs. 10A-230--10A-239. Reserved.
ARTICLE XXIII.
COMPLETE STREETS COORDINATING COUNCIL
Sec. 10A-240. Creation.
   The complete streets coordinating council ("CSCC") is established as a mayor
and council advisory committee.
(Ord. No. 11675, § 3, 8-6-19)
Sec. 10A-241. Declaration of purpose.
   The City of Tucson views all transportation improvements as opportunities to
foster a vibrant, healthy, equitable, interconnected, accessible,
environmentally sustainable, and more livable city where everyone can move
about safely, comfortably, and with dignity; and
   The City of Tucson's complete streets policy, adopted on February 5, 2019 as
Ordinance No. 11621, shall guide the development of a safe, connected, and
equitable transportation network that promotes greater health and mobility for
people of all ages and abilities including, but not limited to, people walking,
biking, using transit, driving, or using wheelchairs or other mobility devices;
and
   As adopted, the complete streets policy requires that the city establish a
complete streets coordinating council (CSCC) to oversee its implementation as a
routine and integral part of the city's everyday practices and that it makes
every transportation project an opportunity to enhance mobility for people
using all modes of transportation.
   As a critical accountability measure, the CSCC shall work in collaboration
with city staff and a complete streets technical review committee (TRC). The
CSCC shall be modeled after the complete streets task force that was convened
in 2018 to collaboratively develop this complete streets policy and shall
consist of diverse stakeholders.
   The CSCC and the TRC are new groups to be established with the express
purpose of working together, with staff and with the community, in order to
integrate the complete streets policy and approach into routine day-to-day
operations within the City of Tucson. It is desired, because of the work they
will be doing, that they will be "change agents," working responsibly in
innovative, creative, coordinated, inclusive, and effective ways and using best
practices in collaborative decision-making to accomplish their mission. The
intent is that, by creating a new structure, the CSCC members will be more
engaged and invested, and become ambassadors for complete streets; and
   The CSCC, TRC, city staff, and community members are intrinsic to the
success of the complete streets work and are not intended to operate in
isolation. City staff is expected to work closely and collaboratively with the
TRC and the CSCC to help navigate policy implementation. The city will engage
the CSCC and ensure that their insight, knowledge, and expertise is utilized.
(Ord. No. 11675, § 3, 8-6-19)
Sec. 10A-242. Membership composition; nomination and appointment;
qualifications; terms of office and reappointment; replacement and removal;
concurrent service; applicability of Tucson Code Chapter 10A, Article XIII.
   (a)   Composition.  The CSCC shall be composed of twenty (20) members,
seventeen (17) of whom shall be voting members and three (3) of whom shall be
non-voting staff representatives. Members shall serve without compensation. All
voting members must be qualified, as described under subsection (c) below, to
represent one or more of the following complete streets policy guiding
principle areas:
      (A)   Safety
      (B)   Accessibility for all abilities
      (C)   Equity, diversity, and inclusivity
      (D)   Land use and sense of place
      (E)   Environment
      (F)   Health and recreation
      (G)   Economic vitality
      (H)   Transportation and mobility
   (b)   Nomination and appointment.
      (1)   All potential members shall submit an application for consideration
for nomi nation or appointment.
      (2)    One (1) member shall be appointed by mayor and each council member
(total of seven (7)).
      (3)    One (1) member shall be appointed by the city manager.
      (4)   Five (5) members shall be appointed as follows:
         a.   One (1) member from the pedestrian advisory committee (PAC), by
selection of that committee;
         b.   One (1) member from the transit task force (TTF), by selection of
that committee;
         c.   One (1) member from the Tucson-Pima County bicycle advisory
committee (TPCBAC) representing the City of Tucson, by selection of that
committee;
         d.   One (1) member from the park Tucson commission (PTC), by
selection of that committee, and
         e.   One (1) member from the commission on disability issues (CODI),
by selection of that committee.
      (5)    Four (4) members shall be appointed based on the qualifications
below by the transportation director. These members shall be selected last to
ensure that the coordinating council has representation in each of the guiding
principles and reflects the broader Tucson community.
      (6)   One (1) member shall be a designated staff representative from each
of the following agencies:
         a.   Arizona department of transportation (ADOT)
         b.   Pima association of governments (PAG)
         c.   Pima County department of transportation (PCDOT)
   The three (3) staff representatives shall be non-voting members of the CSCC.
   (c)   Qualifications.
      (1)    The CSCC's membership should represent the geographic,
demographic, and economic diversity of the community.
      (2)   Desired qualifications include relevant background, knowledge, and/
or expertise in one or more of the following guiding principles and issue areas
that relate to the CSCC's functions and purposes. Every guiding principle shall
be represented by one or more member(s) of the CSCC based on the information
provided in the application:
         (A)   Safety: traffic safety, crime, personal security, traffic
enforcement, crash data, emergency response.
         (B)   Accessibility for all abilities: persons with disabilities,
elderly, youth, families with young children, limited English proficiency
populations, transit-dependent populations, alternative mode users.
         (C)   Equity, diversity, and inclusivity: environmental justice, low-
income individuals and households, communities of color, LGBTQ communities,
refugees, immigrants, non- English speakers, formerly incarcerated people,
residents without a home.
         (D)   Land use and sense of place: sense of place, planning,
neighborhood character, mixed-use development, infill development, parking,
public art, gentrification/displacement, place making/placekeeping.
         (E)   Environment: natural environment, built environment,
sustainability, green infrastructure, climate change, air quality.
         (F)   Health and recreation: health care providers, public health,
health equity, mental health, recreation, access to medical care, injury
prevention.
         (G)   Economic vitality: business, local business, real estate,
development, homebuilding, tourism, business districts, economic development.
         (H)   Transportation and mobility: planning, engineering,
construction, walking, biking, transit, Americans with Disabilities Act,
electric vehicles, regional commuting, freight, transportation service
providers.
      (3)   All members, except the non-voting members appointed by PAG, ADOT,
and PCDOT, shall reside within the City of Tucson.
   (d)   Terms of office and reappointment. CSCC members appointed by the mayor
and each council member shall serve four (4) year terms. In the event that the
appointing official leaves office prior to the conclusion of the appointee's
four (4) year term, the CSCC member's term of service shall expire coincident
with that of the appointing official. Members appointed by the transportation
director and city manager shall serve four (4) year terms from the time of
appointment, in accordance with Tucson City Code, Chapter 10A. Members may
serve no more than two (2) consecutive four (4) year terms (eight (8) years in
total).
   (e)   Replacement and removal. All replacement appointments shall be made by
the appointing authority named under subsection (b) using an application
process with consideration of the guiding principles. The appointing authority
may discuss replacement appointments with the CSCC.
   If a member fails to attend three (3) consecutive regularly scheduled
meetings of the CSCC or fails to attend at least forty (40) percent of
regularly scheduled meetings within a calendar year, that member's appointment
shall be terminated. In the case of any replacement or removal of a member, the
replacement should, to the maximum extent practicable, represent a similar
perspective, knowledge, and/or expertise with regard to the policy's guiding
principles as the replaced or removed member, and every effort should be made
to ensure continued representation on the CSCC of Tucson's diverse populations.
   Should a nominee of the boards and commissions identified under item 4 of
the nomination and appointment section need to be replaced, and that committee
has ceased to exist, a replacement shall be appointed by the transportation
director in consultation with the city manager. The appointee shall have
expertise in the same transportation focus area as the replaced member.
   (f)   Concurrent service. Consistent with Tucson Code § 10A-134(c), members
of the CSCC can serve concurrently on up to two (2) city boards, committees, or
commissions.
   (g)   Applicability of chapter 10A, article XIII. Except as otherwise
specifically provided in this article, all provisions of Tucson Code chapter
10A, article XIII shall apply to the CSCC.
(Ord. No. 11675, § 3, 8-6-19; Ord. No. 11753, § 1, 5-19-20; Ord. No. 11875, §
1, 9-14-21)
Sec. 10A-243. Functions, purposes, powers, and duties.
   As a mayor and council advisory committee, the complete streets coordinating
council (CSCC) is responsible for actively overseeing and bringing
accountability to the complete streets policy implementation process. The CSCC,
the TRC, and an integrated team of city staff representing multiple departments
shall work collaboratively and inclusively together in coordinated ways to
implement the complete streets policy.
   (1)   The CSCC shall bring diverse community perspectives to inform the
implementation of the complete streets policy about which they shall, with
staff, advise and make recommendations for decisions to be made by the mayor
and council, the transportation director, and the technical review committee
on, but not limited to, the following:
      a.    Development of a complete streets policy implementation plan, using
the draft implementation plan outline developed by the complete streets task
force, and carrying out the implementation tasks identified in the plan in
partnership with city staff and the technical review committee (TRC);
      b.   Prioritization of transportation improvement projects through the
development of a project prioritization tool as described in the complete
streets policy;
      c.    Allocation of transportation funding for complete streets
improvements;
      d.   Design of transportation projects to ensure consistency with the
policy and best practices in complete streets; and
      e.    Production and distribution of a biennial report documenting
progress on the complete streets policy implementation, in partnership with the
TRC and an integrated team of city staff representing multiple departments.
   (2)   The CSCC will represent the diverse populations of Tucson. CSCC
members will have an important role helping engage and educate the public on
complete streets topics, and advocating for complete streets projects.
      Community members are fundamental partners in the implementation of the
complete streets policy. Therefore, mayor and council, with support and
guidance from city staff and the CSCC, shall ensure representative, inclusive,
and meaningful community engagement, with a particular emphasis on communities
that have traditionally been underrepresented in city planning and decision-
making processes. This will necessitate specific strategies for overcoming
barriers to engagement associated with race, ethnicity, income, age,
disability, English language proficiency, vehicle access, and other factors
linked to historic disenfranchisement. "Non-traditional" and innovative public
engagement opportunities will be created to "go to the people" such as "pop-up"
engagement at public places, pop-up demonstrations of proposed street
redesigns, block parties, hiring community liaisons and/or contracting with
community organizations to facilitate outreach. Engagement strategies will be
further identified in a community engagement plan that will be co-developed by
staff, CSCC, and TRC.
   (3)   In addition to the functions and purposes described above, the CSCC
shall perform the following functions and serve the following purposes in the
event that the city's qualified voters approve the 2022 charter amendment/
Proposition 411 at the election called for May 17, 2022:
      a.   To develop and establish a Street Safety Improvements Plan for
safety improvements to be funded by the 20% allocation of revenues generated by
the 2022 charter amendment/Proposition 411. The Street Safety Improvements Plan
shall be based upon street safety priorities and will reflect the community
priorities documented and incorporated into Move Tucson, the city's
transportation master plan, as adopted and approved by the mayor and council on
December 7, 2021. Priority in the Street Safety Improvements Plan will be given
to those projects and improvements that enhance safety for all modes of travel,
with emphasis on safety for bicyclists and pedestrians. The Street Safety
Improvements Plan will allocate funding to four (4) major categories of
improvements as follows:
 
Category                           Funding Percentage Estimated Total Funding*
Sidewalk and Pedestrian            30%                $45M
Accessibility Improvements
Bicycle Network Enhancements       20%                $30M
Systemwide Safety Improvements     30%                $45M
Traffic Signal Technology Upgrades 20%                $30M
Total                              100%               $150M
*Funding totals are based on projected tax sales tax revenues
 
         Sidewalk and Pedestrian Accessibility Improvements (30%) - Sidewalks
and other pedestrian accessibility improvements to create safer and more
comfortable routes for walking, biking, and rolling.
         Bicycle Network Enhancements (20%) - Bicycle safety improvements that
retrofit existing streets to add buffered or protected bicycle lanes, upgrade
local streets to bicycle boulevards, and make other improvements to Tucson's
bicycle network.
         System-wide Safety Improvements (30%) - Projects to improve system-
wide safety for various modes of travel, including bicycle and pedestrian
crossing improvements such as High Intensity Activated Crosswalk (HAWK)
signals, street lighting, and neighborhood safety improvements. Approximately
10% of this funding category will be used to fund neighborhood safety
improvements and may include traffic circles, speed bumps, and other traffic
calming measures.
         Traffic Signal Technology Upgrades (20%) - Upgrade Tucson's traffic
signal technology along major corridors to support safe, efficient travel
across the city. Priority corridors will be identified based on an engineering
analysis and traffic safety data.
      b.   To monitor the progress of the Street Safety Improvements Plan and
its projects funded by the 2022 charter amendment/Proposition 411 relating to
street safety improvements, including but not limited to bicycle and pedestrian
safety improvements, sidewalks, traffic signal technology, and lighting.
      c.   To ensure that the purposes for which the 2022 charter amendment/
Proposition 411 (with respect street safety improvements) were approved are
carried out and that proceeds from the revenues dedicated for street safety
improvements under the 2022 charter amendment/Proposition 411 are separately
accounted for.
      d.   In any case where a change from the allocation described in the 2022
publicity pamphlet and in Ordinance No. 11904 may be needed due to unforeseen
circumstances or extraordinary considerations of the public interest and the
matter is referred to the CSCC by the mayor and council, to study the need for
such change and make a recommendation to the mayor and council to either
approve or reject the change.
(Ord. No. 11675, § 3, 8-6-19; Ord. No. 11914, § 3, 2-23-22)
Sec. 10A-244. Staff Support.
   The City of Tucson transportation department shall provide staff support to
the CSCC.
(Ord. No. 11675, § 3, 8-6-19)
Sec. 10A-245. Commission organization and rules.
   (a)   General principles. The structure of the coordinating council shall be
guided by the following principles:
   •   follow best practices in collaborative decision making;
   •   include representation from key stakeholder groups mentioned above;
   •   bring accountability to the implementation of this complete streets
policy
   •   empowers community decision making;
   •   be modeled after the complete streets task force in fostering
collaboration among stakeholders; and
   •   be facilitated by a neutral, professional facilitator.
   (b)   Subcommittees. The CSCC may form subcommittees.
   (c)   By-laws. It is recommended that, within six (6) months from the first
meeting, the CSCC adopt bylaws for its operations. These shall be consistent
with the Tucson Charter, Tucson Code, and other legal authority. Consistent
with Tucson Code §
10A-136, any bylaws adopted by the CSCC shall be filed with the city clerk.
Once adopted, the bylaws may be reviewed periodically to determine whether
revisions may be warranted.
   (d)   Chairperson. The CSCC may decide to have, or not to have, a
chairperson in accordance with their agreed upon bylaws.
   (e)   Meetings. The CSCC shall choose its own meeting dates, times, and
places. Legal action reports and decisions made during CSCC committee meetings
shall be filed with the city clerk.
   (f)   Quorum. A quorum shall consist of nine (9) voting members.
   (g)   Biennial report. The CSCC shall produce, in partnership with the
technical review committee (or its successor) a biennial report for public
distribution that provides at a minimum: progress on implementation of the
complete streets policy, performance-based data, exceptions approved, and
analysis of past recommendations or decisions.
(Ord. No. 11675, § 3, 8-6-19)
Sec. 10A-246. Limitation of powers.
   Neither the CSCC nor any of its members may incur governmental expenses, or
obligate the city in any way, without prior authorization of the mayor and
council.
(Ord. No. 11675, § 3, 8-6-19)
Sec. 10A-247. Sunset clause.
   Tucson Code §
10A-139(b)(1)'s presumptive term of twenty-four (24) months does not apply to
the CSCC. The CSCC shall automatically terminate December 1, 2032, unless at
that time there remain unexpended revenues from the 2022 charter amendment/
Proposition 411 relating to street safety improvements, in which case the CSCC
shall automatically terminate upon the expenditure of those revenues. The term
of the CSCC may be extended by separate ordinance of the mayor and council. If
extended, the mayor and council may review and revise, as appropriate, the
composition, nomination and appointment, and the function's purposes, powers,
and duties of the CSCC to ensure that the body continues to operate effectively
in overseeing implementation of the complete streets policy.
(Ord. No. 11675, § 3, 8-6-19; Ord. No. 11875, § 1, 9-14-21; Ord. No. 11914, §
3, 2-23-22)
ARTICLE XXIV. COMMISSION ON FOOD SECURITY, HERITAGE, AND ECONOMY (CFSHE)
Sec. 10A-250.   Creation.
   The Commission on Food Security, Heritage, and Economy (CFSHE) is
established.
(Ord. No. 11266, § 1, 5-5-15)
Sec. 10A-251.    Membership composition; qualifications; terms and
reappointment.
   (a)   Members. The CFSHE shall be composed of twelve (12) voting members,
who shall serve without compensation. Members shall be appointed by mayor and
council from the following nominations:
      Two (2) members nominated by Local First Arizona, at least one (1) of
which represents local restaurants or stores that purchase locally grown foods;
      Two (2) members nominated by the Community Food Bank of Southern Arizona;
      One (1) member nominated by the Pima County Food Alliance;
      One (1) member nominated by the Southwest Folklife Alliance/Tucson Meet
Yourself;
      One (1) member nominated by Native Seeds/SEARCH;
      One (1) member nominated by the Santa Cruz Valley Heritage Alliance;
      One (1) member nominated by the Arizona-Sonora Desert Museum;
      One (1) member nominated by the University of Arizona College of Public
Health;
      One (1) member nominated by the University of Arizona College of
Agriculture and Life Sciences; and
      One (1) member nominated by the Pima County Health Department.
   (b)   Qualifications. Members should be actively engaged in work or have
technical expertise in the areas of food access and security; local food
heritage; or local food production, distribution, or commercial purchasing/use.
Members must reside or work within the Tucson metropolitan area.
   (c)   Terms and reappointment. Members shall serve for a term of four (4)
years and may be re-appointed for up to one (1) additional term of four (4)
years, but in no event may any individual serve more than a total of eight (8)
continuous years.
(Ord. No. 11266, § 1, 5-5-15; Ord. No. 11649, § 1, 5-21-19)
Sec. 10A-252.   Functions and purposes.
   The CFSHE shall have the following functions and purposes, to the extent
that they are consistent with the city's strategic plan:
   (a)   Advising the mayor and council on matters relating to food security,
food heritage, and the food economy.
   (b)   Providing a common forum to the member organizations for discussion
and coordination of activities.
   (c)   Fostering cooperation and efficiency among the member organizations.
   (d)   Developing food access, food security, nutrition, and economic
development goals and targets; liaison with other U.S. and international
communities to identify best practices; recommending strategies to meet those
goals and targets; and identifying potential funding or other resources to
implement those strategies.
   (e)   Promoting ideas, practices, and programs to increase access to healthy
foods, increase demand and markets for locally-produced foods, improve local
food distribution, reduce food waste, expand composting and other uses of food
waste, expand food industry job opportunities, and expand food entrepreneur
support.
   (f)   Evaluating city policies and regulations for their impact on local
food production, food access and security, and nutrition, and making
recommendations to improve such policies and regulations.
   (g)   At the discretion and express direction of the mayor and council,
assuming and undertaking such other tasks or duties as would facilitate the
goals and objectives of the committee.
(Ord. No. 11266, § 1, 5-5-15)
Sec. 10A-253.   Committee organization and rules.
   (a)   Chairperson. The CFSHE shall select from among its members a chair who
shall serve a two (2) year term. The chair shall have responsibility for
scheduling, presiding at, and directing the conduct of business at all CFSHE
meetings.
   (b)   Bylaws. The CFSHE may adopt bylaws for its operations that are
consistent with the Tucson Charter, Tucson Code, and other legal authority, and
file them with the city clerk.
   (c)   Meetings. The CFSHE shall choose its own meeting dates, times, and
places.
(Ord. No. 11266, § 1, 5-5-15)
Sec. 10A-254.   Staff support; minutes.
   Staff support shall be provided by the mayor's office to support the
functions of the CFSHE, including maintaining minutes which shall be filed with
the city clerk.
(Ord. No. 11266, § 1, 5-5-15)
Sec. 10A-255.   Limitation of powers.
   Neither the CFSHE nor any of its members may incur governmental expenses
without prior authorization of the mayor and council, nor may the CFSHE or its
members obligate the city in any way.
(Ord. No. 11266, § 1, 5-5-15)
Chapter 10B
HOUSING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT*
__________
*   Editors Note: Ord. No. 10656, § 3, adopted April 21, 2009, effective July
1, 2009, amended ch. 10B in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch.
10B, §§ 10B-1--10B-4, pertained to community services, and derived from Ord.
No. 6732, § 2, adopted July 6, 1987; Ord. No. 10584, § 2, adopted Oct. 7, 2008.
   Cross References: Human relations, ch.
17.
__________
Sec.
10B-1.   Policy.
Sec.
10B-2.   Department established.
Sec.
10B-3.   Departmental divisions.
Sec.
10B-4.   Department purposes and functions.
Sec. 10B-1. Policy.
   It is the policy of the city to preserve, protect and promote neighborhoods
through the efficient delivery of city services and resources, and to actively
participate in long term and future planning for the achievement of a desirable
social, economic and physical environment for all inhabitants of the city
through proper use and coordination of public and private resources and
particularly through provision of a broad range of community services and
municipal housing to low- and moderate-income persons in order to develop a
city in which all inhabitants share equally in opportunities for an acceptable
quality of life.
(Ord. No. 10656, § 3, 4-21-09, eff. 7-1-09)
Sec. 10B-2. Department established.
   The department of housing and community development is established. The head
of the department shall serve as the director of housing and community
development, whose appointment, compensation and removal shall be in accordance
with sections
2,
6 and
11 of chapter V of the Charter.
(Ord. No. 10656, § 3, 4-21-09, eff. 7-1-09; Ord. No. 11226, § 1, 12-9-14)
Sec. 10B-3. Departmental divisions.
   The divisions of the department of housing and community development shall
be established by the director of the department, subject to the control of the
city manager, so as to facilitate the efficient and effective management of
housing programs, city-owned public housing assets and community development
programs, to be provided by the department.
(Ord. No. 10656, § 3, 4-21-09, eff. 7-1-09; Ord. No. 11226, § 2, 12-9-14)
Sec. 10B-4. Department purposes and functions.
   The purposes and functions of the housing and community development
department shall include:
   (a)   Implementing the policies set forth in section
10B-1 above through administration of the municipal housing powers vested in
the city by A.R.S. Title 36, Chapter 12, Article 1, as amended, and all powers
relating to housing services that are now or hereafter may be granted the city
by any federal, state or local law and to administratively discharge and carry
out all existing and future duties and responsibilities in connection
therewith;
   (b)   Developing and deploying city initiatives that focus on housing and
community development needs.
(Ord. No. 10656, § 3, 4-21-09, eff. 7-1-09; Ord. No. 11226, § 3, 12-9-14)
Chapter 10C
RESERVED*
__________
*   Editors Note: Section 1 of Ord. No. 5245, adopted Oct. 27, 1980, repealed
ch. 10C, §§ 10C-1--10C-4, relating to a citizen participation system, derived
from Ord. No. 4577, § 2, adopted Sept. 27, 1976, which had repealed Ord. No.
4351, § 1, adopted Apr. 28, 1975, the original ordinance creating the chapter.
Section 3 of Ord. No. 5245 reads as follows:
   Section 3. In place of the Citizen Participation System previously
established by Chapter
10C of the Tucson Code a new Citizen Participation process is established. It
shall be administered by the City Manager's Office and shall have as its
purposes building a partnership among Mayor and Council, City staff and
residents and creating an environment in which citizens are afforded an
opportunity to participate in City affairs in an advisory or advocate role.
__________
Chapter 11
CRIMES AND OFFENSES*
__________
*   Cross References: General penalty and continuing violation, §
1-8; treatment of prisoners generally, §
1-9 et seq.; motor vehicles and related offenses, ch.
20.
__________
Art. I.   In General, §§ 11-1--11-70.4
Art. II.   Methamphetamine; Synthetic Cannabinoids, §§ 11-71--11-87
Art. III.   Smoking, §§ 11-88--11-99
Art. IV.   Civil Emergencies--Powers of the Mayor, §§ 11-100--11-109
Art. V.   Interference with Fire Department, §§ 11-110--11-120
Art. VI.   Obstruction of Enforcement of Civil Infractions, §§ 11-121--11-129
Art. VII.   Nitrous Oxide, §§ 11-130--11-139
Art. VIII.   Reserved, §§ 11-140--11-159
Art. IX.   Reserved, §§ 11-160 – 11-160.3
Article I. In General
Sec.
11-1.   Air guns, slings, bean shooters, etc.
Sec.
11-2.   Reserved.
Sec.
11-3.   Apiaries.
Sec.
11-4.   Blasting.
Sec.
11-5.   Burning trash, other articles--Prohibited generally; declared nuisance.
Sec.
11-6.   Same--Permit required.
Sec.
11-7.   Same--Application for permit; issuance or denial; fee.
Sec.
11-8.   Same--Permit not required for cooking devices.
Sec.
11-9.   Same--Information shown on permit; failure to comply with conditions;
duration.
Sec.
11-10.   Same--Dense smoke defined; chart adopted.
Sec.
11-11.   Same--Penalty; abatement.
Sec.
11-12.   City property; squatting on prohibited.
Sec.
11-13.   Criminal syndicalism and sabotage--Defined.
Sec.
11-14.   Same--Acts prohibited.
Sec.
11-15.   Dance halls; operation near residences.
Sec.
11-16.   Disorderly houses or premises; keeping.
Sec.
11-17.   Drinking establishments--Loitering in, frequenting during hours
closed.
Sec.
11-18.   Same--Allowing frequenting during hours closed.
Sec.
11-19.   Reserved.
Sec.
11-20.   False information; furnishing to police.
Sec.
11-21.   Filling stations prohibited on portion of Congress Street.
Sec.
11-22.   Fireworks.
Sec.
11-23.   Reserved.
Sec.
11-24.   Food and drink establishments--Soliciting or annoying customers.
Sec.
11-25.   Same--Responsibility of proprietor.
Sec.
11-25.1.   Clothing requirements of certain female entertainers and waitresses.
Sec.
11-25.2.   Operation of certain restaurants, etc., where female entertainers
fail to meet certain clothing requirements deemed misdemeanor.
Sec.
11-25.3.   Clothing requirements of certain dancers, etc.
Sec.
11-25.4.   Operation of restaurants, etc., where certain dancers, etc. fail to
meet certain clothing requirements, deemed misdemeanor.
Sec.
11-26.   Reserved.
Sec.
11-27.   Same--False entries on register.
Sec.
11-28.   Indecency, lewdness--Acts prohibited.
Sec.
11-28.1.   Same--Minimum penalty; subsequent convictions.
Sec.
11-29.   Indecent exposure.
Sec.
11-30.   Prohibition of hate crimes and institutional vandalism; penalties.
Sec.
11-30.1.   Same--Minimum penalty; subsequent convictions.
Sec.
11-31.   Lampposts, hydrants, brackets; injuring.
Sec.
11-32.   Legal business; soliciting by police.
Sec.
11-33.   Aggressive solicitation, legislative findings; definitions.
Sec.
11-33.1.   Prohibited acts.
Sec.
11-33.2.   Penalties.
Sec.
11-34.   Juveniles; curfew.
Sec.
11-35.   Vapor releasing substances containing toxic substances.
Sec.
11-36.   Sitting and lying down on public sidewalks in downtown and
neighborhood commercial zones.
Sec.
11-37.   Minors: Playing, loitering about railroad property.
Sec.
11-38.   Prompt payment.
Sec.
11-39.   Permitting or encouraging underage drinking.
Sec.
11-40.   Narcotics--Keeping paraphernalia; acting as lookout.
Sec.
11-41.   Same--Seizure, destruction of paraphernalia.
Sec.
11-42.   Offensive establishments.
Sec.
11-43.   Prostitutes--Prohibited.
Sec.
11-44.   Same--Furnishing intoxicants to.
Sec.
11-45.   Same--Consuming intoxicants in room occupied by.
Sec.
11-46.   Reserved.
Sec.
11-46.1.   Dangerous off-site waste.
Sec.
11-47.   Same--Prohibited.
Sec.
11-48.   Same--Complaints; investigation; prosecution.
Sec.
11-49.   Public property; injuring.
Sec.
11-50.   Boarding, alighting from moving trains.
Sec.
11-51.   Camping in washes.
Sec.
11-52.   Loitering, congregating about railroad yards.
Sec.
11-53.   Soliciting passengers or baggage at railways or hotels.
Sec.
11-54.   Urinating or defecating in public.
Sec.
11-55.   Definition of firearm and air gun; possession of firearms and air guns
by minors; forfeiture of weapon, penalties.
Sec.
11-56.   Reporting of stolen and/or lost firearms required.
Sec.
11-57.   Reserved.
Sec.
11-58.   Water ditches, natural drainage channels--Deposit of offensive matter;
obstructions.
Sec.
11-59.   Same--Duty of abutting property owners to clean.
Sec.
11-60.   Same--Duty to clean upon notice.
Sec.
11-61.   Same--How notice to clean given; failure to comply.
Sec.
11-62.   Same--Nuisances declared.
Sec.
11-63.   Same--Violations, penalties.
Sec.
11-64.   Professional strikebreakers; employment, recruitment or furnishing as
replacements for employees involved in labor disputes unlawful.
Sec.
11-65.   Unattended child in motor vehicle; classification.
Sec.
11-66.   Throwing stars; sale to minors prohibited, possession by minors
prohibited.
Sec.
11-67.   Prohibition of certain automatic dialing and prerecorded message alarm
systems.
Sec.
11-68.   Prohibition of containers in community center premises.
Sec.
11-69.   Prohibition of certain items and activities at the Rodeo Parade and
other parade events.
Sec.
11-70.   Police authority over Rodeo Parade peddlers.
Sec.
11-70.1.   Operating motor vehicle off the roadway prohibited; definitions;
exceptions; impoundment; hearing; penalties.
Sec.
11-70.2.   Violation declared misdemeanor; penalties.
Secs.
11-70.3.--11-70.4. Reserved.
Article II. Methamphetamine; Synthetic Cannabinoids
Sec.
11-71.   Sale of products containing pseudoephedrine.
Sec.
11-72.   Retail establishment's right to refuse sale.
Sec.
11-73.   Possession, sale or distribution of certain synthetic cannabinoids.
Secs.
11-74--11-87.   Reserved.
Article III. Smoking
Sec.
11-88.   Reserved.
Sec.
11-89.   Smoking prohibited in specified places, exceptions.
Sec.
11-90.   Placarding required.
Sec.
11-91.   Reserved.
Sec.
11-92.   Enforcement; penalty.
Sec.
11-93.   Tobacco vending machines prohibited in specified places, exceptions.
Secs.
11-94--11-99.   Reserved.
Article IV. Civil Emergencies--Powers of the Mayor
Sec.
11-100.   Definitions.
Sec.
11-101.   Proclamation of civil emergency.
Sec.
11-102.   General curfew.
Sec.
11-103.   Additional powers.
Sec.
11-104.   Duration of proclamation or orders.
Sec.
11-105.   Violations and penalties.
Secs.
11-106--11-109.   Reserved.
Article V. Interference with Fire Department
Sec.
11-110.   Interference with fire department.
Sec.
11-111.   Police placement of ropes or guards; violation.
Sec.
11-112.   Vehicles obstructing progress of fire apparatus.
Sec.
11-113.   Reserved.
Sec.
11-114.   Refusal to obey order of fire chief or building official;
condemnation sign.
Sec.
11-115.   Penalty.
Secs.
11-116--11-120.   Reserved.
Article VI. Obstruction of Enforcement of Civil Infractions
Sec.
11-121.   Failure to furnish information, failure to sign citation.
Sec.
11-122.   Failure to obey abatement order.
Secs.
11-123--11-129.   Reserved.
Article VII. Nitrous Oxide
Sec.
11-130.   Sale of products containing nitrous oxide.
Sec.
11-131.   Retail establishment's right to refuse sale.
Sec.
11-132.   Possession and use of nitrous oxide by persons under the age of 18.
Secs.
11-133--11-139.   Reserved.
Article VIII. Reserved
Secs.
11-140--11-159.   Reserved.
Article IX. Reserved
Secs.
11-160 – 11-160.3. Reserved.
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL
Sec. 11-1. Air guns, slings, bean shooters, etc.
It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot or discharge any bullet, stone,
shot or other missile with or from an air gun, or with or from a sling or an
elastic spring or bean shooter or any other like appliance within the city.
(1953 Code, ch. 18, § 1)
Sec. 11-2. Reserved.
   Editor's note – Ord. No. 10967, § 5, adopted February 28, 2012 and effective
April 1, 2012, repealed §
11-2, which pertained to alarm systems, false alarms and penalties. The former
section derived from Ord. No. 5527, § 1, adopted March 15, 1982; Ord. No. 6855,
§ 1, adopted December 7, 1987; Ord. No. 7627, § 2, adopted May 6, 1991; and
Ord. No. 9975, § 2, adopted May 24, 2004. See now §§
7-465 et seq.
Sec. 11-3. Apiaries.
An apiary is defined as one (1) or more hives, stands, boxes or other
structures, natural or otherwise, containing bees.
   Sec. 11-3(1). Regulations. The following beekeeping regulations apply:
   (a)   The density of apiaries in any zoning district except property zoned
"SR" or "UR" pursuant to the section 23-30(a) and section 23-36(a) of the
Tucson Code, shall not exceed one (1) hive, stand, box or other structure,
natural or otherwise, containing bees for each twenty-five hundred (2500)
square feet of lot area.
   (b)   If bees are kept within thirty (30) feet of any exterior lot boundary
line, a barrier shall be erected that will prevent bees from flying through it.
Such barrier shall:
   (1)   Be at least five (5) feet in height and shall consist of plant, hedge
or any constructed material:
   (2)   Extend at least thirty (30) feet beyond the apiary(s) in both
directions.
   (c)   Fresh, clean watering facilities for bees shall be provided on the
premises.
   Sec. 11-3(2). Registration.
   (a)   Each beekeeper shall register the beekeeping operation with the
Arizona Commission of Agriculture and Horticulture.
   Sec 11-3(3). Penalty. Any person found responsible under this section shall
be guilty of a civil infraction and punished in accordance with section
8-6 of the Tucson Code and the procedures outlined in chapter
8 of the Tucson Code. (Ord. No. 6447, § 1, 6-16-86; Ord. No. 8958, § 3, 9-22-
97)
(Ord. No. 6387, § 1, 2-10-86)
   Editors Note: Prior to its repeal and reenactment by § 1 of Ord. No. 6387, §
11-3 was entitled "Beekeeping" and was derived from 1953 Code, ch. 18, § 2 and
Ord. No 2133, § 1, adopted Jan. 16, 1961.
   State Law References: Regulation of bees and apiaries generally, A.R.S. § 3-
801 et seq.
Sec. 11-4. Blasting.
Except with written consent of the city engineer, approved by the mayor and
council, no person shall:
   Sec. 11-4(1). Blast rock or stone with powder, dynamite, nitroglycerine or
any other explosive substance or compound within the city;
   Sec. 11-4(2). Carry on the business of blasting rock or stone with powder,
dynamite, nitroglycerine or any other explosive substance or compound, or any
business to which such blasting is an incident, within one (1) mile of the
corporate limits of the city.
(1953 Code, ch. 18, § 3)
Sec. 11-5. Burning trash, other articles--Prohibited generally; declared
nuisance.
The burning of garbage, rubbish, trash, grass clippings, tree prunings, waste
trade materials, junk auto bodies or parts thereof, or tires, and any other
articles in open fires, bonfires, incinerator or burning devices, or in other
manner, outside of a regular building and within the city is hereby prohibited
except as specifically permitted. Except as specifically provided, any such
fire or burning is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and unlawful.
(1953 Code, ch. 18, § 37a)
   Cross References: Fire protection and prevention generally, ch.
13.
Sec. 11-6. Same--Permit required.
No person shall kindle, suffer, maintain, authorize, or permit any open fire or
bonfire, or use or operate with fire any incinerator or other burning device
outside of a regular building within the city without the permit specified in
section
11-7.
(1953 Code, ch. 18, § 37a)
Sec. 11-7. Same--Application for permit; issuance or denial; fee.
Upon application in writing therefor, the chief of the fire department, shall
issue a permit for any of the fires or acts specified by the provisions of
sections
11-5 and
11-6 when he has determined by examination and investigation of the premises
and burning devices, if any, proposed to be used under such permit, that such
fire or burning will not cause dense smoke, acrid or offensive odors or vapors,
sparks, fly ash, or other harmful elements to travel more than one hundred
(100) feet from the point of origin, or emanation thereof, in any area or
neighborhood where buildings are closer together than one hundred (100) feet.
In all other areas such permit may be granted when surrounding conditions,
character and location of buildings, method of proposed burning, the devices
used, or any other similar factors assure that such dense smoke, acrid or
offensive odors or vapors, or other harmful elements resulting therefrom will
not travel through or onto surrounding homes or buildings or will not
injuriously or adversely affect neighboring areas. Whenever the fire chief
shall determine and find that the granting of such permit will create a fire
hazard because of the close proximity of buildings or other physical conditions
present, no permit shall be issued or granted. No charge shall be made for such
permit.
(1953 Code, ch. 18, § 37a)
Sec. 11-8. Same--Permit not required for cooking devices.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, no permit shall be required for
the use and operation of homestyle broilers, barbecue pits, grills, or other
similar cooking devices.
(1953 Code, ch. 18, § 37a)
Sec. 11-9. Same--Information shown on permit; failure to comply with
conditions; duration.
Each such permit issued shall specify the address and precise location, size,
type, or kind of fire or burning operation covered thereby, the time or times
permitted, the duration and limitation of hours thereof, if any, the expiration
date of the permit, the kind, type or specifications of the burning device or
devices, if any, to be used, and any other similar restrictions, specifications
or limitations which shall be reasonably necessary to effectuate compliance
with provisions of this section. Failure to observe and comply with the terms,
conditions and limitations specified in any such permit shall constitute a
violation of this section.
No such permit shall be valid for a period of longer than six (6) months.
(1953 Code, ch. 18, § 37a)
Sec. 11-10. Same--Dense smoke defined; chart adopted.
   Dense smoke shall mean any smoke so heavy and thick that it substantially
obscures any object from plain visibility, or any smoke through which an object
can only be seen dimly, or any smoke which is heavy enough to substantially
cloud and blanket the surrounding neighborhood atmosphere, or that smoke which
has a density of number 2 or greater as established by the Ringelmann's Chart
hereinafter referred to and adopted. The Ringelmann's Chart, as used in this
section, shall be that standard published by the United States Bureau of Mines
to determine the density of smoke as follows:
   "The Ringelmann Chart. The standard by which the density of smoke is to be
measured will be the Ringelmann Chart, officially published by the United
States Bureau of Mines.
"Use of the chart will be made by placing it at such distance from the observer
so that the squares appear as even shades of coloring, or when no white spaces
between the lines are visible. Comparison of the smoke under observation with
the various shades of the chart will then indicate the density of the smoke.
Observation distances shall be not less than one hundred (100) feet nor more
than one-quarter mile from the smoke observed."
(1953 Code, ch. 18, § 37a)
Sec. 11-11. Same--Penalty; abatement.
In addition to the penalty provided by section
1-8, any such public nuisance may be abated and enjoined by the Superior Court,
Pima County, Arizona, in a civil action therefor.
(1953 Code, ch. 18, § 37a)
Sec. 11-12. City property; squatting on prohibited.
All persons entering upon, or assisting to enter upon; enclosing, or assisting
to enclose; locating, or assisting to locate upon, or in any manner connected
with the taking up, occupying, enclosing or assisting to enclose, or
obstructing any authority of the city, for the purpose of taking possession,
directly or indirectly, of any of the vacant or unoccupied lands, owned,
claimed or held in trust by the city, in conflict with the ordinances providing
for and regulating the sale of public lands, owned, claimed or held in trust by
the city, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(1953 Code, ch. 18, § 5)
Sec. 11-13. Criminal syndicalism and sabotage--Defined.
The term "criminal syndicalism," as used in this section, is hereby defined as
any doctrine or precept advocating, teaching or aiding and abetting the
commission of crime, sabotage or unlawful acts of force and violence or
unlawful methods of terrorism as a means of accomplishing a change in
industrial ownership or control or affecting any political change. The term
"sabotage" is hereby defined as meaning willful and malicious physical damage
or injury to physical property.
(1953 Code, ch. 18, § 6)
Sec. 11-14. Same--Acts prohibited.
Any person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor who:
   Sec. 11-14(1). By spoken or written words or personal conduct advocates,
teaches or aids and abets criminal syndicalism or the duty, necessity or
propriety of committing crime, sabotage, violence or any unlawful method of
terrorism, as a means of accomplishing a change in industrial ownership or
control, or affecting any political change; or
   Sec. 11-14(2). Willfully and deliberately by spoken or written words
justifies or attempts to justify criminal syndicalism or the commission or
attempt to commit crime, sabotage, violence or unlawful methods of terrorism
with intent to approve, advocate or further the doctrine of criminal
syndicalism; or
   Sec. 11-14(3). Prints, publishes, edits, issues, circulates or otherwise
dispose of, or publicly displays any book, paper, pamphlet, document, poster or
written or printed matter in any other form, containing or carrying written or
printed advocacy, teaching or in aid and abetment of, or advising, criminal
syndicalism; or
   Sec. 11-14(4). Organizes, or assists in organizing, or knowingly becomes a
member of, any organization, society, group or assemblage of persons organized
or assembled to advocate, teach or aid and abet criminal syndicalism; or
   Sec. 11-14(5). Willfully by personal act or conduct, practices or commits
any act advised, advocated, taught or aided and abetted by the doctrine or
precept of criminal syndicalism; with intent to accomplish a change in
industrial ownership or control, or affecting any political change; or
   Sec. 11-14(6). Voluntarily assembles with any society or assembly of
persons, which advocates, teaches, aides or abets criminal syndicalism, upon
the streets, sidewalks, alleys or other public places in the city or in any
place, building, room or structure in the city.
(1953 Code, ch. 18, § 7)
Sec. 11-15. Dance halls; operation near residences.
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, conduct, carry on or operate
any dance hall within five hundred (500) feet of any private residence in the
city. For the purposes of this section, a dance hall is hereby defined to be
any hall, room, platform or place where public dances are held.
(1953 Code, ch. 18, § 8)
Sec. 11-16. Disorderly houses or premises; keeping.
Any person who shall keep any common ill-governed or disorderly house, or who
shall suffer any drunkenness, quarreling, fighting and unlawful games, or
riotous or disorderly conduct whatever on his premises, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(1953 Code, ch. 18, § 9)
Sec. 11-17. Drinking establishments--Loitering in, frequenting during hours
closed.
It shall be unlawful for any person other than a licensee or an employee of the
licensee engaged in job-related activity to be present on the premises of
licensed liquor establishments as defined in A.R.S. § 4-209.B(6), (7), (8) or
(14) or subsequent definition of such establishments by state law between the
hours of 2:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. daily. It shall be an affirmative defense for
a licensee or an employee of the licensee to allow an intoxicated person to
remain on the premises for a period of time not to exceed thirty (30) minutes
after the state of intoxication is known or should be known to the licensee in
order that a non-intoxicated person may transport the intoxicated person from
the premises.
(1953 Code, ch. 18, § 10; Ord. No. 4034, § 1, 2-19-74; Ord. No. 6076, § 1, 9-4-
84; Ord. No. 7100, § 1, 12-12-88; Ord. No. 10007, § 1, 8-2-04; Ord. No. 10825,
§ 1, 8-4-10)
Sec. 11-18. Same--Allowing frequenting during hours closed.
It shall be unlawful for any person owning, operating, managing or employed in
any of the places designated in section
11-17 to allow any person of the general public to be present at such places
between the hours designated in section
11-17. It shall be an affirmative defense for a licensee or an employee of the
licensee to allow an intoxicated person to remain on the premises for a period
of time not to exceed thirty (30) minutes after the state of intoxication is
known or should be known to the licensee in order that a nonintoxicated person
may transport the intoxicated person from the premises.
(1953 Code, ch. 18, § 11; Ord. No. 6076, § 2, 9-4-84)
Sec. 11-19. Reserved.
   Editors Note: Ord. No. 10421, § 1, adopted June 19, 2007, repealed §
11-19, which pertained to regulation of smoking in restaurants; definitions;
civil infractions; phase-in; hardship exceptions; penalties and derived from
Ord. No. 9220, § 1, adopted April 12, 1999; Ord. No. 9302, § 1, adopted Oct.
11, 1999.
   Cross References: Smoke-Free Arizona Act.
Sec. 11-20. False information; furnishing to police.
It is unlawful for any person to knowingly and willfully give false information
to a police officer while he is acting in his official capacity, with intent to
hinder, delay, impede or mislead the officer in the prosecution of his official
work, or with the intent to obstruct justice.
(1953 Code, ch. 18, § 11a; Ord. No. 2671, § 1, 9-28-64)
Sec. 11-21. Filling stations prohibited on portion of Congress Street.
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or conduct the business of a
filling or service station where automobiles, motorcars or other gasoline-
burning vehicles are furnished with gasoline or motor oil, in any building or
on any premises or lot fronting upon or abutting on or having a vehicle
entrance or exit from or on to Congress Street between the east property line
of Main Street on the west and the intersection of Toole Avenue with Congress
Street on the east.
(1953 Code, ch. 18, § 12)
Sec. 11-22. Fireworks.
   (a) Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
   (1)   City permit means a permit issued by the fire chief.
   (2)   Consumer fireworks means small firework devices that contain
restricted amounts of pyrotechnic composition designed primarily to produce
visible or audible effects by combustion and that comply with the construction,
chemical composition and labeling regulations prescribed in 49 Code of Federal
Regulations part 172 and 173, regulations of the United States consumer product
safety commission as prescribed in 16 Code of Federal Regulations parts 1500
and 1507 and the American pyrotechnics association standard 87-1, standard for
construction and approval for transportation of fireworks, novelties and
theatrical pyrotechnics, December 1, 2001 version.
   (3)   Display fireworks means large firework devices that are explosive
materials intended for use in fireworks displays and designed to produce
visible or audible effects by combustion, deflagration or detonation as
prescribed by 49 Code of Federal Regulations part 172, regulations of the
United States consumer product safety commission as prescribed in 16 Code of
Federal Regulations parts 1500 and 1507 and the American pyrotechnics
association standard 87-1, standard for construction and approval for
transportation of fireworks, novelties and theatrical pyrotechnics, December 1,
2001 version.
   (4)   Expenses of an emergency response means reasonable costs directly
incurred by public agencies including but not limited to the city fire, police
and public works departments or other first responders including but not
limited to private ambulance companies that make an appropriate emergency
response to an incident.
   (5)   Fire chief means the fire chief or that officer's designee.
   (6)   Fireworks:
      (A)   Means any combustible or explosive composition, substance or
combination of substances, or any article prepared for the purpose of producing
a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or
detonation, that is a consumer firework or display firework.
      (B)   Does not include:
         (i)   Toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or other devices in which paper
caps containing not more than twenty-five hundredths grains of explosive
compound are used if constructed so that the hand cannot come in contact with
the cap when in place for the explosion.
         (ii)   Toy pistol paper caps that contain less than twenty-hundredths
grains of explosive mixture, or fixed ammunition or primers therefor.
         (iii)   Federally deregulated novelty items that are known as
snappers, snap caps, party poppers, glow worms, snakes, toy smoke devices and
sparklers.
   (7)   Permissible consumer fireworks:
      (A)   Means the following types of consumer fireworks as defined by the
American pyrotechnics association standard 87-1, standard for construction and
approval for transportation of fireworks, novelties and theatrical
pyrotechnics, December 1, 2001 version:
         (i)   Ground and handheld sparkling devices.
         (ii)   Cylindrical fountains.
         (iii)   Cone fountains.
         (iv)   Illuminating torches.
         (v)   Wheels.
         (vi)   Ground spinners.
         (vii)   Flitter sparklers.
         (viii)   Toy smoke devices.
         (ix)   Wire sparklers or dipped sticks.
         (x)   Multiple tube fireworks devices and pyrotecnic articles.
      (B)   Does not include anything that is designed or intended to rise into
the air and explode or to detonate in the air or to fly above the ground,
including, for example, firework items commonly known as bottle rockets, sky
rockets, missile-type rockets, helicopters, torpedoes, roman candles and
jumping jacks.
   (8)   Police chief means the police chief or that officer's designee.
   (9)   Supervised public display means a monitored performance of display
fireworks open to the public and authorized by city permit.
   (b)   Use of fireworks, and sale of fireworks other than permissible
consumer fireworks, prohibited within the city; exceptions; penalties for
violation.
   (1)   Except as specifically permitted under paragraph (3) of this
subsection, the use of fireworks (including any display firework, consumer
firework, permissible consumer firework, or anything that is designed or
intended to rise into the air and explode or to detonate in the air or to fly
above the ground) within the city is prohibited.
   (2)   The sale of fireworks, other than permissible consumer fireworks,
within the city is prohibited.
   (3)   Violation of the provisions of paragraphs (1) or (2) of this
subsection is a civil infraction, except that any such violation that results
in damage to property or injury to any person or animal is a class 1
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, in addition to any other penalty or fine,
restitution shall be ordered made by the defendant to the victim. This remedy
shall not abridge any civil cause of action by the victim.
   (4)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit:
      (A)   The use of items defined to not be fireworks under subsection (a)
(6)(B) above and A.R.S. § 36-1601(3)(b); or
      (B)   The occurrence of a supervised public display of fireworks
authorized by city permit issued by the fire chief. The fire chief may charge a
fee for this permit to cover administrative costs, including the costs of any
necessary inspections.
   (c)   Sale of permissible consumer fireworks; permits required; inspections;
fees.
   (1)   No person shall sell or allow the sale of permissible consumer
fireworks to a person who is under sixteen (16) years of age.
   (2)   No person shall sell or allow the sale of permissible consumer
fireworks in conflict with state law.
   (3)   A person who desires to sell permissible consumer fireworks to the
public shall first obtain a city permit allowing all of the activities listed
under § 7.3.2(1)(a) and (b) and (2) of the National Fire Protection Association
Code for the Manufacture, Transportation, Storage and Retail Sales of Fireworks
and Pyrotechnic Articles (NFPA 1124), 2006 Edition.
   (4)   In addition to any other remedies or sanctions, failure to comply with
paragraph (3) of this subsection is a civil infraction.
   (5)   A person who desires to sell permissible consumer fireworks to the
public is subject to inspection by the fire chief to assure:
      (A)   That the person has obtained the permit required under paragraph
(3) of this subsection and the sign requirements of subsection (d) of this
section.
      (B)   That the person is in compliance with NFPA 1124, 2006 Edition, as
well as with any other rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal pursuant to
A.R.S. § 36-1609 and Title 41, Chapter 6 and relating to the storage or retail
sale of consumer fireworks.
   (6)   The fire chief may charge a fee for the permit required under
paragraph (3) of this subsection to cover the administrative costs of the
permit system, including the inspections carried out under paragraph (5) of
this subsection.
   (7)   Three (3) copies of the fee schedule for permits, and of any
amendments to it, shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and made
public records and shall be available for public use and inspection during
regular office hours, and shall be of full force and effect immediately upon
such filing.
   (d)   Posting of signs by persons engaged in the sale of permissible
consumer fireworks; penalty.
   (1)   Prior to the sale of permissible consumer fireworks, every person
engaged in such sales shall prominently display signs that state the following:
      (A)   The use of fireworks within the City is prohibited.
      (B)   You must be sixteen (16) years old to buy fireworks.
   (2)   The signs required under paragraph (1) of this subsection shall be
posted in a conspicuous place in each area where fireworks are displayed and at
each cash register where fireworks are sold; shall be not less than eleven (11)
inches by fourteen (14) inches in size; shall be in both Spanish and English;
and shall use easily legible print.
   (3)   In addition to any other remedies or sanctions, failure to comply with
paragraphs (1) and (2) of this subsection is a civil infraction.
   (e)   Authority to enforce violations of this section designated as civil
infractions. The fire chief or the police chief may enforce violations of this
section designated as civil infractions.
   (f)   Violation of this section a civil infraction, except where
specifically provided otherwise. Except where specifically provided otherwise
in this section, any violation of this section is a civil infraction.
   (g)   Liability for emergency responses required by use of fireworks, or by
violations of this section.
   (1)   A person who uses any fireworks, including display fireworks, consumer
fireworks, permissible consumer fireworks, or anything that is designed or
intended to rise into the air and explode or to detonate in the air or to fly
above the ground, is strictly liable for the expenses of any emergency response
that is dispatched as a result of such use. The fact that a person is convicted
or found responsible for a violation of this section is prima facie evidence of
liability under this subsection.
   (2)   A person who violates any provision of this section is strictly liable
for the expenses of any emergency response that is dispatched as a result of
such violation. The fact that a person is convicted or found responsible for a
violation of this section is prima facie evidence of liability under this
subsection.
   (3)   The expenses of an emergency response are a charge against the person
liable for those expenses pursuant to paragraphs (a) or (b) of this subsection.
The charge constitutes a debt of that person and may be collected
proportionately by the public agencies, or other first responders that incurred
the expenses. The liability imposed under this subsection is in addition to and
not in limitation of any other liability that may be imposed.
(Ord. No. 10856, § 2, 11-23-10, eff. 12-1-10)
Sec. 11-23. Reserved.
   Editor's note – Ord. No. 10856, § 1, adopted November 23, 2010 and effective
December 1, 2010, repealed § 11-23, which pertained to the prohibition on the
sale of fireworks.
Sec. 11-24. Food and drink establishments--Soliciting or annoying customers.
It shall be unlawful, in any place of business where food or drink is sold to
be consumed upon the premises, for any person who loafs or loiters about such
place, or who is employed therein, to beg, solicit or importune any patron or
customer of or visitor in such establishment to purchase any article of food or
drink for the one begging, soliciting or importuning, or to be consumed by any
frequenter, habitue or any vagrant or idle person about such place, and no
person shall enter such place or remain therein for the purpose of so begging,
soliciting or importuning patrons, customers or visitors therein to purchase
articles of food or drink.
(1953 Code, ch. 18, § 15)
Sec. 11-25. Same--Responsibility of proprietor.
Any person who owns, manages or otherwise controls any such place of business
where food or drink is sold to be consumed on the premises, and who permits or
allows other persons to beg, solicit or importune patrons, customers or
visitors thereof to purchase food or drink for the ones begging, soliciting or
importuning, or for frequenters, habitues or any idle or vagrant persons about
such place, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(1953 Code, ch. 18, § 16)
Sec. 11-25.1. Clothing requirements of certain female entertainers and
waitresses.
Any female entertaining or performing any dance or in any play, exhibition,
show or other entertainment, or any female serving food or spirituous liquors
as defined by A.R.S. title 4, chapter 1, article 1, as amended, in a
restaurant, nightclub, bar, cabaret, tavern, tap room, theater, or in a
private, fraternal, social, golf or country club, as defined by A.R.S. title 4,
chapter 1, article 1, as amended, or in any public place, who appears clothed,
costumed, unclothed or uncostumed in such a manner that the nipple and the
aureola (the more darkly pigmented portion of the breast encircling the nipple)
are not firmly covered by a fully opaque material, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 3053, § 1, 10-16-67)
Sec. 11-25.2. Operation of certain restaurants, etc., where female entertainers
fail to meet certain clothing requirements deemed misdemeanor.
A person who knowingly conducts, maintains, owns, manages, operates or
furnishes any restaurant, nightclub, bar, cabaret, tavern, tap room, theater,
or any place serving food or spirituous liquors, as defined by A.R.S. title 4,
chapter 1, article 1, as amended, or a private, fraternal, social, golf or
country club, as defined by A.R.S. title 4, chapter 1, article 1, as amended or
any public place, where a female appears clothed, costumed, unclothed or
uncostumed in such a manner that the nipple and the aureola (the more darkly
pigmented portion of the breast encircling the nipple) is not firmly covered by
a fully opaque material, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 3053, § 1, 10-16-67)
Sec. 11-25.3. Clothing requirements of certain dancers, etc.
Any person entertaining or performing any dance or in any play, exhibition,
show or other entertainment, or any person serving food or spirituous liquors
as defined by A.R.S. title 4, chapter 1, article 1, as amended, in a
restaurant, nightclub, bar, cabaret, tavern, tap room, theater, or in a
private, fraternal, social, golf or country club, as defined by A.R.S. title 4,
chapter 1, article 1, as amended, or in any public place, who appears clothed,
costumed, unclothed or uncostumed in such a manner that the lower part of his
or her torso, consisting of the private parts or anal cleft or cleavage of the
buttocks, is not covered by a fully opaque material or is so thinly covered as
to appear uncovered, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 3053, § 1, 10-16-67)
Sec. 11-25.4. Operation of restaurants, etc., where certain dancers, etc. fail
to meet certain clothing requirements, deemed misdemeanor.
A person who knowingly conducts, maintains, owns, manages, operates or
furnishes any restaurant, nightclub, bar, cabaret, tavern, tap room, theater,
or any place serving food or spirituous liquors, as defined by A.R.S. title 4,
chapter 1, article 1, as amended, or a private, fraternal, social, golf or
country club, as defined by A.R.S. title 4, chapter 1, article 1, as amended,
or any public place, where any person appears clothed, costumed, unclothed or
uncostumed in such a manner that the lower part of his or her torso, consisting
of the private parts or anal cleft or cleavage of the buttocks, is not covered
by a fully opaque material or is so thinly covered as to appear uncovered, is
guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 3053, § 1, 10-16-67)
Sec. 11-26. Reserved.
   Editors Note: Ord. No. 9240, § 2, adopted June 21, 1999, repealed §
11-26, which pertained to hotels, rooming houses, motels--guest register
required. See the Code Comparative Table.
Sec. 11-27. Same--False entries on register.
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter in the register of guests of any
hotel, rooming house, motel or auto court within the city a false or fictitious
name, knowing it to be false.
(1953 Code, ch. 18, § 18)
Sec. 11-28. Indecency, lewdness--Acts prohibited.
Every person is guilty of a misdemeanor who:
   Sec. 11-28(1).
   (a)   Being reckless about whether any person present, as a reasonable
person, would be offended; aids, offers, agrees or solicits an indecent or lewd
act;
   (b)   Commits any lewd or indecent act;
   (c)   Aids, offers or agrees to commit or conspires to commit or commits any
act of prostitution; or
   Sec. 11-28(2). Offers to secure or secures another for the purpose of
committing any act of prostitution, fornication, assignation or for any other
lewd or indecent act with any other person; or
   Sec. 11-28(3). Is in a public street, public way, public sidewalk or other
public place, or adjacent thereto, or in the public view, including in a
vehicle, in a manner or under circumstances which manifest the purpose or
intent of inducing, enticing, soliciting or procuring another to commit an act
of prostitution; for the purposes of this subsection the following actions or
circumstances shall be considered with any other evidence to determine whether
such purpose or intent is manifested:
   (a)   That the person has a previous arrest or conviction under section
11-28, any section of A.R.S. chapter 32 of the title 13 or their predecessors,
or equivalents from other jurisdictions;
   (b)   That the person has declared himself or herself to be a prostitute, or
available for the act of prostitution;
   (c)   That the person has quoted a price or list of prices for sexual acts;
   (d)   The person attempts to stop or stops people or vehicles by beckoning
to, hailing, shouting at, waiving to, gesturing or in any other manner;
   (e)   That the person repeatedly engages in conversation with pedestrians or
occupants of motor vehicles;
   (f)   The person has in possession sexual paraphernalia except condoms;
   (g)   The person inquires whether a potential patron, procurer or prostitute
is a police officer;
   (h)   The person searches for articles that would identify a police officer;
or
   (i)   The person requests the touching or exposure of genitals or female
breast.
   Sec. 11-28(4). Knowingly transports any person to any place where he may
commit, or for the purpose of committing any lewd or indecent act or any act of
prostitution; or
   Sec. 11-28(5). Knowingly receives, offers or agrees to receive any person
into any place or building for the purpose of assignation or of performing any
act of lewdness or fornication, or knowingly permits any person to remain there
for any of such purposes; or
   Sec. 11-28(6). Directs any person to any place for the purpose of committing
any lewd or indecent act, or any acts for prostitution or fornication; or
   Sec. 11-28(7). In any way aids, abets or participates in the doing for any
of the act prohibited by this section.
(1953 Code, ch. 18, § 23; Ord. No. 5820, § 1, 7-5-83; Ord. No. 7187, § 1, 5-1-
89; Ord. No. 7717, § 1, 11-25-91; Ord. No. 9192, § 1, 1-11-99)
   State Law References: Sexual offenses, A.R.S. § 13-1401 et seq.; obscenity,
A.R.S. § 13-3501 et seq.
Sec. 11-28.1. Same--Minimum penalty; subsequent convictions.
   (a)   A person convicted for the first time of an offense prohibited by
minor section
11-28(1)(a) may be punished by imprisonment for not more than six (6) months
and up to three (3) years probation, and shall be punished by a fine of not
less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than twenty-five hundred dollars
($2,500.00). A person convicted for a second offense prohibited by minor
section
11-28(1)(a) may be punished by imprisonment for not more than six (6) months
and shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00)
nor more than twenty-five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) and shall be placed on
probation for not less than one (1) year nor more than three (3) years. A
person convicted of a third offense prohibited by minor section
11-28(1)(a) may be punished by imprisonment for not more than six (6) months
and shall be punished by a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) nor more than twenty- five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) and shall be
placed on probation for not less than three (3) years. A person convicted of a
fourth offense prohibited by minor section
11-28(1)(a) may be punished by imprisonment for not more than six (6) months
and shall be punished by a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00)
nor more than twenty-five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) and shall be placed on
probation for not less than three (3) years. No judge may suspend the minimum
fine or probationary period prescribed herein, upon a person convicted of any
offense prohibited by minor section
11-28(1)(a). Placing a person on probation shall not be construed to affect, in
any way, the imposition of the minimum fines provided herein.
   (b)   A person convicted for the first time of an offense prohibited by
minor section
11-28(1)(b) shall be punished by either imprisonment for not less than twenty-
four (24) hours or one hundred (100) hours of community service and may impose
up to six (6) months' imprisonment and shall be fined not less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) nor more than twenty-five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) and may
be placed on probation for a maximum of three (3) years. A person convicted for
a second offense prohibited by minor section
11-28(1)(b) shall be punished by imprisonment for not less than ten (10) days
nor more than six (6) months and fined not less than two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) nor more than twenty-five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) and shall be
placed on probation for not less than one (1) year nor more than three (3)
years. A person convicted of a third or subsequent offense prohibited by minor
section
11-28(1)(b) shall be punished by imprisonment for not less than twenty (20)
days nor more than six (6) months, and fined not less than five hundred dollars
($500.00) nor more than twenty-five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) and shall be
placed on probation for not less than three (3) years. No judge may grant
probation to, or suspend the imposition of the minimum jail sentence, fine or
probation prescribed herein, upon a person convicted of any offense prohibited
by minor section
11-28(1)(b). Placing a person on probation shall not be construed to affect, in
any way, the imposition of the minimum imprisonment and minimum fines provided
herein.
   (c)   A person convicted for the first time of any offense prohibited by
minor sections
11-28(1)(c) through 11-28(8); shall be punished by imprisonment for not less
than fifteen (15) days nor more than six (6) months and by a fine of not less
than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than twenty-five hundred dollars
($2,500.00). A person convicted of a second offense prohibited by minor
sections
11-28(1)(c) through 11-28(8) shall be punished by imprisonment for not less
than thirty (30) days nor more than six (6) months and a fine of not less than
five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than twenty-five hundred dollars
($2,500.00). A person convicted of a third offense prohibited by minor sections
11-28(1)(c) through 11-28(8) shall be punished by imprisonment for not less
than sixty (60) days nor more than six (6) months, and by a fine of not less
than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than twenty-five hundred dollars
($2,500.00). A person convicted of a fourth or subsequent offense prohibited by
minor sections
11-28(1)(c) through 11-28(8) shall be punished by imprisonment for not less
than one hundred and eighty (180) days and by a fine of not less than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than twenty-five hundred dollars
($2,500.00). No judge may grant probation to, or suspend the imposition of the
minimum jail sentence and fine prescribed herein, upon a person convicted of
any offense prohibited in minor sections
11-28(1)(c) through 11-28(8). In addition, a person convicted of any offense
prohibited in minor sections
11-28(1)(c) through 11-28(8) may be placed on probation for a maximum of three
(3) years. This shall not be construed to affect, in any way, the imposition of
the minimum mandatory penalties provided herein.
(Ord. No. 4812, § 1, 5-15-78; Ord. No. 5267, § 1, 12-8-80; Ord. No. 5820, § 1,
7-5-83; Ord. No. 5866, § 1, 9-12-83; Ord. No. 6478, § 1, 8-4-86; Ord. No. 7284,
§ 1, 9-18-89; Ord. No. 7717, § 2, 11-25-91; Ord. No. 9192, § 2, 1-11-99)
Sec. 11-29. Indecent exposure.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully and knowingly expose
or display his or her anus, buttocks, genitals, pubic areas, areola and/or the
nipple of the female breast; or willfully or knowingly aid or assist in the
exposure or display of another's anus, buttocks, genitals, pubic areas, areola
and/or the nipple of the female breast, in or by a street, alleyway, driveway,
right-of-way, parking lot, park, bus stop, hallways, aisle, places of assembly
whether indoor or outdoor, such as bingo halls, fairs, carnivals, swap meets,
museums, or any other place of public accommodation, but not to include:
   (1)   Regular or authorized performers or performances on theater, concert
hall, music hall or nightclub stages, or movie house screens, bars or
restaurants, except as prohibited in sections
11-25.1,
11-25.2,
11-25.3 and
11-25.4.
   (b)   It shall be no defense that the viewer or viewers:
   (1)   Consented to the exposure or display; or
   (2)   Voluntarily subjected himself or herself to the exposure or display;
or
   (3)   Was not, or were not, annoyed, offended, shocked or outraged by the
exposure or display.
   (c)   In this section, unless the context requires otherwise, "exposure or
display" means:
   (1)   To submit to public view the named areas without cover; or
   (2)   To submit to public view the named areas with cover of less than one
(1) layer of fully opaque covering.
(1953 Code, ch. 18, § 9a; Ord. No. 2358, § 2, 11-5-62; Ord. No. 4486, § 1, 5-
24-76)
   Cross References: Licensing of adult entertainment enterprises and
establishments, §
7-206 et seq.
Sec. 11-30. Prohibition of hate crimes and institutional vandalism; penalties.
   (a)   Definitions. As used in this section:
   (1)   Hate crime means the commission of any misdemeanor offense under
A.R.S. § 13-1203 (Assault), A.R.S. § 13-1602 (Criminal Damage), A.R.S. § 13-
1502/1503/1504 (Criminal Trespass), A.R.S. § 13-2904 (Disorderly Conduct),
A.R.S. § 13-1201 (Endangerment), A.R.S. § 13-2921 (Harassment), A.R.S. § 13-
1802 (Telephone Harassment), A.R.S. § 13-1202 (Threats and Intimidation),
A.R.S. § 13-1303 (Unlawful Imprisonment), or T.C. §
16-30 (Graffiti) against an individual or group of individuals or the property
of an individual or group, accompanied by malicious intent as defined in
subsection (2) hereof.
   (2)   Malicious intent means the intent to commit any act, the commission of
which is a necessary element of any offense referred to in subsection (a)(1)
above, motivated by malice toward a victim because of the victim's actual or
perceived race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, sex, sexual
orientation, age, disability, gender identity, ethnicity, familial status and/
or marital status.
   (3)   Institutional vandalism means knowingly vandalizing, defacing or
otherwise damaging:
      a.   Any church, synagogue, mosque, other building structure, or place
used for religious worship and/or the grounds adjacent to, rented by, or owned
by such entities;
      b.   Any cemetery mortuary or other facility used for the purpose of
burying or memorializing the dead;
      c.   Any school, educational facility or community center and/or grounds
adjacent to, rented by, or owned by said entities.
      d.   Any hospital, health clinic, or other health care facility.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to commit a hate crime or
institutional vandalism, as defined in this section, against another individual
or group of individuals.
(Ord. No. 8506, § 1, 5-22-95; Ord. No. 11057, § 2, 3-27-13; Ord. No. 11443, §
1, 3-21-17)
Sec. 11-30.1. Same--Minimum penalty; subsequent convictions.
   A person convicted for the first time of an offense prohibited by section
11-30 shall be punished by imprisonment for not less than ten (10) days nor
more than six (6) months and by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00) nor more than twenty-five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). A person
convicted for a second offense prohibited by section
11-30 shall be punished by imprisonment for not less than twenty (20) days nor
more than six (6) months and by a fine of not less than two hundred dollars
($200.00) nor more than twenty-five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). A person
convicted for a third or subsequent offense prohibited by section
11-30 shall be punished by imprisonment for not less than forty (40) days nor
more than six (6) months and by a fine of not less than four hundred dollars
($400.00) nor more than twenty-five hundred dollars ($2,500). No judge may
grant probation to, or suspend the imposition of the minimum jail sentence and
fine prescribed herein, upon a person convicted of any offense prohibited in
section 11-30. In addition, a person convicted of any offense prohibited in
section
11-30 may be placed on probation for a maximum of three (3) years. This shall
not be construed to affect, in any way, the imposition of the minimum mandatory
penalties herein.
(Ord. No. 8506, § 2, 5-22-95; Ord. No. 11443, § 1, 3-21-17)
Sec. 11-31. Lampposts, hydrants, brackets; injuring.
Any person who shall negligently, willfully or maliciously injure, pull down or
in any manner break any lamppost, bracket or hydrant shall be deemed guilty of
a misdemeanor and shall be liable for the damage.
(1953 Code, ch. 18, § 21)
Sec. 11-32. Legal business; soliciting by police.
It shall be unlawful for the chief of police or any police officer or any other
person connected with the police department to solicit legal business for
either the defense or prosecution of any case pending or which may be filed in
any court, or to urge, recommend or suggest to any person, whether in legal
detention or not, that any particular person practicing law should or should
not be employed for the defense or prosecution of such person or any other
person.
(1953 Code, ch. 18, § 22)
Sec. 11-33. Aggressive solicitation, legislative findings; definitions.
   (a)   The mayor and council find that the increase in aggressive
solicitation throughout the city has become extremely disturbing and disruptive
to residents and businesses, and has contributed not only to the loss of access
to, and enjoyment of, public places, but has also led to an increased sense of
fear intimidation and disorder.
   (b)   Aggressive solicitation may include, without limitation: approaching
or following pedestrians; approaching or following children repeating
solicitations despite refusals; using abusive or profane language to cause fear
and intimidation; causing unwanted physical contact; or intentionally blocking
pedestrian and vehicular traffic. The mayor and council further find that the
presence of individuals who solicit money from persons at or near banks,
automated teller machines, or in public transportation vehicles is especially
troublesome because of the enhanced fear of crime in those confined
environments. Such solicitation carries with it an implicit threat to both
persons and property, as well as public safety.
   (c)   The law is not intended to limit any person from exercising the
constitutional right to solicit funds, picket, protest or engage in other
constitutionally protected activity. Rather, its goal is to protect citizens
from the fear and intimidation accompanying certain kinds of solicitation that
have become an unwelcome and overwhelming presence in the city.
   (d)   Solicit means to request an immediate donation of money or other thing
of value from another person, regardless of the solicitor's purpose or intended
use or the money or other thing of value. The solicitation may be, without
limitation, by the spoken, written or printed word, or by other means of
communication.
   (e)   Aggressive manner means and includes:
   (1)   Intentionally or recklessly making physical contact with or touching
another person in the course of the solicitation without the person's consent;
   (2)   Approaching or following the person being solicited, if that conduct
is intended to or is likely to: a) cause a reasonable person to fear imminent
bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon the property in the
person's possession; or (b) intimidate the person being solicited into
responding affirmatively to the solicitation;
   (3)   Continuing to solicit within five (5) feet of the person being
solicited after the person has made a negative response, if continuing the
solicitation is intended to or is likely to: a) cause a reasonable person to
fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in
the person's possession; or (b) intimidate the person being solicited into
responding affirmatively to the solicitation;
   (4)   Intentionally or recklessly blocking the safe or free passage of the
person being solicited or requiring the person, or the driver or a vehicle, to
take evasive action to avoid physical contact with the person making the
solicitation. Acts authorized as an exercise of one's constitutional right to
picket or legally protest, and acts authorized by a permit issued pursuant to
chapter
7 of the Tucson City Code, shall not constitute obstruction of pedestrian or
vehicular traffic;
   (5)   Intentionally or recklessly using obscene or abusive language or
gestures intended to or likely to: a) cause a reasonable person to fear
imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the
person's possession; or b) words intended to or reasonably likely to intimidate
the person into responding affirmatively to the solicitation.
   (f)   Automated teller machine means a device, linked to a financial
institution's account records, which is able to carry out transactions,
including, but not limited to: account transfers, deposits, cash withdrawals,
balance inquiries, and/or mortgage and loan payments.
   (g)   Automated teller machine facility means the area comprised of one or
more automatic teller machines, and any adjacent space which is made available
to banking customers after regular business hours.
   (h)   Check cashing business means any person duly licensed by the
superintendent of banks to engage in the business of cashing checks, drafts or
money orders for consideration pursuant to the provisions of the banking laws.
   (i)   Public area means an area to which the public or a substantial group
of persons has access, and includes, but is not limited to, alleys, bridges,
buildings, driveways, parking lots, parks, playgrounds, plazas, sidewalks, and
streets open to the general public, and the doorways and entrances to buildings
and dwellings, and the grounds enclosing them.
(Ord. No. 8674, §§ 1, 2, 4-8-96; Ord. No. 8891, § 1, 9-15-97)
   Editors Note: Ordinance No. 8674, § 1, deleted §
11-33 in its entirety. Formerly, such section pertained to loitering and
derived from ch.
18, § 24 of the 1953 Code; Ord. No. 3094, § 1, 3-11-68; Ord. No. 3599, § 1, 1-
25-71. Subsequently, section 2 of same ordinance added a new §
11-33 pertaining to legislative findings; definitions.
Sec. 11-33.1. Prohibited acts.
   Section 11-33.1(1) Aggressive solicitation prohibited. It shall be unlawful
for any person to solicit money or other things of value, or to solicit the
sale of goods or services:
   (1)   In an aggressive manner in a public area;
   (2)   In any public transportation vehicle, or bus, vantran or trolley
station or stop;
   (3)   Within fifteen (15) feet of any entrance or exit of any bank or check
cashing business or within fifteen (15) feet of any automated teller machine
during the hours of operation of such bank, automated teller machine or check
cashing business, without the consent of the owner or other person legally in
possession of such facilities. Provided, however, that when an automated teller
machine is located within an automated teller machine facility, such distance
shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the automated teller machine
facility; or
   (4)   On private property if the owner, tenant, or lawful occupant has asked
the person not to solicit on the property, or has posted a sign clearly
indicating that solicitations are not welcome on the property.
   Section 11-33.1(2) Obstruction of doorways entrances on a public sidewalk
prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person, after having been notified by
a law enforcement officer that he or she is in violation of the prohibition in
this section, to remain within ten (10) feet of a doorway entrance on a public
sidewalk or any other public right-of-way if that person's continued presence
obstructs a doorway entrance.
   Section 11-33.1(3) Exceptions to 11-33.1(2) above. An exception to the
prohibition in the preceding subsection against obstructing a public sidewalk
or other public right-of-way within ten (10) feet of a doorway entrance shall
be made in circumstances involving physical emergencies or the administration
of medical assistance; sidewalk cafes, parades, rallies, demonstrations,
performances or meetings for which street use permits have been issued; chairs
or benches provided by a public agency or abutting private property owner; and
seats in bus zones occupied by persons waiting for the bus.
   Section 11-33.1(4) Solicitation of children. It shall be unlawful for any
person to solicit money or other things of value from any person under the age
of sixteen (16) years who is unaccompanied by an adult.
(Ord. No. 8674, § 2, 4-8-96; Ord. No. 8891, § 1, 9-15-97; Ord. No. 11331, § 2,
12-8-15)
Sec. 11-33.2. Penalties.
   (a)   A person convicted of a first offense for a violation of this
ordinance may be ordered to perform community service or fined in an amount up
to two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00).
   (b)   A person convicted of a second or subsequent violation of this
ordinance may be ordered to perform community service or fined up to five
hundred dollars ($500.00); may be sentenced to jail for not more than ten (10)
days; and shall be placed on probation for not less than one (1) year and no
more than three (3) years.
   (c)   A person convicted of a violation of this ordinance may be required to
perform community service work as described by the court in lieu of, or in
addition to, the fine imposed under this Section. The rate of substitution of
community service work for the fine amount shall be calculated at ten dollars
($10.00) per hour.
(Ord. No. 8674, § 2, 4-8-96)
Sec. 11-34. Juveniles; curfew.
   Sec. 11-34(1). Definitions. As used in this section:
   (a)   Juvenile is any person who has not yet reached eighteen (18) years of
age.
   (b)   Parent is any natural, adoptive, or step-parent of a juvenile.
   (c)   Guardian is any person, other than a parent, who has legal
guardianship of a juvenile; or any person over eighteen (18) years of age who
has been authorized by a parent or legal guardian to have temporary care and
custody of a juvenile.
   (d)   Emancipated minor is any juvenile who is married, serving in the
military, or is otherwise legally recognized as emancipated.
   (e)   Emergency is an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the
resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term "emergency" includes,
but is not limited to, a fire, natural disaster, automobile accident, or any
situation that requires immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or
loss of life or property.
   (f)   Establishment is any privately-owned place of business, and all
property appurtenant thereto, to which the public or a substantial portion of
the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of amusement or
entertainment.
   (g)   Public place is any place to which the public or a substantial portion
of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets,
sidewalks, alleys, rights-of-way, parks, playgrounds, or government buildings
or facilities; vacant lots; and the common and/or parking areas of government
buildings and facilities, schools, hospitals, apartment homes and complexes,
office buildings, shops, malls, and other establishments.
   (h)   Residence is the dwelling house or usual place of abode of a juvenile
and his parent or legal guardian.
   Sec. 11-34(2) Curfew--Juveniles under age 16. It is unlawful for any
juvenile, prior to his sixteenth birthday, to be present in, about or upon any
public place or establishment in the city between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
5:00 a.m. of the following day.
   Sec. 11-34(3) Curfew--Juveniles age 16 and older. It is unlawful for any
juvenile, on or after his sixteenth birthday to be present in, about or upon
any public place or establishment in the city between the hours of 12:00
midnight and 5:00 a.m. of the following day.
   Sec. 11-34(4). Parental responsibility. It is unlawful for the parent or
guardian of any juvenile to permit, or by insufficient control allow, the
juvenile to be present in, about or upon any public place or establishment in
the city in violation of this section.
   Sec. 11-34(5). Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to
any juvenile who:
   (a)   Is accompanied by his parent or guardian;
   (b)   Is an emancipated minor;
   (c)   Is involved in an emergency;
   (d)   Has permission from his parent or guardian to travel to, or be in or
at, a specific public place or establishment for a reasonable, legitimate and
specific purpose;
   (e)   Is exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, including free exercise of religion, speech, and assembly.
   (f)   Is engaged in interstate travel;
   (g)   Is attending, or travelling to or returning from, an official school,
religious or other civic or recreational event supervised by adults and
sponsored by a governmental entity, a civic organization, or another similar
entity that takes responsibility for the juvenile;
   (h)   Is engaged in employment activity, or travelling to or returning from
such activity; or
   (i)   Is on the sidewalk immediately abutting the juvenile's residence.
   Sec. 11-34(6). Enforcement of provisions of this section. Before taking any
enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall attempt to
ascertain the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the public place
or establishment.
(1953 Code, ch. 18, § 25; Ord. No. 3224, § 1, 3-10-69; Ord. No. 9182, § 3, 1-4-
99)
Sec. 11-35. Vapor releasing substances containing toxic substances.
The dispensing of certain vapor releasing substances containing a toxic
substance is regulated and prohibited as follows:
   Sec. 11-35(1). Definition In this series of sections unless the context
otherwise requires, "vapor releasing substances containing a toxic substance"
means paints, varnishes and like coating substances releasing vapors or fumes
containing benzene, toluene, volatile ketones, isophorone, acetone, chloroform,
methylene chloride, mestiyl oxide, xylene, cumene, ethylbenzene,
trichloroethylene, MIBK, MIAK, MEK, and diacetone alcohol dispensed by the use
of aerosol spray devices.
   Sec. 11-35(2). Dispensing such substances prohibited.
   (a)   No person shall sell or offer for sale, deliver or provide, or give to
any person under eighteen (18) years of age any vapor releasing substances
containing a toxic substance.
   (b)   No sale or transfer of possession of any vapor releasing substances
containing a toxic substance shall be made except by a person who is at the
time of sale actively employed or engaged in operating a bona fide commercial
establishment at a fixed location.
   Sec. 11-35(3). Exceptions. Nothing contained in this series of sections
shall be applicable to the transfer of any vapor releasing substances
containing a toxic substance, from a parent to a child, from a guardian to his
ward, from an employer to employee, from a teacher to a student or in any other
similar relationship when such transfer is for a lawful and bona fide purpose.
   Sec. 11-35(4). Commercial establishments. Every bona fide commercial
establishment selling vapor releasing substances containing a toxic substance
shall conspicuously display an English/Spanish bilingual sign of not less than
eleven (11) inches by fourteen (14) inches in size which states: "Warning--
Deliberate Inhalation of Spray Paint Vapors Can Be Dangerous." Such printed
warning shall be easily legible.
(Ord. No. 4141, § 1, 2-25-74)
Sec. 11-36. Sitting and lying down on public sidewalks in downtown and
neighborhood commercial zones.
   Sec. 11-36.1. Purpose and intent. Pursuant to
Chapter IV, Sections 1(19) and (21) of the Charter, mayor and council find as
follows:
   (a)   Public sidewalks in business districts are created and maintained for
the primary purpose of enabling pedestrians to safely and efficiently move
about from place to place, facilitating deliveries of goods and services, and
providing potential customers with convenient access to goods and services.
   (b)   During normal business hours, the public sidewalks in downtown and
neighborhood commercial areas are prone to congestion, and should be kept
available to serve these primary purposes.
   (c)   Except in places provided therefor or where reasonably necessary,
sitting or lying on the public sidewalks in downtown and neighborhood
commercial areas during the hours of greatest congestion interferes with the
primary purposes of the public sidewalks, threatens public safety, and damages
public welfare.
   (d)   Pedestrians, particularly the elderly, disabled, or vision-impaired,
are put at increased risk when they must see and navigate around individuals
sitting or lying upon the public sidewalk.
   (e)   The public welfare is promoted by economically healthy downtown and
neighborhood commercial areas which attract people to shop, work and recreate.
These areas provide easily accessible goods and services, employment
opportunities, the tax revenues necessary to maintain and improve property
within these areas.
   (f)   In some circumstances people sitting or lying on the sidewalks deter
many members of the public from frequenting those areas, which contributes to
undermining the essential economic viability of those areas. Business failures
and relocations can cause vacant storefronts which contribute to a spiral of
deterioration and blight which harms the public health, safety and welfare. An
important factor in protecting public safety is attracting people to the
streets and sidewalks of the city's business districts, because the presence of
many law abiding citizens serves as a deterrent to crime and increases the
public's sense of security and the safety to all.
   (g)   There are numerous other places within the downtown and neighborhood
commercial areas where sitting or lying down can be accommodated without unduly
interfering with the safe flow of pedestrian traffic, impairing commercial
activity, threatening public safety or harming the public welfare. These other
places include city parks and plazas, arcades, and common areas open to the
public, and generally on private property with the permission of the property
owner. In addition, public sidewalks outside the designated hours are available
for sitting or lying down.
Therefore, the limited regulation of sitting or lying down on sidewalks is both
reasonably necessary and appropriately balances the public interest and
individual rights.
   Section 11-36.2. Prohibited conduct; exceptions.
   (a)   No person shall sit or lie down upon a public sidewalk or upon a
blanket, chair, stool, or any other object placed upon a public sidewalk or
median during the hours between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. in the following
zones:
   (1)   The Downtown Zone, defined as the area bounded by Interstate 10 on the
West, 6th Street on the North, Fourth Avenue on the East and 17th Street on the
South.
   (2)   The Fourth Avenue Business Zone, defined as the area bounded by
University Blvd. on the North, Congress Street on the South, 3rd Avenue on the
East and 5th Avenue on the West.
   (3)   The University Zone, defined as the area bounded by Speedway Blvd. on
the North, 6th Street on the South, Park Avenue on the East, and Euclid Avenue
on the West.
   (b)   The prohibition in subsection (a) shall not apply to any person:
   (1)   Sitting or lying down on a public sidewalk due to medical emergency;
   (2)   Who, as the result of a disability, utilizes a wheelchair, walker, or
similar device to move about the public sidewalk;
   (3)   Operating or patronizing a commercial establishment conducted on the
public sidewalks pursuant to a permit;
   (4)   Who is exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United
States Constitution, including free exercise of religion, speech and assembly;
provided, however, that the person sitting or lying on the public sidewalk
remains at least ten (10) feet from any doorway or business entrance, leaves
open a five (5) foot path and does not otherwise block or impede pedestrian
traffic. This exception applies only to persons and does not create an
exception to sections
16-35 or
25-51 of this Code, or any other provisions of this Code, that prohibit the
placement of items or objects on a public sidewalk that prevent full, free and
unobstructed public use in any manner.
   (5)   Sitting on a chair or bench located on the public sidewalk which is
supplied by a public agency or by the abutting private property owner; or
   (6)   Sitting on a public sidewalk within a bus stop zone while waiting for
public or private transportation.
Nothing in any of these stated exceptions shall be construed to permit any
conduct which is otherwise prohibited by law.
   (c)   No person shall be cited under this section unless the person engages
in conduct prohibited by this section after having been notified by a law
enforcement officer that the conduct violates this section.
   Section 11-36.3. Penalty. Violation of this ordinance shall constitute a
misdemeanor punishable by community service or fines not to exceed two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.00), by imprisonment not to exceed ten (10) days, and by
probation not to exceed one (1) year or both such fine and imprisonment. The
rate of substitution of community service work for the fine amount shall be
calculated at ten dollars ($10.00) per hour.
(Ord. No. 8978, § 1, 11-10-97; Ord. No. 9360, § 1, 3-20-00; Ord. No. 11331, §
2, 12-8-15)
   Editors Note: Ord. No. 3224, § 3, adopted Mar. 10, 1969, amended this Code
by repealing former §§
11-35 and
11-36 derived from 1953 Code, ch. 18, §§ 26 and 27. Said former §§
11-35 and
11-36 contained provisions relative to the responsibility of parents or
guardians for minors and penalty provisions. Subsequently, Ord. No. 8978, § 1,
11-10-97, added a new §
11-36 to read as herein set out.
Sec. 11-37. Minors: Playing, loitering about railroad property.
It shall be unlawful for any minor, under the age of eighteen (18) years, to
play or loiter about any railroad depot, roundhouse, machineshop or freight
house, or to play or loiter about or ride upon any railroad car, engine, truck
or other vehicle belonging to or used upon or in connection with any railroad
within the corporate limits of the city without the consent of the owner or
lessee of such railroad, or of the agent of such owner or lessee. Any such
minor violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and proceedings shall be taken in accordance with and pursuant to the laws of
the state regulating juveniles.
(1953 Code, ch. 18, § 28)
Sec. 11-38. Prompt payment.
   (a)   Violation. It shall be a civil infraction and punishable as provided
in this section if in bad faith: a) an owner fails to pay for work performed by
a general contractor or contractor, or b) a general contractor fails to pay for
work performed by a subcontractor, or c) a subcontractor fails to pay for labor
or materials provided, within fourteen (14) days or within the time otherwise
agreed upon between the parties following the completion of the work or labor
or delivery of materials, and delivery of an initial written request for
payment evidenced by an affidavit of service or return receipt of certified
mail.
A separate violation may be charged for each segment of completed work, or
labor or delivery of materials for which payment is not made. Each day for
which payment is not made may be charged as a separate violation after the
violation accrues.
Bad faith may be established by the conduct between the parties or other means
as allowed by the court but shall at a minimum be evidenced by two subsequent
written requests for payment delivered not sooner than two weeks after the
initial request and at least two weeks apart and testimony that payment in full
has not been made and there is no reasonable basis to delay payment which
together shall constitute prima facie evidence of bad faith. A party who acts
in compliance with applicable contract provisions shall not be deemed to act in
bad faith under this section.
   (b)   Definitions. As used in this section:
   Completion of work or labor means, unless otherwise agreed upon between the
parties, the date upon which the work or labor for which payment is requested
has been completed, or if an inspection is required by the city for the work or
labor, the date such work or labor passed inspection.
   Contractor includes any person, firm, entity, partnership, corporation,
association, or other organization licensed under Title 32 of the Arizona
Statutes and that undertakes to perform work directly for an owner.
   General contractor is synonymous with the terms "commercial contractor" and
"contractor" as used in A.R.S. § 32-1101(A) and includes any person, firm,
entity, partnership, corporation, association, or other organization or any
combination thereof that uses subcontractors and engages in construction,
repair or alteration.
   Owner means the person, firm, entity, partnership, corporation, association
or other organization or combination thereof possessing either a fee or lesser
interest that enters into a contract, arrangement or agreement with a general
contractor or contractor for the construction, repair or alteration of a
structure. Owner includes all assigns and successors in interest of the owner.
   Subcontractor means any person, firm, entity, partnership, corporation,
association or other organization or any combination thereof that undertakes to
perform work for a general contractor and has a direct contractual relationship
with the general contractor.
   (c)   Penalty. A violation of this section shall result in a fine of not
less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the first offense and not
less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the second offense.
   (d)   Scheduling of hearing. A violation charged under this section shall be
heard by the construction special magistrate not more than sixty (60) days
after the violations set forth in the complaint have been answered. For good
cause shown, the construction special magistrate may continue the hearing.
   (e)   Defenses. Justification is a defense to a prosecution under this
section. Justification means money is unavailable to make payment due to
nonpayment by an owner, general contractor, contractor or subcontractor,
bankruptcy, force majure, operation of a stop notice or bonded stop notice or a
prima facie showing that any claim for moneys due for work completed, labor
performed or materials provided is subject to a legal or equitable defense.
Unavailability of money due to nonpayment is not a defense unless the party
asserting nonpayment: a) files an action in a court of competent jurisdiction
seeking payment or enters arbitration seeking payment unless to do so would be
a futile act in that it would not likely result in the recovery of funds to
provide payment, or b) initiates or seeks to initiate an action under this
section.
Nonpayment based upon poor quality of work may not be asserted as a defense
where there is an agency with jurisdiction over quality issues and a written
complaint has not been filed with that agency.
   (f)   Limitation on action. No violation chargeable under this section may
be filed more than one (1) year after the violation accrues. A violation
accrues under this section on the date of delivery of the last request for
payment required by this section. No action may be brought on behalf of any
person, firm, corporation or entity that does not hold a license if a license
is required by Title 32 of the Arizona Statutes.
(Ord. No. 9158, § 2, 11-9-98)
Sec. 11-39. Permitting or encouraging underage drinking.
   (a)   No person eighteen (18) years of age or older may knowingly permit or
fail to take reasonable action to prevent the illegal consumption of spirituous
liquor by an underage person on premises owned by the person or under the
person's control. This subsection does not apply to spirituous liquor used
exclusively as part of a religious service.
   (b) A person who violates this section is guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 10396, § 1, 5-1-07; Ord. No. 11387, § 1, 7-6-16)
   Editors Note: Prior to the reenactment of §
11-39 by Ord. No. 10396, Ord. No. 4520, § 1, adopted June 21, 1976, repealed §
11-39 which had pertained to the frequenting of places where narcotics were
used and derived from the 1953 Code, ch. 18, § 32.
Sec. 11-40. Narcotics--Keeping paraphernalia; acting as lookout.
If any person shall keep or exhibit any box, pipe, cup, hypodermic needle,
thing or apparatus used for unlawfully smoking, eating, inhaling, injecting or
consuming any substance defined as a narcotic by A.R.S. section 13-3401, or if
any person shall act as a lookout or tender at any place where such acts are
practiced or carried on, he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(1953 Code, ch. 18, § 33; Ord. No. 5974, § 2, 3-26-84)
Sec. 11-41. Same--Seizure, destruction of paraphernalia.
It shall be the duty of the police officers of the city to seize and safely
keep all cups, pipes, apparatus, boxes, hypodermic needles and things used for
the purpose of unlawfully eating, smoking, inhaling, injecting or otherwise
consuming any substance defined as a narcotic by A.R.S. section 13-3401, and
produce the same in court. Such articles shall be retained until the final
disposition of any case in which they may be required as evidence, to be then
destroyed by order of the court; but nothing herein contained shall prevent the
destruction of such articles no longer required to be retained as evidence.
(1953 Code, ch. 18, § 34; Ord. No. 5974, § 3, 3-26-84)
Sec. 11-42. Offensive establishments.
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, carry on, conduct, maintain or
operate, in the city or within one (1) mile of the corporate limits of the
city, any gambling house or place of any kind in which any gambling games are
conducted, or any kind of banking or percentage game is played with cards, dice
or other device for money, checks, credits or any other representative of
value; or any house of prostitution or assignation; or any other offensive or
unwholesome business or establishment.
(1953 Code, ch. 18, § 30)
Sec. 11-43. Prostitutes--Prohibited.
Any person who shall practice prostitution or who shall, by word, sign or
action make known or call attention that she is a prostitute, courtesan or lewd
woman, or who shall make any public meretricious display of herself, or who
shall solicit any person to visit or patronize a prostitute or place of
prostitution, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
(1953 Code, ch. 18, § 35)
   State Law References: Prostitution A.R.S. § 13-3201 et seq.
Sec. 11-44. Same--Furnishing intoxicants to.
It shall be unlawful for any person to give, barter, sell or deliver to any
prostitute in the city any malt, vinous or spirituous intoxicating liquor or to
give, barter, sell or deliver to any person any malt, vinous or spirituous
intoxicating liquor in any room or building where a prostitute loiters,
frequents or is present.
(1953 Code, ch. 18, § 19)
Sec. 11-45. Same--Consuming intoxicants in room occupied by.
It shall be unlawful for any person to use or consume any malt, vinous or
spirituous intoxicating liquor in any room where a prostitute loiters,
frequents or is present.
(1953 Code, ch. 18, § 20)
Sec. 11-46. Reserved.
   Editors Note: Ord. No. 9816, § 4, adopted Feb. 24, 2003, repealed §
11-46, and enacted similar provisions set out in new §
16-34. Former §
11-46 pertained to public nuisance and derived from ch. 18, § 37 of the 1953
Code. See the Code Comparative Table.
Sec. 11-46.1. Dangerous off-site waste.
   Sec. 11-46.1(1). The purpose of this section is to protect the public
health, safety and welfare by providing procedures for affected areas of the
community to be informed regarding potential dangers of private commercial
facilities which conduct the accumulation, treatment, remediation, or disposal
of dangerous off-site wastes and by providing procedures which will assist in
resolving community conflicts concerning the impact of such facilities on
nearby areas. Where dangers are found to exist to nearby areas or conflicts can
not be resolved in advance, this section will provide for the temporary and/or
permanent abatement of a proposed or existing dangerous off-site waste
nuisance, as defined, to allow public concerns to be properly investigated and
acted upon.
   Sec. 11-46.1(2). The city shall have the authority under this section and
pursuant to the procedures below to abate any dangerous off-site waste nuisance
by either suspending or withholding the issuance of any city permits or
authorizations which are otherwise required for the construction or operation
of the facility, by revoking any existing permits or authorizations for the
operation of the facility or by enjoining the continued operation of an
existing facility. The city's authority to abate a dangerous off-site waste
nuisance shall include the authority pursuant to the procedures in this section
to restrict or limit the operation of the facility to protect public health.
   Sec. 11-46.1(3). "Dangerous off-site waste nuisance" is hereby defined as
including any accumulation of dangerous off-site waste for the private
commercial purpose of processing, treating, remediating or disposing of all or
any portion of the waste material within the city limits of Tucson where such
activity creates a significant risk of harm or creates reasonably based public
health concerns among a considerable number of persons in a community or
neighborhood.
   (1)   "Dangerous off-site waste" is defined as all waste products which are
collected for the private commercial off-site processing, treatment,
remediation or disposal and which are defined by county, state or federal laws
or regulations as "hazardous waste," "special waste" or "solid waste petroleum
contaminated soil" and shall include all waste listed in A.R.S. 49-852 and 49-
854 as subject to designation as a "special waste" regardless of the actual
status or date of state designation.
   (2)   "Risk of harm" means any present or potential future harm to area
property owners or neighborhoods or to the community at large which may be
caused by the dangerous off-site waste including risks from any proposed
facility, the actual existing operation or any proposed, expected or allowable
expansion of the operation or any change in the process. "Risk of harm" shall
include the potential release of dangerous off-site waste due to the regular
and permitted operation of the facility as well as reasonable estimates of
risks which may be caused by the accidental handling of materials or the
intentional violation of established standards and legal requirements.
   Sec. 11-46.1(4). Community notification of a potential operation involving
the processing, treatment, remediation or disposal of dangerous off-site waste.
Any person or business which proposes to conduct any private commercial
activity involving the private commercial accumulation of dangerous off-site
waste for the purpose of processing, treating, remediating or disposing of such
waste shall provide notice to affected parties of the proposed dangerous waste
activities and to such additional parties as may be designated by the chief
building official in accordance with this section.
   (1)   The notice shall be in a form approved by the city and shall inform
the affected parties of the permit or permit revision which is being requested,
the agency from which the permit or permit revision is being requested, the
nature of the proposed operation, the individual chemicals or hazardous
materials which are subject to regulation and a description of the measures to
be taken to protect surrounding areas from unreasonable exposure to dangerous
off- site waste. The notice shall also inform the affected parties of their
rights to object to the location of the facility and the requirement that such
objections be filed with the city within ninety (90) days of the mailing of the
notice.
   (2)   The notice required by this subsection shall be mailed within sixty
(60) days of the filing of the permit application or request for permit
revision.
   (3)   The "affected parties" who shall be entitled to notice shall include:
   a.   The city clerk, who shall forward a copy of the permit request to the
chief building official, the director of utility services, and the fire chief
of the city.
   b.   All public schools and hospitals located within three (3) miles of the
exterior lot lines of the property where the facility is or is proposed to be
located.
   c.   All real property owners within three hundred (300) feet of the
exterior lot lines of the property where the facility is or is proposed to be
located.
   d.   The residential property owners on the residential block which lies
closest to the proposed facility in each direction, north, south, east and
west.
   e.   Any neighborhood association registered with the city which either
partially or completely lies within two (2) miles of the proposed facility.
   (4)   After the initial notice has been provided under this subsection, the
owner or operator of the facility may be granted a waiver by the utility
services department from the notice requirement set forth herein for a
subsequent permit application or permit revision where further notification
will not provide any significant additional information, is within one (1) year
of the prior notification and is essentially duplicative of prior notification.
   (5)   Notice shall not be required for the renewal of a permit where notice
has already been provided for the expiring permit and there is no significant
change in the terms of the permit or the actual or proposed operation of the
facility.
   (6)   Notice shall be required where an owner or operator has stated to any
permitting authority that it will voluntarily abide by self imposed limitations
and where a decision is made to exceed such self imposed limitations even where
it is not necessary to revise or amend the existing permit.
   (7)   Objections to the location of the facility shall be filed with the
chief building official within ninety (90) days after the date of the notice.
   (8)   Failure to object to the location of a proposed facility within ninety
(90) days from the date of mailing the notice provided by this section shall
waive any right an affected party may have under this section to object to the
location of the facility after that time except where significant new
information becomes available.
   (9)   "Permit" as used in this subsection shall refer to a permit from a
county, state or federal agency regulating hazardous materials, hazardous
waste, special waste, stormwater runoff or air quality.
   Sec. 11-46.1(5). Temporary abatement of a potential dangerous off-site waste
nuisance. In order to insure protection of public health, safety and welfare, a
potential dangerous off-site waste nuisance shall be subject to temporary
abatement to provide and allow time for investigation of the level of danger
posed by the facility and to permit time for community consultation concerning
the potential health and environmental risks. The procedure for temporary
abatement of a potential dangerous off-site waste nuisance shall be as follows:
   (1)   The chief building official and the fire chief may initiate an action
to temporarily abate a potential dangerous off-site waste nuisance where (1)
there is a reasonable basis to believe that a potential dangerous off-site
waste nuisance may exist or is proposed or (2) where there is reasonable public
concern among a considerable number of community or neighborhood residents that
a dangerous off-site waste nuisance may exist or is proposed and a reasonable
basis for further investigation of the potential hazard.
   (2)   The chief building official shall initiate an action to temporarily
abate a potential dangerous off-site waste nuisance or shall direct that a
hearing be held pursuant to subsection
11-46.1(6) where more than fifty (50) percent of the property owners within the
notification area object to the location of the facility or where any school or
hospital within the notification area objects to the location of the facility.
   (3)   The chief building official shall initiate an action for the temporary
abatement of an dangerous off-site waste nuisance by providing written notice
that such action has been taken to the operator or owner of the existing or
proposed facility which may constitute an dangerous off-site waste nuisance.
   a.   Where the potential dangerous off-site waste nuisance is proposed for
construction but has not commenced construction of the structure to be used, an
order by the chief building official for the temporary abatement of an
dangerous off-site waste nuisance shall stay the authorization for any
construction including the granting of any further permits or conducting of any
compliance inspections. No further authorization for construction or permits
shall thereafter be granted to the potential dangerous off-site waste nuisance,
except upon the compliance with the procedures set forth in this section. The
stay set forth in this section shall not toll any time limitation which is
otherwise applicable under this Code.
   b.   Where the potential dangerous off-site waste nuisance is an existing
facility, the chief building official and fire chief shall determine whether
the facility poses an imminent danger to public health and safety.
   1.   If the facility is determined to pose an imminent danger to the public
health and safety, the potential dangerous off-site waste nuisance shall be
immediately abated and shall cease and desist any further operation.
   2.   If the facility is not determined to pose an imminent danger to the
public health and safety, the potential dangerous off-site waste nuisance shall
not be subject to abatement until after a hearing is held by the chief building
official.
   (4)   The temporary abatement of a potential dangerous off-site waste
nuisance shall not exceed a period of six (6) months except where the operator/
owner of the potential dangerous off-site waste nuisance agrees to extend such
time, where the operator/owner fails to comply with the community consultation
provisions in subsection (5) below, where the temporary abatement is extended
by the hearing officer appointed pursuant to subsection
11-46.1(6) or where an appeal is filed with the mayor and council pursuant to
subsection
11-46.1(6)(7).
   (5)   During the temporary abatement period, the operator/owner of the
potential dangerous off-site waste nuisance shall provide reasonable and
appropriate notice to and communications with potentially affected community
residents to establish that the facility will not unreasonably expose the
members of the community to risks from environmental hazards. Such conduct may
include, inter alia, mailing information to area residents, informational
meetings with area residents, consultations with neighborhood associations,
consultations with area public schools and community mediation. The city shall
cooperate with the operator/owner to facilitate such community consultation.
   (6)   The operator/owner of any facility which is subject to a temporary
abatement action shall have the right to appeal the action to mayor and
council. Any such appeal shall be filed with the city clerk in writing. The
appeal shall be scheduled for a public hearing before mayor and council on the
third regularly scheduled mayor and council session following the filing of the
appeal.
   a.   The operator/owner shall have the burden of establishing in any such
appeal that the proposed or existing facility does not pose any potential
danger to area residents or the community and that there is no need for the
temporary abatement or for the community consultation as provided in subsection
(5) above.
   b.   Failure of the facility to use the best management practices or best
available technology, monitoring or security in the processing, transportation,
storage or disposal of dangerous off-site waste may be accepted by mayor and
council as prima facia evidence that a temporary abatement shall continue.
   Sec. 11-46.1(6). Determination that a facility constitutes an dangerous off-
site waste nuisance. While a temporary abatement of a potential dangerous off-
site waste nuisance is in effect, the chief building official may order a
public hearing be held to determine whether the facility subject to the
temporary abatement constitutes an environmental nuisance which shall be
permanently abated. The determination shall be made in the following manner.
   (1)   The city shall designate an independent hearing officer. The hearing
officer shall hold a public hearing to determine whether the facility
constitutes an dangerous off-site waste nuisance.
   (2)   The city shall provide notice of the hearing date and location to the
operator/owner of the facility and to all property owners who the chief
building official determines may be affected by the operation of the facility.
The city may also provide notice of the hearing by publication and other
appropriate means where a large number of persons may be affected by the
facility.
   (3)   At the hearing the hearing officer shall determine whether the
operator/owner of the facility has complied with the requirements for community
notice and consultation as set forth in section
11-46.1(4) and
11-46.1(5)(5) above. If the hearing officer determines that the operator/owner
has not complied with the community notice and consultation provisions and that
further community notice and consultations will inform the public or alleviate
public concerns regarding the operation of the facility, the hearing officer
shall order that the temporary abatement be extended to provide time for
compliance with the community consultation provisions.
   (4)   The hearing officer shall determine prior to the expiration of the
temporary abatement order whether the facility in fact constitutes an dangerous
off-site waste nuisance which shall be either permanently abated or subject to
such conditions and restrictions upon its operation as are reasonable and
necessary to protect property and the public health and welfare. The hearing
officer's determination shall be based upon the following factors:
   a.   Whether the operation of the facility within established county, state
and federal permits at the specific proposed or actual site of operation would
be an unreasonable danger to area residents due to its location;
   b.   Whether the operation of the facility at levels which may reasonably
occur due to poor maintenance, accidental releases or intentional violation of
established county, state and federal permits would be an unreasonable danger
to area residents;
   c.   Whether the operation of the facility will be unreasonably dangerous to
any institutions with particularly sensitive populations including any public
schools, hospitals, nursing homes or retirement homes;
   d.   Whether the operation of the facility will unreasonably diminish and
suppress area property values;
   e.   Whether proposed or existing monitoring, maintenance, supervision,
security and record-keeping requirements are adequate to deter and detect the
accidental or intentional operation of the facility in violation of existing
permits without unreasonable risk to area residents or the community;
   f.   Whether the operation of the facility will create an unreasonable risk
to the subsurface, surface and habitat environment in the area where the
facility is to be located;
   (5)   The hearing officer shall have the sole authority to continue the
hearing where such continuance is necessary to permit additional time for the
investigation or study of issues in the hearing. The hearing officer shall
further have the authority to extend the temporary abatement where such a
continuance is ordered provided that no temporary abatement shall be extended
beyond one year from the date of its initial imposition.
   (6)   The hearing officer shall issue his determination and the basis
therefore within ten (10) days of the public hearing.
   (7)   Any party who has received written notice of the hearing or the city
may appeal the determination of the hearing officer to the mayor and council
within fourteen (14) days of the date of the hearing officer's determination by
filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk. A public hearing on the appeal
shall be scheduled within thirty (30) days from the filing of the first appeal
notice with mayor and council.
   (8)   The filing of an appeal pursuant to subsection (6) above shall extend
the temporary abatement through the date of the scheduled appeal hearing before
mayor and council provided that such period shall not exceed sixty (60) days.
   (9)   Mayor and council shall review the determination of the hearing
officer, the record in the case and such additional matters as may be
determined to be relevant to its determination. Mayor and council shall then
exercise its discretion in determining whether the facility constitutes an
dangerous off-site waste nuisance as set forth in the provisions and standards
of this section which shall be permanently abated or subject to such conditions
and restrictions as may be deemed appropriate to protect public health, safety
and welfare.
   (10)   The cost of retaining the hearing officer and providing the notice
required by this subsection shall be equally born by the city and the owner or
operator of the proposed facility.
   Sec. 11-46.1(7). The provisions of this subsection shall be supplemental to
state and federal environmental protection laws. Nothing herein shall authorize
the city to require that any owner or operator of any dangerous off-site waste
facility contravene or disregard any order, permit, regulation or statutory
provision of state or federal environmental law.
(Ord. No. 8643, § 1, 1-22-96; Ord. No. 9861, § 3, 6-16-03)
Sec. 11-47. Same--Prohibited.
Any person committing a public nuisance or a dangerous off-site waste nuisance
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
(1953 Code, ch. 18, § 38; Ord. No. 8643, § 2, 1-22-96)
Sec. 11-48. Same--Complaints; investigation; prosecution.
If a public nuisance shall be committed within the city limits, any person
affected thereby may make complaint in writing specifying the nature of such
nuisance, the location thereof, and the name of the person committing the same,
to the health officer; and it shall then be the duty of the health officer to
examine the premises complained of as a nuisance. If, in his judgment, such
nuisance exists, the health officer shall make or cause to be made a complaint
against the person committing such nuisance, or permitting the same to exist
upon any premises occupied, used, owned or controlled by such person before the
proper court of competent jurisdiction to try such complaint, and shall cause
such complaint to be prosecuted before such court.
(1953 Code, ch. 18, § 39)
Sec. 11-49. Public property; injuring.
Any person who shall negligently, willfully or maliciously injure, pull down or
in any manner break or destroy any signpost or board containing the name or
number of any street in the city, or who shall pull down, obliterate, deface or
destroy any house or door number placed upon any house or door in the city, or
who shall mutilate, deface or in any manner destroy, or who shall attempt to
mutilate, deface or in any manner destroy any public fountain, bench, music
stand or any property belonging to the city shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(1953 Code, ch. 18, § 40)
   Cross References: Injuring or tearing up pavement or sidewalks, §
25-1 et seq.
Sec. 11-50. Boarding, alighting from moving trains.
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a railroad employee, a
passenger or person intending to become a bona fide passenger, or an officer of
the law, to get on or off an engine or car upon any railroad while such engine
or car is in motion. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall
be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
(1953 Code, ch. 18, § 41)
Sec. 11-51. Camping in washes.
   Sec. 11-51.1. Purpose and intent. Pursuant to Chapter IV, Sections 1(19),
(21) and (29) of the Charter, and Chapter VII, Sections 1(14), (18), (24), (32)
and (33) of the Charter, mayor and council find as follows:
   (a)   The washes and drainage areas within the City of Tucson have the
primary purpose of allowing the city to manage stormwater flow within the city
and to protect its citizens from flood and erosion habitat, while also
providing secondary benefits including natural open space, preservation of
riparian habitat, and corridors for wildlife movement.
   (b)   The city has enacted comprehensive protections of the city's washes,
including development and floodplain ordinances to limit erosion and protect
structures, prohibitions against driving a motor vehicle into washes, and
prohibitions against putting any waste or refuse in the city's washes. Camping
in public washes leads to increased obstruction of stream drainages and natural
flow, compromises habitats, disrupts wildlife corridors, and is frequently
accompanied by the use of fire and flammable devices used for cooking and
heating.
   (c)   Camping in wash areas impairs the primary and secondary purposes of
the city's washes, threatens the public safety of citizens and first responders
attempting rescue during flood events, leads to fires and fire responses, and
damages public welfare. Prohibiting camping in Tucson's washes is necessary to
protect the city's primary and secondary interests in its washes and conforms
with other city ordinances that protect and preserve them.
   Sec. 11-51.2. Prohibited conduct; exceptions.
   (a)   Camping in a publicly-owned wash within the City of Tucson without the
prior written approval of the city is prohibited and is a violation of this
section.
   Sec. 11-51.3. Penalty. Violation of this section shall constitute a
misdemeanor punishable by community service or fines not to exceed two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.00), by imprisonment not to exceed ten (10) days, and by
probation not to exceed one (1) year or both such fine and imprisonment.
   Sec. 11-51.4. Definitions.
   (a)   Camping is defined as setting up or remaining in or at a campsite.
   (b)   Campsite is any place where tents, shade structures, boxes, furniture,
mattresses or other material are used for the purpose of establishing or
maintaining a temporary place to live; or where any stove or fire is placed for
the purpose of establishing or maintaining a temporary place to live.
   (c)   Wash is defined as a watercourse having beds, banks, sides and
channels through which waters currently flow, at least periodically, or through
which waters flowed but no longer flow. "Wash" includes, but is not limited to,
all defined washes or watercourses under any other section of the Tucson City
Code, including all washes or watercourses mapped by the City Engineer pursuant
to Section
26-3. For the purposes of this Article, "wash" also includes any culvert or
similar drainage improvement that is located within a wash.
(Ord. No. 12182, § 1, 6-17-25)
Sec. 11-52. Loitering, congregating about railroad yards.
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than railroad employees, to
assemble, congregate or gather, or to remain idly loitering in or about any
railroad freight depot, warehouse or railroad yard, or where railroad cars are
being loaded, unloaded, repaired or iced, unless such person has the express
permission of the owner or lessee in possession or use of such railroad
property so as to assemble, congregate or gather, or loiter.
(1953 Code, ch. 18, § 43)
Sec. 11-53. Soliciting passengers or baggage at railways or hotels.
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter in or upon any depot, depot
ground, hotel or hotel ground for the purpose of soliciting passengers or
baggage to be transported or carried in any manner, without the consent of the
owner of such ground or the person in charge thereof.
(1953 Code, ch. 18, § 45)
Sec. 11-54. Urinating or defecating in public.
It is unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate in a public place, or in
any place exposed to public view, except an established lavatory or toilet.
(Ord. No. 5340, § 3, 4-6-81)
   Editors Note: Ord. No. 4554, § 1, adopted Aug. 23, 1976, specifically
amended the Code by repealing §
11-54 which pertained to spitting. The section had been derived from the 1953
Code, ch. 18. § 46. Subsequently, 3 of Ord. No. 5340, adopted Apr. 6, 1981,
enacted a new §
11-54.
Sec. 11-55. Definition of firearm and air gun; possession of firearms and air
guns by minors; forfeiture of weapon, penalties.
   (a)   Definitions:
   (1)   Firearm means any loaded or unloaded handgun, pistol, revolver, rifle,
shotgun or other weapon which will or is designed to or may readily be
converted to expel a projectile by the action of an explosive, except that it
does not include a firearm in permanently inoperable condition.
   (2)   Air gun means any loaded or unloaded handgun, pistol, revolver, rifle,
BB gun or pellet gun which will or is designed to or may readily be converted
to expel a projectile by the action of compressed air or other gasses, except
that it does not include an air gun in permanently inoperable condition.
   (b)   A minor who is unaccompanied by a parent, grandparent or guardian, or
a certified hunter safety instructor or certified firearms safety instructor
acting with the consent of the minor’s parent or guardian shall not knowingly
carry or possess on the minor’s person, within the minor’s immediate control,
or in or on any means of transportation a firearm or air gun in any place that
is open to the public or on any street or highway or on any private property,
except private property owned or leased by the minor or the minor’s parent,
grandparent or guardian.
   (c)   This section does not apply to a minor who is fourteen (14), fifteen
(15), sixteen (16) or seventeen (17) years of age and who is engaged in any of
the following:
   (1)   Lawful hunting or shooting events or marksmanship practice at
established ranges or other areas where the discharge of a firearm or air gun
is not prohibited.
   (2)   Lawful transportation of an unloaded firearm or air gun for the
purpose of lawful hunting.
   (3)   Lawful transportation of an unloaded firearm between the hours of 5:00
a.m. and 10:00 p.m. for the purpose of shooting events or marksmanship practice
at established ranges or other areas where the discharge of a firearm is not
prohibited.
   (4)   Any activity that is related to the production of crops, livestock,
poultry products or ratites or storage of agricultural commodities.
   (d)   If the minor is in possession of a firearm or air gun and
unaccompanied as required by subsection (b) of this section, a peace officer
shall seize the firearm or air gun at the time the violation occurs. The law
enforcement agency responsible for the seizure of firearms as provided herein,
shall hold the firearm until the charges have been adjudicated or otherwise
disposed of.
   (e)   Any person who violates subsection (b) is guilty of a class two
misdemeanor, and in addition to any other disposition authorized by Title 8 of
the Arizona Revised Statutes, the court may:
   (1)   Order the suspension or revocation of the minor's driver's license. If
the minor does not have a driver's license at the time of adjudication, the
court may direct that the department of transportation not issue a driver's
license to the minor until the minor reaches eighteen (18) years of age.
   (2)   Order that the firearm or air gun seized pursuant to subsection (d) be
forfeited and sold, destroyed or otherwise properly disposed of.
   (f)   Any parent or guardian of a minor who permits, or by insufficient
control allows, the minor to carry or possess a firearm or air gun in violation
of subsection (b) is guilty of a class two misdemeanor.
   (g)   This section is supplemental to any other law imposing a criminal
penalty for the use or exhibition of a deadly weapon. A minor who violates this
section may be prosecuted and convicted for any other criminal conduct
involving the use or exhibition of the deadly weapon.
(Ord. No. 7933, § 2, 10-26-92; Ord. No. 8164, § 1, 11-15-93; Ord. No. 9416, §
1, 7-10-00)
Sec. 11-56. Reporting of stolen and/or lost firearms required.
   (a)   Any person who owns or possesses a firearm shall report the theft or
loss of such firearm to the Tucson police department within forty-eight (48)
hours of the time he or she knew or should have known the firearm has been
stolen or lost, when either the owner or possessor resides in the city, or the
theft or loss of the firearm occurs in the city. As used in this section,
"firearm" has the same set forth in A.R.S. 13-105(19).
   (b)   The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to
any of the following:
   1.   Law enforcement officials while engaged in their official duties;
   2.   Members of the armed forces of the United States, or of the national
guard, while engaged in their official duties;
   3.   Firearms dealers and manufacturers licensed under federal law who are
subject to the reporting requirements of 18 U.S.C. 923(g)(6).
   (c)   A failure to report the loss or theft of a firearm as required in this
section is a violation of the provisions of this section and constitutes a
civil infraction, punishable by a civil sanction of one hundred dollars
($100.00).
(Ord. No. 11081, § 1, 5-29-13)
Sec. 11-57. Reserved.
   Editors Note: Ord. No. 10126, § 19, adopted March 1, 2005, repealed §
11-57, which pertained to handbills; posting on public property and utility
poles prohibited; civil infraction, costs of removal; minimum penalties and
derived from Ord. No. 7699, § 1, adopted Oct. 7, 1991; Ord. No. 8958, § 3,
adopted Sept. 22, 1997.
Sec. 11-58. Water ditches, natural drainage channels--Deposit of offensive
matter; obstructions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited in any
acequia, water ditch, arroyo, or natural drainage channel, within the city, any
filth, rubbish, garbage or any other matter or thing which is offensive to the
sight or smell, or is derogatory to health, or trash, weeds or waste materials
which in any manner obstruct or impede the natural or easy flow of the waste
therein, or permit from the premises occupied by such person any house drainage
or sewerage or any soapsuds or waste water in which any clothing or other
materials have been washed, rinsed or cleaned, or any impure water whatever to
drain into any such ditch, acequia, arroyo or natural drainage channel.
(1953 Code, ch. 18, § 54; Ord. No. 1839, § 1, 7-21-58)
   Cross References: Sewerage and sewage disposal generally, ch.
24.
Sec. 11-59. Same--Duty of abutting property owners to clean.
It shall be unlawful for all persons owning or occupying premises within the
city through which an acequia, arroyo, water ditch, or natural drainage channel
runs not to keep such arroyo, acequia, water ditch or natural drainage channel
at all times free from all rubbish, garbage, filth, growing vegetation, brush,
and any and all foreign matter and things whatever, which may obstruct the
natural and easy flow of the water therein, or which may endanger the health,
safety or welfare of residents of the vicinity or the public in general.
(1953 Code, ch. 18, § 55; Ord. No. 1839, § 2, 7-21-58)
Sec. 11-60. Same--Duty to clean upon notice.
It shall be the duty of persons mentioned in section
11-59, on notice in writing from the chief of the fire department or director
of public works or their authorized deputies, to forthwith remove from any
acequia, arroyo, water ditch or natural drainage channel which runs through
their property within the city any rubbish, garbage, filth, growing vegetation,
foreign matter of any type, or anything whatsoever which may impede the natural
and easy flow of water, endanger or injure neighboring property or the free use
and enjoyment of same, or endanger the health, welfare or safety of residents
in the vicinity, or the public in general, within five (5) days from the date
of such notice.
(1953 Code, ch. 18, § 55a; Ord. No. 1839, § 3, 7-21-58)
Sec. 11-61. Same--How notice to clean given; failure to comply.
The notice provided for in section
11-60 shall be given by registered letter to the owner at his last-known
address and to the occupant; and if unoccupied, by posting the same in a
conspicuous place on the property. If, within ten (10) days after giving such
notice, the rubbish, garbage, filth, growing vegetation, foreign matter or
thing mentioned in the notice shall not be removed, the chief of the fire
department or director of public works, or their authorized deputies, shall
then cause same to be removed at the expense of the owner of the property. A
verified statement of the costs and expense in connection therewith shall be
mailed to the record owner at his last-known address and to the occupant. The
record owner shall be liable for the payment of the expense to the city, and an
appropriate action in any court of competent jurisdiction may be maintained to
collect the expense.
(1953 Code, ch. 18, § 55b; Ord. No. 1839, § 4, 7-21-58)
Sec. 11-62. Same--Nuisances declared.
The presence of garbage, trash, refuse, grass clippings and other waste
materials, or the accumulation and presence of weeds, brush and natural
vegetation to the extent that it impedes, obstructs or hinders the easy natural
flow of drainage or floodwaters in any arroyo, water ditch, acequia or natural
drainage channel is hereby declared a public nuisance; such nuisance may be
abated by appropriate action in any court of competent jurisdiction by the city
in addition to other remedies provided by law.
(1953 Code, ch. 18, § 55c; Ord. No. 1839, § 5, 7-21-58)
Sec. 11-63. Same--Violations, penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of sections
11-58,
11-59 and
11-60 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor; and upon conviction thereof shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00), or by
imprisonment not to exceed ten (10) days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
(1953 Code, ch. 18, § 55d; Ord. No. 1839, § 6, 7-21-58)
Sec. 11-64. Professional strikebreakers; employment, recruitment or furnishing
as replacements for employees involved in labor disputes unlawful.
   Sec. 11-64(1). Purposes.
   (a)   The purposes of this section are as follows:
   (1)   To prohibit the recruitment of professional strikebreakers by persons
or agencies not involved in the labor dispute.
   (2)   To prohibit the employment of professional strikebreakers.
   (3)   To encourage and promote stable economic development.
   (4)   To encourage the orderly and peaceful settlement of labor disputes.
   (b)   It is not the purpose of this section to prohibit an employer from
hiring replacements for employees involved in a labor dispute when such
replacements are not professional strikebreakers.
   Sec. 11-64(2). Definitions. 
   Labor dispute includes any controversy concerning terms, tenure or
conditions of employment or concerning the association or representation of
persons in negotiation, fixing, maintaining, changing or seeking to arrange
terms or conditions of employment, regardless of whether the disputants stand
in the proximate relation of employer and employee.
   Professional strikebreaker means a person who customarily and repeatedly
offers himself for employment in the place of an employee involved in a labor
dispute. It shall be presumed that a person customarily and repeatedly offers
himself for employment in the place of a person involved in a labor dispute
when such person shall have three (3) or more times offered to take or has
taken employment in the place of persons involved in a labor dispute.
   Sec. 11-64(3). Supplying Strikebreakers Prohibited. No person shall recruit,
procure, supply or refer any professional strikebreakers for employment in
place of any employee involved in a labor dispute. But this subsection shall
not be applicable to the Arizona State Employment Service or to referring
employment agencies that are duly licensed by the State.
   Sec. 11-64(4). Employing Strikebreakers Prohibited. No person involved in a
labor dispute shall, directly or indirectly:
   (a)   Employ in the place of an employee involved in such dispute any
professional strikebreakers; nor
   (b)   Contract or arrange with any other person to recruit, procure, supply
or refer professional strikebreakers for employment in such dispute.
   Sec. 11-64(5). Notification of Labor Dispute to the Employment Applicants.
It is unlawful for any person to employ, recruit, solicit or advertise for
employees, or refer persons to employment, in place of employees involved in a
labor dispute, without adequate notice to such person, or in such
advertisement, that there is a labor dispute at the place at which employment
is offered and that the employment offered is in place of employees involved in
such labor dispute.
   Sec. 11-64(6). Separate Offense. The recruiting, procuring, supplying,
referring or employing of each professional strikebreaker shall constitute a
separate offense; and each day of employment of a professional strikebreaker
shall constitute a separate offense.
   Sec. 11-64(7). This section will in no way be construed to apply or
interfere with any disputes or strikes that may be in progress at the time of
the adoption of this section.
(Ord. No. 2951, § 1, 12-19-66)
Sec. 11-65. Unattended child in motor vehicle; classification.
   (a)   It is unlawful to leave a child who is under ten (10) years of age in
a motor vehicle without supervision by another person in the motor vehicle who
is at least fourteen (14) years of age if either of the following applies:
   (1)   The conditions tend to present a risk to the child's health, safety or
welfare; or
   (2)   The motor vehicle engine is running or the key to the motor vehicle is
located in the passenger compartment.
   (b)   A person who violates this section is guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor.
   (c)   A person convicted of a violation of this section shall be fined not
less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and the imposition of this minimum
fine cannot be suspended except as provided in subsection (d) of this section.
   (d)   In a case involving a defendant's first violation of this section, the
court may dismiss the charge if the defendant completes a parenting education
program to which the defendant is referred by the court that includes a minimum
of twenty-four (24) hours of parenting classes and/or counseling and that also
includes education on the dangers of leaving young children unattended in motor
vehicles. The program shall be capable of providing a certification of
successful completion of its requirements. Upon completion of that program, the
defendant shall provide that certification to the court.
   (e)   Any peace officer is authorized to use whatever force is reasonable
and necessary to remove any child from a vehicle whenever it appears that the
child's life or health is endangered by extreme temperatures, lack of
ventilation or any other condition existing within the vehicle as described in
subsection (a).
(Ord. No. 10580, § 1, 9-23-08, eff. 11-15-08)
Sec. 11-66. Throwing stars; sale to minors prohibited, possession by minors
prohibited.
   (a)   It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person in this city to sell,
give or lend to a minor, or to allow a minor to possess, any instrument,
without handles, consisting of a metal plate having three (3) or more radiating
point with one (1) or more sharp edges and designed in the shape of a polygon,
trefoil, cross, star, diamond, or other geometric shape that can be used as a
weapon for throwing.
   (b)   It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any minor in this city to
manufacture or cause to be manufactured, import into the city, keep for sale or
offer or expose for sale or give, lend or possess any instrument, without
handles, consisting of a metal plate having three (3) or more radiating points
with one (1) or more sharp edges and designed in the shape of a polygon,
trefoil, cross, star, diamond or other geometric shape that can be used as a
weapon for throwing.
(Ord. No. 6049, § 1, 6-25-84)
Sec. 11-67. Prohibition of certain automatic dialing and prerecorded message
alarm systems.
   (a)   Prohibition. It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to
use or cause to be used any telephone device or telephone attachment that
automatically selects a public primary telephone trunk line of the city and
then reproduces any prerecorded message to report any burglary or other
emergency.
   (b)   Exemption. The term "person" shall not include the city.
(Ord. No. 5890, § 1, 10-11-83; Ord. No. 6384, § 4, 2-3-86)
   Editors Note: The provisions of §
11-67 were formerly contained in §
11-88, which was repealed by § 2 of Ord. No. 6384. Since the subject matter is
the same, the editor has retained a complete history note for the section.
Sec. 11-68. Prohibition of containers in community center premises.
It shall be unlawful for any patron to enter the Tucson Community Center Arena,
Music Hall, or Little Theater with any bottle, flask, flagon, glass, thermos,
can, wineskin, canister, or any other similar container, or to be in possession
of the same on the above-described premises unless purchased from a vendor
authorized by the community center.
(Ord. No. 5890, § 1, 10-11-83; Ord. No. 6384, § 4, 2-3-86)
   Editors Note: The provisions of §
11-68 were formerly contained in §
11-91, which was repealed by § 2 of Ord. No. 6384. Since the subject matter is
the same, the editor has retained a complete history note for the section.
Sec. 11-69. Prohibition of certain items and activities at the Rodeo Parade and
other parade events.
   (a)   The provisions of this subsection (a) apply to the Tucson Rodeo
Parade:
   (1)   It is unlawful for any person to sell, give, transfer or possess any
object or thing, including but not limited to plastic horns, inflated balloons,
"poppers" and other illegal fireworks, manufactured primarily for the purpose
of making, or which if carelessly or intentionally broken, punctured, directed
toward an animal, sounded or otherwise mishandled is likely to make, a noise or
movement which is likely to startle, frighten or otherwise cause or contribute
to the loss of control over any animal in the annual Tucson Rodeo Parade,
within one thousand (1,000) feet of the parade route during the parade day
hours of 7:30 a.m. until the time that the last entry in the parade has passed.
   (2)   It is unlawful for any person to use any object or thing, or do any
act, in a manner that is intended or likely to startle, frighten or otherwise
cause or contribute to the loss of control of any animal in the Tucson Rodeo
Parade.
   (3)   It is unlawful for an entrant, a parent or a legal guardian to allow a
child:
   a.   Under fourteen (14) years of age to participate as a walking entrant in
the Tucson Rodeo Parade.
   b.   Under six (6) years of age to participate as a passenger on a drawn
entry in the Tucson Rodeo Parade.
   c.   Under eight (8) years of age to participate on horseback in the Tucson
Rodeo Parade.
   (b)   The provisions in this subsection (b) apply only to the following
events: the Tucson Rodeo Parade; the Downtown Parade of Lights; the Veteran's
Day Parade; and the St. Patrick's Day Parade.
   (1)   It is unlawful for any person to block, hamper, obstruct or impede the
passage of, any person, equipment, float, bicycle, motor vehicle, other
vehicle, or animal participating in a parade.
   (2)   It is unlawful for any person to interfere with, grab at, take hold
of, hit, pull, or push any person, equipment, float, bicycle, motor vehicle,
other vehicle or animal participating or used in a parade, or anything in the
possession of any participant in the parade. This subsection does not apply to
persons who are authorized participants in the parade and whose duties include
the management and control of equipment, vehicles or animals.
   (3)   It is unlawful for any person to remove, displace or interfere with
any lawfully placed sign, barricade, or other property or equipment used in
connection with the closure of streets for, or other regulation of, a parade.
   (4)   It is unlawful for any unauthorized person or vehicle to be on any
roadway designated as a parade route, parade staging area, or parade dispersal
point.
   (5)   It is unlawful for any person to disobey the order of a police officer
attempting to control traffic or crowd movement at a parade.
   (6)   It is unlawful for any entrant in a parade to ride any animal or
operate any vehicle, including any drawn or motor vehicle, with any alcohol or
intoxicant in his or her system.
(Ord. No. 6641, § 1, 2-9-87; Ord. No. 10494, § 1, 1-15-08)
Sec. 11-70. Police authority over Rodeo Parade peddlers.
Any provision of law to the contrary notwithstanding, peddlers at or near the
Tucson Rodeo Parade may be limited with respect to areas of operation, items
for sale, or access to spectators by order of any police officer on duty at the
Parade deemed necessary to preserve and protect the public safety. It shall be
unlawful for any person to disobey any such order by any such officer.
(Ord. No. 6641, § 1, 2-9-87)
Sec. 11-70.1. Operating motor vehicle off the roadway prohibited; definitions;
exceptions; impoundment; hearing; penalties.
   Sec. 11-70.1(1). Operating Motor Vehicle off the Roadway within One-Fourth
Mile of a Structure Prohibited. It is a civil infraction for any person to
operate a motor vehicle off the roadway within one-fourth mile of any
structure, occupied or not, within the city. It is not a defense that the
operator of the motor vehicle did not know he was operating within one-fourth
mile of a structure.
   Sec. 11-70.1(2). Definitions.
   (a)   Motor vehicle means any vehicle as defined under Arizona state law, or
any vehicle, whether required to be licensed or not, propelled wholly or in
party by a motor.
   (b)   Operate means driving or controlling a vehicle whether moving, running
or not.
   (c)   Roadway means any dedicated street or alley or any road or parking lot
generally open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel. For purposes of
this section, "roadway" shall include any private driveway or private property
utilized by the property owner or any invitee or licensee thereof for any
purpose other than access to or entry onto a dry wash or riverbed.
   (d)   Structure means any building used or capable of being used for any
residential, commercial, agricultural or governmental purpose.
   (e)   Dry wash or riverbed is defined as a watercourse having beds, banks,
sides and channels through which either waters currently flow, at least
periodically, or through which waters flowed but no longer flow.
   Sec. 11-70.1(3). Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply:
   (a)   When the person is the owner of the property or has the written
permission to operate a motor vehicle off the roadway on the property except
that permission cannot be granted to drive a motor vehicle in a dry wash or
riverbed within one-fourth mile of a structure. The written permission must be
in the person's possession and must be shown upon demand to the law enforcement
officer and the permission shall contain the notarized signature of the person
legally entitled to possession of said property.
   (b)   When the person is operating an authorized emergency vehicle including
towing services.
   (c)   When the person is operating a motor vehicle actually used in the
process of farming or ranching.
   (d)   When the person is operating a motor vehicle owned by a business or
enterprise licensed by the city and used in the legitimate off-road operations
of the business or enterprise, such as sand and gravel operations, land
surveying operations, construction companies, utility companies, and other
similar enterprises.
   (e)   When the person is a governmental employee operating a vehicle while
on government business.
   (f)   When the person is operating a golf cart on a golf course.
   Sec. 11-70.1(4). Impoundment of the Vehicle, Hearing Procedures. The citing
authority shall impound or cause to be impounded any motor vehicle operated in
violation of this section and issue a civil citation giving notice that there
shall be a hearing within forty-eight (48) hours excluding weekends and
holidays before a hearing officer. The hearing officer shall determine the
responsibility of the operator and the release of the vehicle pursuant to the
following procedures:
   (a)   The defendant shall admit or deny the allegations of the citation. If
the defendant admits the allegations, the hearing officer shall immediately
enter judgment against the defendant. If the defendant denies the allegations,
the hearing officer shall hold the hearing immediately. If the defendant fails
to appear as directed on the citation, the hearing officer shall enter a
default judgment against the defendant and order the police department to
continue to hold the impounded vehicle and dispose of the vehicle pursuant to
sections
20-13 and
20-14 of this Code.
   (b)   Immediately after the hearing, if the hearing officer determines the
existence of a violation, the hearing officer shall enter judgment in favor of
the plaintiff and penalties shall be assessed pursuant to this section.
Otherwise, judgment shall be entered in favor of the defendant.
   (c)   If a continuance is granted to the defendant for good cause, the
impounded vehicle may be released upon the posting of a cash bond covering the
cost of the towing, impoundment and potential fine. If a continuance is granted
to the city for good cause, the impounded vehicle shall be released forthwith
without the necessity of a bond.
   (d)   If a case is continued, the hearing officer shall set the hearing
within thirty (30) days.
   (e)   If judgment is entered in favor of the defendant the impounded vehicle
shall be released forthwith to the operator or owner of the impounded vehicle
without any towing or impoundment cost and any bond posted shall be returned to
the person posting the bond.
   (f)   In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this section and
the provisions of chapter
8 of this Code, the provisions of this section shall control.
   Sec. 11-70.1(5). Penalties, Return of Impounded Vehicle.
   (a)   If judgment is entered against the defendant, the hearing officer
shall impose a fine for a first offense of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00)
nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation. For a second
offense, the hearing officer shall impose a fine of not less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation.
The imposition of any fine under this section shall not be suspended. If there
is a bond posted, the bond shall be forfeited except when posted by a person
other than the defendant.
When the bond is posted by someone other than the defendant, the bond shall be
held for ten (10) days, unless the penalties are paid earlier. Notice shall be
sent to the person posting the bond informing the person that the bond will be
forfeited unless the penalties are paid within ten (10) days from the date
judgment was entered. If after notice has been sent to the poster of the bond
and the penalties are not paid within the prescribed 10-day period, the hearing
officer shall order the bond to be forfeited.
   (b)   The hearing officer shall order the release of the impounded vehicle
to the operator or owner upon payment of the fine, towing and impoundment fees.
   (c)   If the fine, towing and impoundment fees are not paid within ten (10)
days, the hearing officer shall inform the police department to proceed
pursuant to section
20-13 and
20-14 of this Code.
(Ord. No. 6675, § 1, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 8958, § 3, 9-22-97)
   Editors Note: Section 1 of Ord. No. 6675, adopted Mar. 23, 1987, added §
11-70, which the editor has redesignated §
11-70.1 in order to avoid duplication of section numbers.
Sec. 11-70.2. Violation declared misdemeanor; penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine not
exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for not more than
six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. No. 10494, § 2, 1-15-08)
   Editors Note: Ord. No. 10494, § 2, adopted Jan. 15, 2008, added §
11-71, which the editor has redesignated as §
11-70.2 in order to avoid duplication of section numbers.
Secs. 11-70.3 , 11-70.4. Reserved.
   Editor’s Note: Sections 11-70.3, 11-70.4, relating to police restricted
areas, derived from Ord. No. 11746, § 1, adopted April 21, 2020, were repealed
by § 2 of Ord. No. 11770, adopted July 7, 2020.
ARTICLE II.
METHAMPHETAMINE; SYNTHETIC CANNABINOIDS*
__________
*   Editors Note: Prior to reenactment by Ord. No. 10211, § 1, adopted Oct. 18,
2005, effective Nov. 1, 2005, Ord. No. 9816, § 6, adopted Feb. 24, 2003,
repealed former Art. II, §§ 11-71--11-84, and enacted similar provisions set
out in new § 16-31. Former Art. II pertained to noise and derived from Ord. No.
5890, § 1, adopted Oct. 11, 1983; Ord. No. 6043, § 21, June 25, 1984; Ord. No.
8956, § 1, adopted Nov. 3, 1997; Ord. No. 9394, §§ 1--3, adopted June 5, 2000.
See the Code Comparative Table.
__________
Sec. 11-71. Sale of products containing pseudoephedrine.
   (a)   Definitions. For the purposes of this article, the following
definitions apply:
   (1)   Pseudoephedrine product means any product containing ephedrine or
pseudoephedrine and includes any compound, mixture or preparation that contains
any detectable quantity of ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, norpseudoephedrine, or
phenylpropanolamine or their salts, optical isomers or salts of optical
isomers. Product packaging that lists ephedrine, pseudoephedrine,
norpseudoephedrine, or phenylpropanolamine as an active ingredient shall
constitute prima facie evidence that the product is a pseudoephedrine product.
   (2)   Retail establishment means any place of business that offers any
pseudoephedrine product for sale at retail.
   (3)   Permittee means any person who holds or is required to hold a license
or permit to sell drugs at retail pursuant to Title 32, Chapter 18 of the
Arizona Revised Statutes.
   (b)   The operator and the permittee of a retail establishment shall keep
all pseudoephedrine products behind a store counter or otherwise in a manner
that is inaccessible to customers without the assistance of the operator or an
employee of the establishment.
   (c)   A violation of this section is a class 1 misdemeanor.
   (d)   Any pseudoephedrine products found to be displayed in a retail
establishment in violation of subsection (b) constitute a nuisance and are
subject to seizure and disposal by the city in the manner provided in
subsection (e) of this section.
   (e)   Products subject to seizure under this section may be seized by a
peace officer under the authority of a search warrant or upon probable cause to
believe that the products are subject to seizure pursuant to subsection (d).
Before removing any products subject to seizure from the retail establishment,
the peace officer shall give the operator or permittee of the establishment a
reasonable opportunity to remove the products from the area of the
establishment accessible to the public, unless the operator or permittee has
been afforded this opportunity on a previous occasion within the preceding
twelve (12) months.
   (f)   At the time of seizing any products under this section, the peace
officer shall deliver a notice of intent to dispose of the seized products.
This notice shall include the date and location of the seizure, an inventory of
the items seized, a description of how a post-seizure hearing may be requested,
the time limit for requesting that hearing, and a warning that failure to
request the hearing in a timely manner will result in the disposal and
destruction of the seized property. The notice required under this subsection
shall be served on the operator or permittee of the retail establishment
present at the time of the seizure, or if that person cannot be identified at
the time of the seizure, on any employee of the establishment.
   (g)   A person receiving a notice of intent to dispose under this section
may request a post-seizure hearing to determine the validity of the seizure
within fifteen (15) days of receiving the notice. The court shall conduct the
hearing within ten (10) days of the court's receipt of the request, excluding
weekends and holidays. Failure to request the hearing in a timely manner, or
failure to attend a scheduled hearing, constitutes a waiver of the right to
challenge the validity of the seizure. At the hearing, the city shall have the
burden of establishing by a preponderance of the evidence that the property was
subject to seizure pursuant to subsections (b) and (d) of this section. At the
hearing, the court may admit any reliable and relevant evidence. If the court
finds that the products were not subject to seizure, it shall order the
immediate return of all seized items. If the court finds that the products were
properly seized pursuant to this section, the court shall order that the
products are forfeited to the city, and shall direct the city to destroy and
dispose of the products.
   (h)   The requirements of this section are in addition to any requirements
under state and federal law.
(Ord. No. 10211, § 1, 10-18-05)
Sec. 11-72. Retail establishment's right to refuse sale.
Any operator, permittee, or employee of a retail establishment may refuse to
sell any pseudoephedrine product to any person if the operator, permittee or
employee has reason to believe that the product will be used in the unlawful
manufacture of methamphetamine or other controlled substance. Facts that give
rise to the reason to believe that the product will be used unlawfully include
but are not limited to a "suspicious transaction" as defined in Section 13-3401
of the Arizona Revised Statutes; the attempted purchase of pseudoephedrine
products in excess of the amounts permitted by Arizona law; the attempt to
purchase pseudoephedrine products in a series of transactions in an effort to
circumvent the limitations on sales; or the attempt to purchase pseudoephedrine
products in conjunction with other products, such as red phosphorous or iodine,
that are known to be used in manufacturing methamphetamine. Any person who
refuses to make a retail sale in accordance with this section is not liable to
its customer or any other person for any loss or damage caused in whole or in
part by the refusal to sell.
(Ord. No. 10211, § 1, 10-18-05)
Sec. 11-73. Possession, sale or distribution of certain synthetic cannabinoids.
   (a)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section:
   Licensee means the person licensed or required to be licensed pursuant to
Chapter 19 of this Code.
   Prohibited synthetic cannabinoid means any material, compound, mixture or
preparation that contains any quantity of the following cannabimimetic
substances and their salts, isomers, whether optical, positional or geometric,
and salts of isomers, whenever the existence of such salts, isomers and salts
of isomers is possible within the following specific chemical designation:
   (1)   Any synthetic cannabinoid designated within A.R.S. Section 13-3401;
and
   (2)   EG-018.
   Retail establishment means any business or other establishment that is
engaged in the business of sales of tangible personal property at retail.
   (b)   Prohibitions. It is unlawful for any person or any operator or
licensee of a retail establishment to sell, offer for sale, display for sale,
or distribute any prohibited synthetic cannabinoid in the corporate limits of
the city. This prohibition is in addition to any act otherwise prohibited under
Arizona or federal law, and nothing in this section limits or in any way
affects any other provision of Arizona or federal law.
   (c)   Classification and penalties. Any violation of this section is a
public nuisance and is punishable as follows:
   1.   A violation of this section is a class 1 misdemeanor. Each day during
which a violation of this section occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
In addition to any other penalties imposed according to law, any person found
guilty of this section shall be liable for payment of the costs of prosecution
and all investigative costs incurred, including but not limited to any cost for
forensic or laboratory testing.
   2.   Alternatively, a violation of this section may be charged as a civil
infraction, with penalties and sanctions as provided in Chapter 8 of this Code.
In addition to any other penalties imposed under Chapter 8, any person found
responsible for a civil infraction violation of this section shall be liable
for payment of the costs of prosecution and all investigative costs incurred,
including but not limited to any cost for forensic or laboratory testing. Upon
finding a person or retail establishment responsible for a civil infraction
violation of this section, the court or hearing officer shall issue an
abatement order as provided in Section
8-6.1 of this Code, ordering the person and/or retail establishment to abate
the violation(s) and to remain in compliance with the abatement order for one
(1) year, and advising the person and/or retail establishment that any
violation of the order shall result in the imposition of additional fines and
penalties, and may cause the filing of a criminal charge for failure to obey an
order to abate, the penalties for which include mandatory jail pursuant to
Section
11-122 of this Code.
   3.   In addition to the remedies and penalties described above, the City of
Tucson shall have the authority to seek an injunction against any person or
retail establishment violating the provisions of this section. In any action
seeking an injunction, the city shall be entitled to collect its enforcement
expenses, including forensic costs, law enforcement costs and reasonable
attorney fees and costs incurred.
   4.   In addition to the remedies and penalties described above, for any
retailer who is a licensee under Chapter 7, Article XIX of this Code relating
to retail tobacco sales, violations of this section shall be a basis for the
suspension of that license as follows:
   i.   The license of a licensee who violates this section on two (2) separate
dates within a twelve (12) month period shall be suspended for a period of
thirty (30) days.
   ii.   The license of a licensee who violates this section on three (3)
separate dates within a twelve (12) month period shall be suspended for a
period of twelve (12) months.
   License suspensions under this subsection shall be administered as provided
in Section
7-436 of this Code. A licensee under Chapter 7, Article XIX shall be notified
in writing within ten (10) days by the police department whenever an operator
or employee of the licensee is cited for a violation of this section, and the
license shall not be suspended in the absence of such notification.
   (d)   Seizure. Any product found to be displayed for sale or offered for
sale in violation of this section constitutes a nuisance and is subject to
seizure by law enforcement. Products subject to seizure under this section may
be seized by a peace officer under the authority of a search warrant or upon
probable cause to believe the product is subject to seizure as provided in this
section.
   (e)   Injunctive relief. The City of Tucson shall have the authority to seek
an injunction against any person or retail establishments violating the
provisions of this section. In any action seeking an injunction, the city shall
be entitled to collect its enforcement expenses, including forensic and
laboratory costs, law enforcement costs and reasonable attorney fees and costs
incurred.
   (f)   Defense. It shall be a defense to any prosecution under this section
that a product is specifically exempted by, or regulated within and in
compliance with, state or federal law. For the purposes of this section, it
shall not be a defense that a product is not subject to regulation unless the
product is specifically exempt from regulation; mere "nonregulation" without a
specific regulatory exemption does not render a product exempt under this
section.
(Ord. No. 11460, § 2, 5-23-17)
Secs. 11-74--11-87. Reserved.
ARTICLE III.
SMOKING*
__________
*   Editors Note: Section 1 of Ord. No. 6384, adopted Feb. 3, 1986, changed the
title of this article from "Nuisances" to "Smoking."
__________
Sec. 11-88. Reserved.
   Editors Note: Section 11-88 was repealed by § 2 of Ord. No. 6384. The
provisions were reenacted by 4 as a new 11-67.
Sec. 11-89. Smoking prohibited in specified places, exceptions.
No person shall smoke or carry a lighted cigar, cigarette or pipe, or use a
match or flame- producing device for lighting any of them in any of the
following places and at the following times:
   (1)   Smoking means inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted
cigar, pipe, cigarette, weed, plant or other combustible substance, or any
activated electronic smoking device as defined in section
7-427(a) of this Code, in any manner or in any form.
   (2)   Smoking is prohibited in any public vehicle, any area placarded as a
"No Smoking" area, or an enclosed structure, such as, but not limited to,
taxicabs, lobbies, hallways, restrooms, stairways, malls, stores, theaters,
locker rooms, conference rooms and recreation rooms.
   (a)   Smoking will be permitted by performers when smoking is required by a
script as an integral part of a performance.
   (b)   This article does not apply to places where smoking is regulated or
prohibited by federal, state or county laws.
   (c)   This section includes structures under the control of the city.
   (d)   This article does not apply to bars, bowling alleys, pool halls,
restaurants, retail tobacco stores, private homes, hotel and motel rooms rented
to guests, hotel and motel conference or meeting rooms and public or private
assembly rooms when used for private functions, or private vehicles. The
exceptions of this provision do not apply if the area is placarded as "No
Smoking."
   (3)   In designated areas of the workplace as defined and set forth herein.
   (a)   Purpose. Because smoking is a danger to health and is a cause of
annoyance and discomfort to those who are present in smoky, confined spaces,
the purpose of this section is to protect the public health and welfare by
regulating smoking in the workplace.
   (b)   Definitions.
   (i)   Workplace means any enclosed area of a structure or portion thereof
intended for occupancy by any business entity. "Workplace" includes but is not
limited to offices, factories, retail stores, hospitals, libraries, and service
establishments.
   (ii)   Employer means any person who employs the services of an individual
person.
   (iii)   Employee means any person who is employed by any employer in
consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit.
   (c)   Within ninety (90) days of the adoption of this section, each employer
shall adopt, implement, and maintain a written policy regulating smoking by
employees which shall contain at a minimum the following:
   (i)   Prohibition of smoking in employer conference and meeting rooms,
classrooms, auditoriums, rest rooms, and hallways.
   (ii)   Provision and maintenance of a contiguous no-smoking area of not less
than two-thirds of the seating capacity and floor space in cafeterias,
lunchrooms, and employee lounges.
   (iii)   Any nonsmoking employee may object to his or her employer about
smoke in his or her workplace. The employer shall attempt to reach a reasonable
accommodation, using already available means of ventilation, separation or
partition, insofar as possible, between the preferences of nonsmoking and
smoking employees. However, an employer is not required by this subsection to
make any expenditures for structural changes in the workplace.
   (iv)   If an accommodation which is satisfactory to all affected nonsmoking
employees cannot be reached in any given workplace, the preference of
nonsmoking employees shall prevail; and the employer shall prohibit smoking in
that workplace.
   (v)   No employee shall be terminated or subject to disciplinary action
solely as a result of his or her complaint about smoking in the workplace.
   (vi)   The smoking policy shall be communicated to all employees within
three (3) weeks of its adoption.
   (d)   This subsection is not intended to regulate smoking in the following
places:
   (i)   A private home.
   (ii)   An office occupied solely by a single smoker.
(Ord. No. 5890, § 1, 10-11-83; Ord. No. 7089, § 1, 11-14-88; Ord. No. 7202, §
1, 6-5-89; Ord. No. 11703, § 3, 10-22-19)
   Editors Note: Section 11-89(3), renumbered from §
11-89(4), was added as the result of an Initiative Special Election held Nov.
5, 1985, pursuant to a citizen-initiated measure--Initiative Petition No. 1985-
I002. The amendment became effective on Nov. 12, 1985. The ninety days referred
to in §
11-89(3)(c) is Feb. 10, 1986.
Sec. 11-90. Placarding required.
"No Smoking" signs with letters not less than one (1) inch in height or the
international "No Smoking" symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of
a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle of not less than six (6) inches
and with a red bar across it) shall be clearly, sufficiently and conspicuously
posted at the entrance of every place where smoking is prohibited by section
11-89 by the owner, operator, manager or other person having control of such
place.
(Ord. No. 5890, § 1, 10-11-83; Ord. No. 7089, § 1, 11-14-88; Ord. No. 7202, §
1, 6-5-89)
Sec. 11-91. Reserved.
   Editors Note: Section 11-91 was repealed by § 2 of Ord No. 6384. Section 4
reenacted the provisions as a new §
11-68.
Sec. 11-92. Enforcement; penalty.
   (a)   Any person found responsible under this article shall be guilty of a
civil infraction and punished in accordance with the mandatory penalties of
subsection (c) of this section pursuant to the procedures outlined in this
section and chapter
28 of the Tucson Code. If there is any conflict between the procedures of this
section and the general procedures of chapter
28, this section is controlling.
   (b)   Violations may be investigated and citations may be issued by police
officers and fire department inspectors.
   (c)   Any person who violates any provision of section
11-89(3) by smoking in a posted "No Smoking" area is guilty of an infraction
and shall be punished by a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00)
nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). Any employer who violates any
provision of section
11-89(3) is guilty of an infraction and shall be punished by a fine of not less
than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00). Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such.
(Ord. No. 5890, § 1, 10-11-83; Ord. No. 6384, § 5, 2-3-86)
   Editors Note: Section
11-92(c) was added as the result of an Initiative Special Election held Nov. 5,
1985, pursuant to a citizen-initiated measure--Initiative Petition No. 1985-
1002. The amendment became effective on Nov. 12, 1985.
Sec. 11-93. Tobacco vending machines prohibited in specified places,
exceptions.
   (a)   Declaration of legislative findings. The city council finds that the
vast majority of smokers begin smoking in their teens or pre-teens. The health
hazards posed by cigarettes and other tobacco products are well documented and
the sale of tobacco in any form to persons under the age of eighteen (18) is
prohibited in Arizona. However, cigarette vending machines in public places
have provided unsupervised minors with easy access to cigarettes, in
contravention of the policy of this state. Accordingly, the city council finds
that the ability of unsupervised minors to obtain cigarettes and other tobacco
products in violation of the law will be significantly reduced by prohibiting
vending machines which dispense such products, except as allowed in this local
law.
   (b)   Definitions. 
   Bar area means the area within a liquor establishment where beverages
containing spirituous liquor are dispensed.
   Dispensing of spirituous liquors means the preparation of beverages
containing spirituous liquors.
   Employee means any person who performs any service at a licensed liquor
establishment on a full-time, part-time or contract basis. Employee does not
include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the
premises or for the delivery of goods to the liquor establishment.
   Liquor establishment means any public or private place which sells or serves
spirituous liquors and is required to be licensed pursuant to A.R.S. § 4-209
(b).
   Operator means any person who owns, operates or manages a business as a
corporation or partnership, firm, organization or other legal entity.
   Public place means any area to which the public is invited or permitted.
   Spirituous liquors is as defined in A.R.S. § 4-101(27).
   Tobacco product means any substance which contains tobacco, including but
not limited to cigarettes, cigars, smoking tobacco and smokeless tobacco.
   Vending machine means any mechanical, electronic or other similar device
that dispenses tobacco products.
   (c)   Distribution of tobacco products through vending machines prohibited.
   (1)   No vending machine operator shall place a vending machine dispensing a
tobacco product in a public place except as provided in this section.
   (2)   No operator shall allow a vending machine dispensing a tobacco product
on their premises except as provided in this section.
   (d)   Exceptions. Liquor establishments possessing a liquor license pursuant
to A.R.S. § 4-209.B.6., bar license, may allow vending machines dispensing a
tobacco product on the licensed premises pursuant to the following procedures:
   (1)   Placing a vending machine dispensing tobacco products at a distance no
greater than ten (10) feet from the bar area; and
   (2)   Placing a vending machine dispensing tobacco products so that it is
visible by the operator of the liquor establishment, or his or her employee,
during the use of such vending machine.
   (e)   Penalties.
   (1)   Any person found to be responsible for a violation of this section
shall be guilty of a civil infraction and fined not less than two hundred and
fifty dollars ($250.00) for the first violation; not less than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for the second violation; and not less than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) for the third and all subsequent violations. Each day such
violation is committed or permitted to continue shall be a separate offense and
shall be punishable as such. No judge or hearing officer may grant probation to
or suspend the imposition of the minimum fine prescribed herein upon a person
found responsible for any offense prohibited in this section.
   (2)   Violations may be investigated and citations may be issued by police
officers and fire department inspectors.
(Ord. No. 7991, § 1, 2-1-93)
Secs. 11-94, 11-95. Reserved.
   Editors Note: Sections 11-94, 11-95, relating to exemptions from and
violations of this article, derived from Ord. No. 5890, § 1, adopted Oct. 11,
1983, were repealed by § 2 of Ord. No. 6384, adopted Feb. 3, 1986.
Secs. 11-96--11-99. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV.
CIVIL EMERGENCIES--POWERS OF THE MAYOR
Sec. 11-100. Definitions.
   A civil emergency is hereby defined as:
   (1)   A riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the use of force or
violence disturbing the public peace, or any threat to use such force or
violence, if accompanied by immediate power of execution, by two (2) or more
persons acting together without authority of law; or
   (2)   Any natural disaster or man-made calamity, including flood,
conflagration, windstorm, tornado, earthquake or explosion within the corporate
limits of the city resulting in the death or injury of persons or the
destruction of property to such an extent that extraordinary measures must be
taken to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
   Curfew is hereby defined as a prohibition against any person or persons
walking, running, loitering, standing or motoring upon any alley, street,
highway, public property or vacant premises within the corporate limits of the
city excepting persons officially designated to duty with reference to said
civil emergency.
(Ord. No. 3514, § 1, 9-8-70)
Sec. 11-101. Proclamation of civil emergency.
When in the judgment of the mayor, or in the event of his absence or inability
to act, the vice-mayor, and upon the advice and with the consent of a majority
of the council, or if a majority of the council is unavailable for any reason,
with the advice of the police or fire chief and the city manager, or their duly
appointed designees, a civil emergency as defined herein is deemed to exist, he
shall forthwith proclaim in writing the existence of the same.
(Ord. No. 3414, § 1, 9-8-70)
Sec. 11-102. General curfew.
After proclamation of a civil emergency by the mayor or vice-mayor, he may
order a general curfew applicable to such geographical areas of the city or to
the city as a whole as he deems advisable and applicable during such hours of
the day or night as he deems necessary in the interest of the public safety and
welfare.
(Ord. No. 3514, § 1, 9-8-70)
Sec. 11-103. Additional powers.
After proclamation of a civil emergency by the mayor or vice-mayor, he may
also, in the interest of public safety and welfare, make any or all of the
following orders:
   (1)   Order the closing of any or all retail liquor stores.
   (2)   Order the closing of any or all beer taverns.
   (3)   Order the closing of any or all private clubs or portions thereof
wherein the consumption of intoxicating liquors and/or beer is permitted.
   (4)   Order the discontinuance of the retail sale of beer.
   (5)   Order the discontinuance of the sale, distribution, or gift of
gasoline or other liquid flammable or combustible products in any container
other than a gas tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle.
   (6)   Order the closing of gasoline stations and other establishments, the
chief activity of which is the sale, distribution or dispensing of liquid
flammable or combustible products.
   (7)   Order the discontinuance of the sale, distribution, dispensing, loan
or gift of any firearms or ammunition of any character whatsoever.
   (8)   Order the closing of any or all establishments or portions thereof,
the chief activity of which is the sale, distribution, dispensing or giving
away of firearms and/or ammunition.
   (9)   Issue such other orders as are eminently necessary for the protection
of life and property.
(Ord. No. 3514, § 1, 9-8-70)
Sec. 11-104. Duration of proclamation or orders.
Any proclamation or order issued in accordance with the provisions of this
article shall terminate after forty-eight (48) hours from the issuance thereof,
or upon the issuance of a proclamation determining an emergency no longer
exists, whichever occurs first; however, the duration of any such proclamation
or order may be extended for such additional periods of time as may be
determined necessary by the mayor.
(Ord. No. 3514, § 1, 9-8-70)
Sec. 11-105. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this article or executive order or
proclamation issued pursuant hereto shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable
by a fine not exceeding three hundred dollars ($300.00) or by imprisonment for
not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day
any such violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 3514, § 1, 9-8-70)
Secs. 11-106--11-109. Reserved.
ARTICLE V.
INTERFERENCE WITH FIRE DEPARTMENT*
__________
*   Cross References: Fire protection and prevention, ch.
13.
__________
Sec. 11-110. Interference with fire department.
Any person who attempts to obstruct or obstructs the operations of the fire
department in connection with a suspected or reported fire or other emergency,
whether or not such fire or emergency is found to exist, or disobeys any lawful
command of the chief or any officer of the fire department who is in charge of
such operations, or any part thereof, or any police officer assisting the fire
department, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 5719, § 2, 2-28-83; Ord. No. 6739, § 1, 7-6-87)
Sec. 11-111. Police placement of ropes or guards; violation.
It shall be the duty of the chief of police of the city, at the time of any
fire, to place ropes or guards across all streets, lanes or alleys on which
shall be situated any building on fire, and at such other points as are deemed
expedient and necessary. Any person entering within the line indicated by such
ropes or guards and refusing to go outside such lines when directed to do so by
any police officer or officer of the fire department shall be deemed guilty of
a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 6030, § 2, 6-11-84; Ord. No. 10036, § 4, 9-7-04)
   Editors Note: Section 1 of Ord. No. 6030, enacted June 11, 1984, repealed
former §§
11-111, 11-112, relative to tampering with fire equipment generally and
tampering with fire hydrant or fire appliance; the repealed sections had been
derived from Ord. No. 5719, § 2, enacted Feb. 28, 1983. Section 2 of Ord. No.
6030 set out new §§
11-111, 11-112, as herein codified.
Sec. 11-112. Vehicles obstructing progress of fire apparatus.
Any person operating any vehicle who shall willfully or carelessly permit the
same to obstruct the progress of any apparatus of the fire department
organization going to a suspected, reported or actual fire or other emergency,
or who shall willfully damage any hose or apparatus belonging to the fire
department shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 6030, § 2, 6-11-84; Ord. No. 10036, § 3, 9-7-04)
   Note: See the editor's note accompanying 11-111.
Sec. 11-113. Reserved.
   Editors Note: Section 11-113, prohibited tampering with barricades, derived
from Ord. No. 5719, § 2, adopted Feb. 28, 1983, was repealed by § 2 of Ord. No.
6739, adopted July 6, 1987.
Sec. 11-114. Refusal to obey order of fire chief or building official;
condemnation sign.
Any person who refuses to obey, as soon as practicable, a verbal or written
cease and desist order, a stop-work order, an order to vacate premises or any
other lawful order under this chapter, given by the fire chief or building
official or the designate of either, or who disobeys a condemnation sign posted
by or at the direction of the fire chief or building official or designate of
either, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 5719, § 2, 2-28-83)
Sec. 11-115. Penalty.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor
more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for not more than
six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. No judge may suspend the
imposition of the minimum fine prescribed herein.
(Ord. No. 5719, § 2, 2-28-83)
Secs. 11-116--11-120. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI.
OBSTRUCTION OF ENFORCEMENT OF CIVIL INFRACTIONS
Sec. 11-121. Failure to furnish information, failure to sign citation.
Any person who fails to furnish to the citing official or his designate the
information required for completion of a civil infraction citation or who,
after request by the citing official, refuses to sign the civil infraction
citation shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 5720, § 1, 2-28-83)
Sec. 11-122. Failure to obey abatement order.
Any person who fails to obey an order of abatement issued by a magistrate,
special magistrate, or limited special magistrate is guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by a minimum mandatory twenty-four (24) hours in jail up to a
maximum six (6) months in jail, by a minimum mandatory fine of two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.00), up to a maximum twenty-five hundred dollars
($2,500.00), and may be placed on probation up to three (3) years. Minimum jail
and minimum fines can not be suspended.
(Ord. No. 8154, § 3, 11-8-93)
Secs. 11-123--11-129. Reserved.
ARTICLE VII.
NITROUS OXIDE
Sec. 11-130. Sale of products containing nitrous oxide.
   (a)   Definitions. For the purposes of this article, the following
definitions apply:
   (1)   Nitrous oxide product means any balloon, container, canister, device
or cartridge exclusively containing nitrous oxide, N2O, dinitrogen monoxide,
dinitrogen oxide, nitrogen oxide, butyl nitrite, isobutyl nitrite, secondary
butyl nitrite, tertiary butyl nitrite or laughing gas. Product packaging that
lists nitrous oxide or any of the other chemicals listed in this definition as
the exclusive ingredient shall constitute prima facie evidence that the product
is a nitrous oxide product.
   (2)   Retail establishment means any place of business that offers any
nitrous oxide product for sale at retail.
   (3)   Operator means any owner, licensee, proprietor, president, officer,
director, manager, or supervisor of the retail establishment; or an employee
with administrative or operational authority for the retail establishment.
   (b)   The operator of a retail establishment shall keep all nitrous oxide
products behind a store counter or otherwise in a manner that is inaccessible
to customers without the assistance of the operator or an employee of the
establishment.
   (c)   A retail establishment that sells nitrous oxide products shall display
at least two (2) conspicuous signs, with at least one (1) in English and one
(1) in Spanish, of not less than eleven (11) inches by fourteen (14) inches in
size which state the following:
It is unlawful for a person to sell or deliver nitrous oxide products to a
person under eighteen (18) years of age. Except in limited situations, such an
offense is a class 5 felony.
It is unlawful for a person under the age of eighteen (18) to possess nitrous
oxide. Such an offense is a class 3 misdemeanor.
It is unlawful for a person under the age of eighteen (18) to inhale, ingest or
otherwise consume nitrous oxide. Such an offense is a class 1 misdemeanor.
   (d)   A retail establishment that sells nitrous oxide products shall record
each transaction involving the sale of nitrous oxide products in a registry.
The record of each sale shall include the date purchased, amount purchased, the
printed name and address of the purchaser, the sex and age of purchaser and the
signature of the purchaser. The establishment shall maintain each registry
entry for one year from the date of the transaction. The retail establishment
shall make the registry available during normal business hours for inspection
and copying by any peace officer.
   (e)   Any nitrous oxide products found displayed in a retail establishment
in violation of any subsection within this section constitute a nuisance and
are subject to seizure and disposal by the city in the manner provided in
subsection (f) of this section. Any nitrous oxide products remaining in a
retail establishment found to have sold products in violation of any subsection
within this section constitute a nuisance and are subject to seizure and
disposal by the city in a manner provided in subsection (f) of this section.
   (f)   Products subject to seizure under this section may be seized by a
peace officer under the authority of a search warrant or upon probable cause to
believe that the products are subject to seizure pursuant to subsection (e).
Before removing any products subject to seizure from the retail establishment,
the peace officer shall give the operator of the establishment a reasonable
opportunity to remove the products from the area of the establishment
accessible to the public, unless the operator has been afforded this
opportunity on a previous occasion within the preceding twelve (12) months.
   (g)   At the time of seizing any products under this section, the peace
officer shall deliver a notice of intent to dispose of the seized products.
This notice shall include the date and location of the seizure, an inventory of
the items seized, a description of how a post-seizure hearing may be requested,
the time limit for requesting that hearing, and a warning that failure to
request the hearing in a timely manner will result in the disposal and
destruction of the seized property. The notice required under this subsection
shall be served on the operator of the retail establishment present at the time
of the seizure, or if that person cannot be identified at the time of the
seizure, on any employee of the establishment.
   (h)   A person receiving a notice of intent to dispose under this section
may request a post-seizure hearing to determine the validity of the seizure
within fifteen (15) days of receiving the notice. The court shall conduct the
hearing within ten (10) days of the court's receipt of the request, excluding
weekends and holidays. Failure to request the hearing in a timely manner, or
failure to attend a scheduled hearing, constitutes a waiver of the right to
challenge the validity of the seizure. At the hearing, the city shall have the
burden of establishing by a preponderance of the evidence that the property was
subject to seizure pursuant to any subsection within this section. At the
hearing, the court may admit any reliable and relevant evidence. If the court
finds that the products were not subject to seizure, it shall order the
immediate return of all seized items. If the court finds that the products were
properly seized pursuant to this section, the court shall order that the
products are forfeited to the city, and shall direct the city to destroy and
dispose of the products.
   (i)   An operator who violates a provision of this section is guilty of a
class 1 misdemeanor.
   (j)   The requirements of this section are in addition to any requirements
under state and federal law.
(Ord. No. 10735, § 1, 11-24-09, eff. 2-1-10)
Sec. 11-131. Retail establishment's right to refuse sale.
Any operator of a retail establishment may refuse to sell any nitrous oxide
product to any person if the operator has reason to believe that the product
will be used in any manner contrary to federal, state or local law. Facts that
give reason to believe that the product will be used unlawfully include, but
are not limited to, the following:
   (1)   The circumstances would lead a reasonable person to believe that any
person is attempting to possess nitrous oxide products for the purpose of
unlawful distribution to persons under the age of eighteen (18) as prohibited
by state law.
   (2)   The transaction involves payment for nitrous oxide products in a total
amount of more than one hundred dollars ($100.00).
Any person who refuses to make a retail sale in accordance with this subsection
is not liable to its customer or any other person for any loss or damage caused
in whole or in part by the refusal to sell.
(Ord. No. 10735, § 1, 11-24-09, eff. 2-1-10)
Sec. 11-132. Possession and use of nitrous oxide by persons under the age of
18.
   (a)   A person under the age of eighteen (18) commits an offense if the
person possesses a nitrous oxide product unless the person under eighteen (18)
years of age is delivering or accepting delivery in the person's capacity as an
employee. Such an offense is a class 3 misdemeanor.
   (b)   A person under the age of eighteen (18) commits an offense if the
person inhales, ingests uses or otherwise consumes a nitrous oxide product.
Such an offense is a class 1 misdemeanor.
   (c)   This section shall not apply to any person who inhales, ingests uses
or otherwise consumes nitrous oxide or any material containing nitrous oxide
pursuant to an administration for the purpose of medical, surgical, or dental
care by a person duly licensed to administer such an agent.
(Ord. No. 10735, § 1, 11-24-09, eff. 2-1-10)
Secs. 11-133--11-139. Reserved.
ARTICLE VIII.
RESERVED*
__________
*   Editors Note: Ord. No. 9816, § 8, adopted Feb. 24, 2003, repealed Art.
VIII, §§
11-140--11-145, and enacted similar provisions set out in new §
16-32. Former Art. VIII pertained to loud or unruly gatherings and derived from
Ord. No. 8683, § 1, adopted May 6, 1996; Ord. No. 9041, § 1, adopted April 13,
1998. See the Code Comparative Table.
__________
Secs. 11-140--11-159. Reserved.
ARTICLE IX.
RESERVED*
*   Editors Note: Ord. No. 11331, § 1, adopted Dec. 8, 2015, repealed Art. IX,
§§ 11-160 – 11-160.3. Former Art. IX pertained to crimes on library grounds and
derived from Ord. No. 8770, § 1, adopted Nov. 4, 1996. See the Code Comparative
Table.
Secs. 11-160 – 11-160.3. Reserved.
Chapter 11A
GENERAL SERVICES DEPARTMENT*
__________
*   Editors Note: Ord. No. 9934, § 1, adopted Feb. 2, 2004, effective July 1,
2004, amended the title of said chapter to read as set out. Formerly said title
pertained to Department of Operations.
   Cross References: Buildings, electricity, plumbing, etc. ch.
6; refuse collection and disposal, ch.
15; sewerage and sewage disposal, ch.
25; streets and sidewalks, ch.
25; water, ch.
27.
__________
Sec.
11A-1.   General services department established.
Sec.
11A-2.   Powers and duties of the general services department.
Sec.
11A-3.   Divisions within general services department.
Sec. 11A-1. General services department established.
There is established a general services department, whose head shall be the
director of general services. The director's appointment and removal shall be
in accordance with sections
2,
6, and
11 of chapter V of the Charter.
(Ord. No. 3904, § 1, 8-14-72; Ord. No. 7884, § 4, 8-3-92; Ord. No. 9934, § 3,
2-2-04)
Sec. 11A-2. Powers and duties of the general services department.
The general services department shall perform those duties designated by the
city manager, and the director of general services shall carry out those
assigned duties and functions, including the supervision of divisions
established within the general services department, deemed advisable.
The general services department shall provide those architectural, engineering,
communications, facilities management, fleet maintenance, and other technical,
support, and administrative services that the city manager assigns to it.
(Ord. No. 3904, § 1, 8-14-72; Ord. No. 7884, § 4, 8-3-92; Ord. No. 9934, § 3,
2-2-04; Ord. No. 9948, § 1, 4-19-04)
Sec. 11A-3. Divisions within general services department.
The general services department's divisions shall have the functions and duties
assigned by the director of general services, and those additional functions,
powers, and duties designated by the city manager.
(Ord. No. 3904, § 1, 8-14-72; Ord. No. 7884, § 5, 8-3-92; Ord. No. 8070, § 3,
6-21-93; Ord. No. 9934, § 3, 2-2-04; Ord. No. 9948, § 1, 4-19-04)
   Editors Note: It should be noted that the provisions of Ord. No. 9934 and
Ord. No. 9948 become effective July 1, 2004.
Chapter 11B
PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT SERVICES DEPARTMENT*
__________
*   Cross References: Administration, ch.
2; development compliance code, ch.
23A.
__________
Sec.
11B-1.   Planning and development services department established.
Sec.
11B-2.   Powers and duties of the planning and development services department.
Sec.
11B-3.   Department purposes and functions.
Sec.
11B-4.   Other Code provisions.
Sec. 11B-1. Planning and development services department established.
   The development services department is renamed as the planning and
development services department, and there is hereby established the planning
and development services department. The head of the department shall be the
director of planning and development services, whose appointment, compensation
and removal shall be in accordance with sections
2,
6 and
11 of Chapter V of the Charter.
(Ord. No. 10655, § 2, 4-21-09, eff. 7-1-09)
Sec. 11B-2. Powers and duties of the planning and development services
department.
   The planning and development services department shall perform such work and
duties as the city manager may designate, and the director of the planning and
development services department shall carry out such assigned duties and
functions, including the supervision of divisions established within the
planning and development services department as necessary. The divisions of the
department shall be established by the director, subject to the control of the
city manager, so as to facilitate the efficient and effective delivery of
services to be provided by the department.
(Ord. No. 10655, § 2, 4-21-09, eff. 7-1-09)
Sec. 11B-3. Department purposes and functions.
   The purposes and functions of the planning and development services
department shall include, but not be limited to:
   (a)   Administration of those functions and duties of the former director of
the department of urban planning and design as set forth in the Land Use Code
and Tucson Code
chapter 23A;
   (b)   Development and implementation of the Land Use Code,
chapter 23, the Development Compliance Code,
chapter 23A, development standards, the Unified Development Code,
chapter 23B, and its administrative manual and technical standards manual;
   (c)   Creation and maintenance of city zoning maps;
   (d)   Administration of the board of adjustment, the planning commission,
sign design review committee and the design review board;
   (e)   Serving as the planning agency as set forth in A.R.S. Title 9, Chapter
4, Article 6 unless otherwise designated by the city manager; and
   (f)   Such other purposes and functions as the city manager may designate
from time to time.
(Ord. No. 10655, § 2, 4-21-09, eff. 7-1-09; Ord. No. 11227, § 1, 12-9-14; Ord.
No. 11508, § 11, eff. 1-4-18)
Sec. 11B-4. Other Code provisions.
   For purposes of this chapter, and for purposes of all other chapters of the
Tucson Code, the terms "planning and development services department", "PDSD",
"development services department" and "DSD" shall be deemed to refer to the
planning and development services department; and any references to the "the
director of the planning and development services department", "PDSD director,
"Director of the development services department" or "DSD director" shall be
deemed to refer to the director of the planning and development services
department.
(Ord. No. 10655, § 2, 4-21-09, eff. 7-1-09; Ord. No. 11227, § 2, 12-9-14)
 
Chapter 12
ELECTIONS*
Art. I.   Definitions, § 12-1
Art. II.   Voter Qualifications and Registrations, §§ 12-2 – 12-10
Art. III.    Conduct of Elections, §§ 12-11 – 12-38
Art. IV.    Vote by Mail Elections and Early Voting, §§ 12-39 – 12-53
Art. V.    Financial Disclosure, §§ 12-54 – 12-63
Art. VI.    Nominations; Candidates, §§ 12-64 – 12-80
Art. VII.    Campaign Finance; Candidates, Political Action Committees, and
Public Funding Program, §§ 12-81 – 12-109
Art. VIII.    Initiative, §§ 12-110 – 12-147
Art. IX.    Referendum, §§ 12-148 – 12-160
Art. X.    Recall, § 12-161 – 12-180
Art. XI.    Campaign Finance; Reporting for All Political Action Committees
Intending to Influence any Petition Drive, §§ 12-181 – 12-190
Art XII.    Reporting of Independent Expenditures, § 12-191
Article I. Definitions
Sec.
12-1.       Definitions
Article II. Voter Qualifications and Registrations
Sec.
12-2.       City clerk to compile and keep register of persons entitled to
vote.
Sec.
12-3.       Qualifications of city electors.
Sec.
12-4.       Change of residence from one address to another.
Sec.
12-5.       Registration, residence in ward required.
Sec.
12-6.       Active registered voters.
Secs. 12-7 – 12-10. Reserved.
Article III. Conduct of Elections
Sec.
12-11.    Applicability of general election laws; duties of the mayor and
council and city clerk.
Sec.
12-12.    City clerk may promulgate rules, regulations, procedures, and forms.
Sec.
12-13.    Vote by mail elections authorized.
Sec.
12-14.    Mayor and council to adopt ordinance calling all municipal elections.
Sec.
12-15.    All special elections to be conducted in same manner and under same
provisions as general elections.
Sec.
12-16.    Voting locations for city elections.
Sec.
12-17.    Form; preparation of ballot.
Sec.
12-18.    Form; early or mail ballot affidavit.
Sec.
12-19.    Rotation of names of candidates.
Sec.
12-20.    City clerk authorized to conduct hand counts.
Sec.
12-21.    City to bear costs incurred by city clerk.
Sec.
12-22.    Displaying United States flag at voting locations.
Sec.
12-23.    Appointment of voting location boards; vote by mail or early ballot
boards, write-in boards; other election boards.
Sec.
12-24.    Authorized persons in voting locations during voting hours.
Sec.
12-25.    Prohibited electioneering within seventy-five (75) feet of city
voting locations or sites where mail ballots may be cast.
Sec.
12-26.    Limits on permitted activities within the seventy-five (75) foot
limit.
Sec.
12-27.    Grounds for challenging a voter.
Sec.
12-28.    Challenging of voters at a voting location; procedure.
Sec.
12-29.    Challenging of vote by mail and early ballots; procedure.
Sec.
12-30.    Rules determining residence of voter upon challenge; reading of rules
upon request.
Sec.
12-31.    Release of unofficial election returns.
Sec.
12-32.    Adoption of official canvass of election.
Secs. 12-33 – 12-38. Reserved.
Article IV. Vote by Mail Elections and Early Voting
Sec.
12-39.   Election notice.
Sec.
12-40.   Mailing vote by mail ballots.
Sec.
12-41.   Request for early ballots; on-site early voting; emergency voting of
electors.
Sec.
12-42.   Early ballot request forms distributed by candidates or political
committees.
Sec.
12-43.   Mailing early ballot.
Sec.
12-44.   Instructions to vote by mail and early voters.
Sec.
12-45.   Duties of city clerk on receiving a returned vote by mail or early
ballot.
Sec.
12-46.   Replacement ballots.
Sec.
12-47.   Provisional ballots.
Secs. 12-48 – 12-53. Reserved.
Article V. Financial Disclosure
Sec.
12-54.    Duty to file financial disclosure statement; exceptions.
Sec.
12-55.    City clerk to provide forms and guidelines.
Sec.
12-56.    Violation; classification.
Secs. 12-57 – 12-63. Reserved.
Article VI. Nominations; Candidates
Sec.
12-64.    Qualifications of candidates.
Sec.
12-65.    Number of signatures required.
Sec.
12-66.    Nomination petition signers.
Sec.
12-67.    Nomination petition circulators.
Sec.
12-68.    Nomination petition signature withdrawal.
Sec.
12-69.    Filing of nomination paper, declaration and financial disclosure
statement.
Sec.
12-70.    Filing of nomination paper, declaration and financial disclosure
statement for write-in candidates.
Sec.
12-71.    Nomination other than by primary.
Sec.
12-72.    Filing and form of nomination petitions.
Sec.
12-73.    Penalty for petition forgery.
Sec.
12-74.    Limitations on appeals of validity of nomination petitions;
disqualification of candidate.
Secs. 12-75 – 12-80. Reserved.
Article VII. Campaign Finance; Candidates, Political Action Committees, and
Public Funding Program
Sec.
12-81.    Public matching funds program; campaign contract.
Sec.
12-82.    Campaign finance administrator; duties thereof.
Sec.
12-83.    Registration of political committees.
Sec.
12-84.    Organization of political committees.
Sec.
12-85.    Committee recordkeeping; treasurer; accounts.
Sec.
12-86.    Contribution limits.
Sec.
12-87.    Exemption from definition of contribution.
Sec.
12-88.    Advertising and fund-raising disclosure statements.
Sec.
12-89.    Exemptions from definition of expenditure.
Sec.
12-90.    Deceptive mailings.
Sec.
12-91.    Contribution restrictions.
Sec.
12-92.    Campaign finance violations; classifications.
Sec.
12-93.    Campaign finance reports required.
Sec.
12-94.    Campaign finance reporting period.
Sec.
12-95.   Failure to file; penalties; notice; suspension.
Sec.
12-96.    Enforcement authority; investigation; reasonable cause; notice of
violation; administrative appeal.
Sec.
12-97.    Transfer and disposal of committee monies; limitations.
Sec.
12-98.    Termination statement; filing; contents.
Sec.
12-99.    Establishment of a restricted election campaign account.
Secs. 12-100 – 12-109. Reserved.
Article VIII. Initiative
Sec.
12-110.    Application to circulate petitions; filing of statement of
organization.
Sec.
12-111.    Form of petition.
Sec.
12-112.    Affidavit of circulator.
Sec.
12-113.    Final version of petition.
Sec.
12-114.    Right of city clerk to review.
Sec.
12-115.    Registered circulators; requirements; definition.
Sec.
12-116.    Circulation of petition.
Sec.
12-117.    Petition signature fraud.
Sec.
12-118.    Procedure for withdrawing signatures.
Sec.
12-119.    Filing initiative petition.
Sec.
12-120.    Issuance of a petition filing receipt to the petitioners.
Sec.
12-121.    Examination of petitions.
Sec.
12-122.    Interim receipt of sufficiency.
Sec.
12-123.    Receipt of insufficiency.
Sec.
12-124.    Generation of random sample.
Sec.
12-125.    Disposition of petitions by the city clerk.
Sec.
12-126.    Certificate of sufficiency.
Sec.
12-127.    Certificate of insufficiency.
Sec.
12-128.    City clerk to certify sufficient petitions to mayor and council;
mayor and council adopt ordinance or call an election.
Sec.
12-129.    Disposition of sufficient petitions.
Sec.
12-130.    Disposition of insufficient petitions.
Sec.
12-131.    Number of proposed initiative measures to be voted on not limited.
Sec.
12-132.    Arrangement for and conduct of election.
Secs. 12-133 – 12-147. Reserved.
Article IX. Referendum
Sec.
12-148.    Applicability of referendum to city ordinances; 30-day period for
referendum to be calculated from the date ordinance is made available from the
city clerk.
Sec.
12-149.    Form of petition.
Sec.
12-150.    Affidavit of circulator.
Sec.
12-151.    Provisions applicable to referendum.
Sec.
12-152.    Right of city clerk to review.
Sec.
12-153.    Submission of sufficient petitions to mayor and council; mayor and
council repeal the part(s) protested or call an election.
Sec.
12-154.    Insufficient petitions; effective date of ordinance
Secs. 12-155 – 12-160. Reserved.
Article X. Recall
Sec.
12-161.    Petition authorized, number of signatures.
Sec.
12-162.    Affidavit to circulate recall petitions.
Sec.
12-163.    Form of recall petition.
Sec.
12-164.    Circulation of recall petitions.
Sec.
12-165.    Notice to officer of issuance of recall petition.
Sec.
12-166.    Provisions applicable to recall.
Sec.
12-167.    Notice of insufficient petition.
Sec.
12-168.    Filing of sufficient petition; notice to officer; statement of
defense.
Sec.
12-169.    Resignation of officer.
Sec.
12-170.    Failure to resign; call of election.
Sec.
12-171.    Candidacy of officer sought to be removed.
Sec.
12-172.    Nomination of recall candidates.
Sec.
12-173.    Filing of recall nomination petitions and papers.
Sec.
12-174.    Arrangement for and conduct of election.
Sec.
12-175.    Form of ballot.
Sec.
12-176.    Incumbent to continue in office; costs for additional recall effort.
Sec.
12-177.    Appointing recalled officers to public office.
Secs. 12-178 – 12-180. Reserved.
Article XI. Campaign Finance; Reporting for Political Action Committees
Intending to Influence Any Petition Drive
Sec.
12-181.    Definitions.
Sec.
12-182.    Requirements for petition drive political committees; no receipt of
contributions or expenditures until requirements met; financial records to be
preserved.
Sec.
12-183.    Requirements for all other political committees.
Sec.
12-184.    Time for filing of campaign finance reports by petition drive
political committees; opening and closing reporting dates.
Sec.
12-185.    Notification requirements.
Sec.
12-186.    Regulations for administration and enforcement; interpretation of
reporting provisions.
Sec.
12-187.    Failure to comply a civil infraction.
Secs. 12-188 – 12-190. Reserved.
Article XII. Reporting of Independent Expenditures
Sec.
12-191.    Supplemental reporting of independent expenditures in city limits.
__________
   *Editor’s note – Former Chapter 12 was repealed and replaced in its entirety
by Ord. 11245, adopted February 18, 2015, which was repealed and replaced in
its entirety by Ord. 11457, adopted April 19, 2017, which was repealed and
replaced in its entirety by Ord. 11525, adopted February 21, 2018.
   Charter references – Power of city to regulate elections, ch. IV, § 1(20);
elections generally, ch. XVI.
   Cross references – Description of wards, §
1-19; additions to wards upon annexation, §
1-20.
   State law reference – Municipal election and voters, A.R.S. §§ 9-821 – 9-
825.
ARTICLE I.
DEFINITIONS
Sec. 12-1.   Definitions.
   (a)   "Advertisement" means information or materials, other than nonpaid
social media messages, that are mailed, e-mailed, posted, distributed,
published, displayed, delivered, broadcasted or placed in a communication
medium and that are for the purpose of influencing an election.
   (b)   "Agent" means any person who has actual authority, either expressed or
implied, to represent or make decisions on behalf of another person.
   (c)   "Anonymous contribution" means a contribution that is missing
information necessary to adequately identify the contributor.
   (d)   "Ballot measure expenditure" means an expenditure made by a person
that expressly advocates the support or opposition of a clearly identified
ballot measure.
   (e)   "Best effort" means that a committee treasurer or treasurer's agent
makes at least one written effort, including an attempt by e-mail, text
message, private message through social media or other similar communication,
or at least one oral effort that is documented in writing to identify the
contributor or an incomplete contribution.
   (f)   "Business day" means any day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal
holiday.
   (g)   "Calendar quarter" means a period of three (3) consecutive months
ending on March 31, June 30, September 30 or December 31.
   (h)   "Campaign Contract" means a signed agreement between a candidate and
the City wherein the candidate agrees to abide by limitations on candidate's
personal contributions, limitations on campaign expenditures, and limitations
on the use of all contributions as specified in the City Charter, in exchange
for public matching funds.
   (i)   "Campaign Period" means the entire time from the date on which an
individual becomes a candidate until the election or defeat of the candidate.
The campaign period ends on the date the mayor and council canvass and declare
the results of the election at which the candidate is elected or defeated.
   (j)   "Candidate" means an individual who receives contributions or makes
expenditures or who gives consent to another person to receive contributions or
make expenditures on behalf of that individual in connection with the
candidate's nomination, election or retention for any public office.
   (k)   "Candidate, Public Funding" means a candidate who has signed a
campaign contract agreeing to limit their campaign expenditures in exchange for
public matching funds.
   (l)   "Clearly identified candidate" means that the name or a description,
image, photograph or drawing of the candidate appears or the identity of the
candidate is otherwise apparent by unambiguous reference.
   (m)   "Committee" means a candidate committee, a political action committee
or a political party.
   (n)   "Contribution" means any money, advance, deposit or other thing of
value that is made to a person for the purpose of influencing an election.
Contribution includes:
      (1)   A contribution that is made to retire campaign debt from a previous
election cycle.
      (2)   Money or the fair market value of anything that is directly or
indirectly provided to an elected official for the specific purpose of
defraying the expense of communications with constituents.
      (3)   The full purchase price of any item from a committee.
      (4)   A loan that is made to a committee for the purpose of influencing
an election, to the extent the loan remains outstanding.
   (o)   "Controlling legislation" means the legislation as outlined in section
12-11(a) of this code.
   (p)   "Coordinated party expenditures" means expenditures that are made by a
political party to directly pay for goods or services on behalf of its nominee.
   (q)   "Day" means a calendar day unless otherwise specified.
   (r)   "Direct Campaign Expense" means expenses related directly to further
the campaign of the individual candidate, such as printing campaign literature,
media space or time, mailings, campaign headquarters rent, or paying for
campaign staff salaries.
   (s)   "Earmarked" means a designation, instruction or encumbrance between
the transferor of a contribution and a transferee that requires the transferee
to make a contribution to a clearly identified candidate.
   (t)   "Election" means any election for any ballot measure or any candidate
election during a primary, general, recall or special election for any office
in the city.
   (u)   "Election Campaign Account" means a restricted account in the general
fund into which shall be deposited such sums as may be appropriated from time
to time in the annual budget, gifts and donations made to the city for the
support of public election campaign financing, and such sums as may otherwise
be appropriated to said account.
   (v)   "Election cycle" means the two (2) year period between the scheduled
date of the city's general election and the scheduled date of the immediately
following general election. For the purposes of a recall election, "election
cycle" means the period between issuance of a recall petition serial number and
the latest of the following:
      (1)   The date of the recall election that is called pursuant to section
12-170 of this code.
      (2)   The date that a resignation is accepted pursuant to section
12-169 of this code.
      (3)   The date that the city clerk provides notice pursuant to section
12-167 of this code that the number of signatures is insufficient.
   (w)   "Entity" means a corporation, limited liability company, labor
organization, partnership, trust, association, organization, joint venture,
cooperative, unincorporated organization or association or other organized
group that consists of more than one (1) individual.
   (x)   "Excess contribution" means a contribution that exceeds the applicable
contribution limits for a particular election.
   (y)   "Expenditure" means any purchase, payment, or other thing of value
that is made by a person for the purpose of influencing an election.
   (z)   "Expressly advocates" is based on the determination by the city clerk
who shall consider the following three (3) components:
      (1)   Even if it is not presented in the clearest, most explicit
language, speech is express if its message is unmistakable, unambiguous, and
suggestive of only one (1) plausible meaning.
      (2)   Speech may only be termed advocacy if it presents a clear plea for
action, and thus speech that is merely informative is not covered by this
article.
      (3)   It must be clear what action is advocated. Speech cannot be
considered express advocacy of the election or defeat of a clearly identified
candidate when reasonable minds could differ as to whether it encourages a vote
for or against a candidate or encourages the reader to take some other kind of
action. If any reasonable alternative reading of speech can be suggested, it
cannot be express advocacy.
   (aa)   "Family contribution" means any contribution that is provided to a
candidate's committee by the parent, grandparent, aunt, uncle, child or sibling
of the candidate or the candidate's spouse, including the spouse of any of the
listed family members, regardless of whether the relation is established by
marriage or adoption.
   (bb)   "Firewall" means a written policy that precludes one person from
sharing information with another person.
   (cc)   "Identification" means:
      (1)   For an individual, the individual's first and last name, residence
location or street address and occupation and the name of the individual's
primary employer.
      (2)   For any other person, the person's full name and physical location
or street address.
   (dd)   "Incomplete contribution" means any contribution that is received by
a committee for which the contributor's complete identification has not been
obtained. For public funding candidates this includes the original signature.
   (ee)   "Independent expenditure" means an expenditure by a person, other
than a candidate committee, that complies with both of the following:
      (1)   Expressly advocates the election or defeat of a clearly identified
candidate.
      (2)   Is not made without cooperation or consultation with or at the
request or suggestion of a candidate or the candidate's agent.
   (ff)   "Individual" means a natural person.
   (gg)   "In-kind contribution" means a contribution of goods, services or
anything of value that is provided without charge or at less than the usual and
normal charge.
   (hh)   "Itemized" means that each contribution received or expenditure made
is set forth separately.
   (ii)   "Mega PAC status" means official recognition that a political action
committee has received contributions from five hundred (500) or more
individuals in amounts of ten dollars ($10) or more in the four (4) year period
immediately before application to the secretary of state.
   (jj)   "Nominee" means a candidate who prevails in the primary election and
includes the nominee's candidate committee.
   (kk)   "Permanent Early Voting List" or "PEVL" is a permanent list of
voters, maintained by the county voter registrar, that elect to automatically
receive an early ballot for any election for which the voter is a qualified
elector.
   (ll)   "Person" means an individual or a candidate, nominee, committee,
corporation, limited liability company, labor organization, partnership, trust,
association, organization, joint venture, cooperative or unincorporated
organization or association, as well as, a natural person.
   (mm)   "Personal monies" means any of the following:
      (1)   Assets to which the individual or individual's spouse has either
legal title or an equitable interest.
      (2)   Salary and other earned income from bona fide employment of the
individual or individual's spouse.
      (3)   Dividends and proceeds from the sale of investments of the
individual or individual's spouse.
      (4)   Bequests to the individual or individual's spouse.
      (5)   Income to the individual or individual's spouse from revocable
trusts for which the individual or individual's spouse is a beneficiary.
      (6)   Gifts of a personal nature to the individual or individual's spouse
that would have been given regardless of whether the individual became a
candidate or accepted a contribution.
      (7)   The proceeds of loans obtained by the individual or individual's
spouse that are secured by collateral or security provided by the individual or
individual's spouse.
      (8)   Family contributions.
   For public funding candidates, personal monies shall not exceed three
percent (3%) of the maximum expenditure limit.
   (nn)   "Political Action Committee" means an entity that is required to
register as a political action committee pursuant to section
12-83 of this code.
   (oo)   "Primary purpose" means an entity's predominant purpose.
Notwithstanding any other law or rule, an entity is not organized for the
primary purpose of influencing an election if all of the following apply at the
time the contribution or expenditure is made:
      (1)   The entity has tax exempt status under section 501(a) of the
internal revenue code.
      (2)   Except for a religious organization, assembly or institution, the
entity has properly filed a form 1023 or form 1024 with the internal revenue
service or the equivalent successor form designated by the internal revenue
service.
      (3)   The entity's tax exempt status has not been denied or revoked by
the internal revenue service.
      (4)   The entity remains in good standing with the corporation
commission.
      (5)   The entity has properly filed a form 990 with the internal revenue
service or the equivalent successor form designated by the internal revenue
service in compliance with the most recent filing deadline established by the
internal revenue service regulations or policies.
   (pp)   "Qualified Elector" means any person who is qualified to register to
vote pursuant to section
12-3 of this code and is properly registered.
   (qq)   "Qualified Signer" for purposes of nominating petitions, means any of
the following:
      (1)   A qualified elector who is a registered member of the party from
which the candidate is seeking nomination.
      (2)   A qualified elector who is a registered member of a political party
that is not entitled to continued representation on the ballot.
      (3)   A qualified elector who is registered as independent or no party
preferred.
   (rr)   "Resident" means an individual who has actual physical presence in
the City combined with intent to remain. A temporary absence does not result in
a loss of residence if the individual has an intent to return following their
absence. An individual has only one (1) residence for purposes of this chapter.
   (ss)   "Separate segregated fund" means a fund established by a corporation,
limited liability company, labor organization or partnership that is required
to register as a political action committee.
   (tt)   "Social media messages" means forms of communication, including
internet sites for social networking or blogging, through which users create a
personal profile and participate in online communities to share information,
ideas and personal messages.
   (uu)   "Sponsor" means any person that establishes, administers or
contributes financial support to the administration of a political action
committee or that has common or overlapping membership or officers with that
political action committee.
   (vv)   "Standing committee" means a political action committee or political
party that is active in more than one (1) reporting jurisdiction in this state
and that files a statement of organization in a format prescribed by the
secretary of state.
   (ww)   "Surplus monies" means those monies of a terminating committee that
remain after all of the committee's expenditures have been made, all debts have
been extinguished and the committee ceases accepting contributions.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
ARTICLE II.
VOTER QUALIFICATIONS AND REGISTRATIONS
Sec. 12-2.   City clerk to compile and keep register of persons entitled to
vote.
   (a)   For every city election, the city clerk shall compile, from the
information in the general county voting register, a complete record of all
persons entitled to vote at that city election under the provisions of this
article, which shall be known as the "City of Tucson Register of Voters."
   (b)   In a polling place election the City Clerk shall use the permanent
early voting list provided by the Pima County Recorder to assist in the
administration of elections.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-3.   Qualifications of city electors.
   Every resident of the city may become a qualified elector and may register
to vote at all city elections if the resident:
   (a)   Is a current resident of the city and will have been a resident of the
state for twenty-nine (29) days; and
   (b)   Is a resident of the ward in which they claim the right to vote thirty
(30) days, next preceding any primary, general, or special election; and
   (c)   Is a citizen of the United States; and
   (d)   Will be eighteen (18) years of age or more on or before the date of
the general election next following their registration; and
   (e)   Is able to write their name or make their mark, unless prevented from
doing so by physical disability; and
   (f)   Has not been convicted of treason or a felony, unless restored to
civil rights; and
   (g)   Has not been adjudicated an incapacitated person as defined in A.R.S.
§ 14-5101.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-4.   Change of residence from one address to another.
   A qualified elector who moves from one address to another during the twenty-
nine (29) day period preceding a City election is deemed to be a resident and
registered elector at the address from which they have moved, until the day
after the City election and must vote within that precinct.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-5.    Registration, residence in ward required.
   All persons whose names appear on the "City of Tucson Register of Voters",
as herein provided, and who are qualified electors of the city and of the ward
in which they claim the right to vote, under the provisions of this article,
shall be entitled to vote in their respective wards at any primary, general or
special city election, but any person whose name does not so appear shall not
be entitled to vote in city elections.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-6.   Active registered voters.
   The terms "registered voters," "persons who are registered to vote,"
"registered electors" and "voters registered" as used in this chapter include
only active registered voters for the purpose of the following:
   (a)   Calculating petition signature requirements.
   (b)   Mailing and distributing election-related notices, pamphlets or
ballots.
   (c)   Providing voting machines.
   (d)   Furnishing ballots.
   (e)   Determining qualification for political parties' continued
representation on the ballot.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Secs. 12-7 – 12-10. Reserved.
ARTICLE III.
CONDUCT OF ELECTIONS
Sec. 12-11.   Applicability of general election laws; duties of the mayor and
council and city clerk.
   (a)   The provisions of the Arizona Constitution and the general laws of the
State of Arizona, governing the elections of state and county officers, not
inconsistent with the provisions of the Tucson Charter, shall govern City of
Tucson elections. In matters for which no provision is made in the Tucson
Charter, or this code, the mayor and council and city clerk, respectively,
shall exercise the powers and perform the duties conferred or imposed by these
laws on the secretary of state, board of supervisors and county election
officials concerning elections.
   (b)   The laws of the State of Arizona relative to violations of the
election laws, specifically including those prohibiting coercion or
intimidation of voters, shall apply to vote by mail elections under the Tucson
Charter and this code, and shall be enforced as provided in those laws.
   (c)   The mayor and council may enact ordinances as may be necessary or
desirable to carry out the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-12.   City clerk may promulgate rules, regulations, procedures and
forms.
   The city clerk is authorized to promulgate rules, regulations, procedures,
and forms necessary to conduct city elections and to carry out the provisions
of this chapter and of Tucson Charter Chapters XVI, XIX, XX, and XXI, with the
exception of campaign finance rules and regulations which shall be approved by
mayor and council.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-13.   Vote by mail elections authorized.
   (a)   The City of Tucson shall conduct all elections as vote by mail
elections, unless otherwise prescribed by mayor and council. All city elections
held on the same date shall use the same method of voting. The provisions of
vote by mail elections for this article are pursuant to A.R.S. Title 16, and
unless specifically prescribed otherwise in this code, are conducted in a
similar manner as early voting provisions.
   (b)   For any city election conducted as a vote by mail election, the city
clerk, with the approval of the mayor and council, shall designate voting
locations as prescribed in section 12-15 of this code.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-14.   Mayor and council to adopt ordinance calling all municipal
elections.
   The conducting and carrying on of all city elections shall be under the
control of the mayor and council, and they shall, by ordinance, subject to the
provisions of the Tucson Charter, provide for the holding of all municipal
elections. The ordinance calling each election shall be published in the same
manner and in the same publications as all other ordinances requiring
publication.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-15.   All special elections to be conducted in same manner and under
same provisions as general elections.
   All special elections provided for in the Tucson Charter, including, but not
limited to, those involving initiative, referendum or recall, shall be
conducted in the same manner and under the same provisions as are provided for
the holding of general elections, including the qualifications of electors, the
nomination of candidates and campaign contribution and expenditure requirements
set forth in controlling legislation.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-16.   Voting locations for city elections.
   Pursuant to Tucson City Charter, there shall be at least one (1) voting
location provided in each ward in the city for the casting of votes, or in the
case of a Vote by Mail election, for the replacement of ballots, and such
voting locations shall be kept open on the day of the election from 6:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m. The mayor and council may increase the number of voting locations
from time to time as necessity may require.
   The following criteria will be used in determining voting locations and
which precincts to combine for a specified election:
   (a)   Selection of facilities already in use so as to cause a change in
voting location for as few voters as possible.
   (b)   Selection of facilities which will provide the greatest convenience to
the greatest number of voters.
   (c)   Selection of facilities located on or near major streets with adequate
ingress and egress as well as ample voter parking capacity.
   (d)   When determining voting locations, every attempt should be made to
secure locations that are compliant with the Americans with Disabilities Act
(ADA) and utilize the checklist authorized by the Department of Justice when
surveying.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-17.    Form; preparation of ballot.
   The city clerk shall prescribe the form of the ballot. The ballot for early
ballot voters shall be identifiable as an early ballot.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-18.   Form; early or mail ballot affidavit.
   The city clerk shall prescribe the form of the affidavit for an early or
mail ballot pursuant to state law.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-19.   Rotation of names of candidates.
   (a)   In any primary election when there are two (2) or more candidates of
the same political party on the ballot, the names of such candidates shall be
so alternated on the ballots used in each election precinct that the name of
each candidate shall appear substantially an equal number of times in each
possible position.
   (b)   In any general election, the list of candidates of the several parties
shall be arranged with the names of the parties in descending order according
to the votes cast for governor for that county in the most recent general
election for the office of governor.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-20.   City clerk authorized to conduct hand counts.
   (a)   In any city election, the city clerk is authorized to perform any hand
count(s) the city clerk deems necessary to check the accuracy of the count
produced by the central vote tabulating equipment, or to cause, authorize, or
direct others to perform such hand count(s), including any county officer in
charge of elections who is administering any consolidated election in which the
city is participating.
   (b)   The percentage of ballots or voting areas subject to any hand count(s)
shall be at the discretion of the city clerk.
   (c)   A hand count authorized by this section does not supersede the count
produced by the central vote tabulating equipment, which is the official count.
   (d)   The city clerk shall promulgate rules, regulations, procedures, and
forms necessary to carry out the provisions of this section.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-21.   City to bear costs incurred by city clerk.
   All necessary expenses incurred by the city clerk in carrying out the
provisions of this chapter, including all equipment, and supplies, shall be a
city charge.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-22.   Displaying United States flag at voting locations.
   The city clerk shall provide for the display of the flag of the United
States in or near every voting location on election days during the hours the
polls are open.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-23.   Appointment of voting location boards; vote by mail or early
ballot boards, write-in boards; other election boards.
   (a)   Not less than twenty (20) days prior to Election Day the mayor and
council shall appoint the number of election boards necessary to process
ballots.
      (1)   Each voting location election board shall consist, at a minimum, of
one (1) inspector or deputy city clerk, one (1) marshal, and two (2) judges
from each of the two (2) largest political parties in the city, to be selected
upon the recommendation of their county party chairs, made not less than thirty
(30) days prior to election day. In the event that a party chair does not
timely submit recommendations, the city clerk shall proceed to appoint the
boards. Additionally, clerks may be selected as deemed necessary by the City
Clerk.
      (2)   Each early ballot processing board shall consist, at a minimum, of
two (2) judges from each of the two (2) largest political parties in the city,
to be selected upon the recommendation of their county party chairs, made not
less than thirty (30) days prior to election day. In the event that a party
chair does not timely submit recommendations, the city clerk shall proceed to
appoint the boards.
      (3)   Each write-in ballot board shall consist of one (1) inspector and
two (2) judges drawn from those members serving on ballot processing boards and
shall be from each of the two (2) largest political parties in the city.
      (4)   Each hand count board shall consist of two (2) judges drawn from
those members serving on ballot processing boards and shall be from each of the
two (2) largest political parties in the city.
      (5)   The accuracy and certification board shall consist of one (1)
member of each recognized political party having a candidate on the ballot. For
non-candidate elections, the two (2) parties receiving the highest number of
votes for governor at the last general election shall comprise the board.
   (b)   The mayor and council shall make all such appointments. The city clerk
is authorized to fill such vacancies or appoint additional boards or members as
deemed necessary or dismiss those that are not needed.
   (c)   Members of all voting location and ballot processing boards shall be
qualified and registered electors of the city and appointments shall be made so
as to provide as equal as practicable representation of members of the two (2)
largest political parties of the city. The inspector, marshal or judges shall
not have changed their political party affiliation since the last preceding
city general election.
   (d)   The election boards shall serve at a place and time to be designated
by the city clerk.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-24.   Authorized persons in voting locations during voting hours.
   No person shall be allowed to remain inside the seventy-five (75) foot limit
while the polls are open, except for the purpose of voting, and except the
election officials, one (1) representative at any one (1) time of each
political party represented on the ballot who has been appointed by the county
chairman of that political party and the challengers allowed by law, may remain
inside. No electioneering may occur within the seventy-five (75) foot limit.
   Voters having cast their ballots shall promptly move outside the seventy-
five (75) foot limit.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-25.   Prohibited electioneering within seventy-five (75) feet of city
voting locations or sites where mail ballots may be cast.
   (a)   Electioneering occurs when an individual knowingly, intentionally, by
verbal expression and in order to induce or compel another person to vote in a
particular manner or refrain from voting expresses support for or opposition to
a candidate who appears on the ballot, a ballot question that appears on the
ballot, or a political party with one or more candidates who appear on the
ballot in that election.
   (b)   There shall be no electioneering, photography, or videography within
the seventy-five (75) foot limit of any city voting location as posted by the
election marshal, or within seventy-five (75) feet of the main outside entrance
to any city voting location or site where mail ballots may be cast. A voter who
makes available an image of the voter's own ballot by posting on the internet
or in some other electronic medium is deemed to have consented to retransmittal
of that image and that retransmittal does not constitute a violation of this
section.
   (c)   An election official, a representative of a political party who has
been appointed by the county chairman of that political party or a challenger
who is authorized by law to be within the seventy-five (75) foot limit, shall
not wear, carry or display materials that identify or express support for or
opposition to a candidate, a political party or organization, a ballot question
or any other political issue and shall not electioneer within the seventy-five
(75) foot limit of a voting location.
   (d)   With the permission of the voter, a minor may enter and remain within
the seventy-five (75) foot limit in order to accompany a voter into a polling
place, an on-site early voting facility and a voting booth while the voter is
voting.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-26.   Limits on permitted activities within the seventy-five (75) foot
limit.
   (a)   Permitted materials means written or printed material or items that
express support for or opposition to a candidate who appears on the ballot in
that election, a ballot question that appears on the ballot in that election or
a political party with one (1) or more candidates who appear on the ballot in
that election.
      (1)   Permitted materials must be displayed prior to the opening of the
voting location. No additional materials will be allowed after 6:00 a.m.
      (2)   No permitted materials may be displayed inside the physical voting
location itself.
      (3)   Permitted materials may only be displayed inside the seventy-five
(75) foot limit in the area marked by city clerk staff prior to Election Day.
      (4)   Displays in this area must comply with the following:
         a.   signs posted in this area shall not exceed four (4) square feet;
         b.   prevent any interference with or danger to the movement of voters
or city clerk election staff going into and out of the voting location;
         c.   provide equal access to all candidates, campaigns or other
persons wishing to display permitted materials;
      (5)   Permitted materials displayed inside the seventy-five (75) foot
limit must be secured to prevent accidental dispersion or scattering. If the
volume, concentration, or positioning of materials is deemed to create a
potential hazard to the movement of persons, city clerk elections staff shall
have the right to reposition the materials.
      (6)   Any permitted material left or found inside the seventy-five (75)
foot limit, and not located in the designated area, will be removed by city
clerk election staff.
   (b)   No person shall do any of the following within the seventy-five (75)
foot limit:
      (1)   Obstruct electors from entering or leaving the area provided for
voting.
      (2)   Impede orderly voting.
      (3)   Otherwise interfere with the rights of electors.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-27.   Grounds for challenging a voter.
   A person offering to vote may be orally challenged by any registered elector
of the City upon any of the following grounds:
   (a)   The voter is not the person whose name appears on the register.
   (b)   The voter has not resided in the precinct for at least twenty-nine
(29) days prior to the election.
   (c)   The voter is not properly registered at an address permitted by the
Tucson Charter and State law.
   (d)   The individual is not a qualified registrant pursuant to State law.
   (e)   The individual has voted before at that election.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-28.   Challenging of voters at a voting location; procedure.
   (a)   Upon challenge being made, if the person challenged appears to be
registered, the person shall take and subscribe to the oath prescribed in the
affidavit of registration and, if the person so elects, may be at once sworn to
answer fully and truly all questions material to the challenges as are put to
the person by the inspector of the voting location.
   (b)   Any returned United States mail addressed to the person challenged or
the spouse of the person challenged, or both, and to the address appearing on
the precinct register or affidavit shall be considered as sufficient grounds to
proceed under this section.
   (c)   If after the examination on the challenge, a majority of the election
board is satisfied that the challenge is not valid, the person challenged shall
be permitted to vote.
   (d)   If the person challenged refuses to be sworn or affirmed, or refuses
to answer questions material to the challenge or if a majority of the election
board finds that the challenge is valid, the person challenged shall be
permitted to vote a provisional ballot pursuant to State law.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-29.   Challenging of vote by mail and early ballots; procedure.
   (a)   The county chairman of each political party represented on the ballot
may, by written appointment addressed to the early ballot board, designate
party representatives and alternates to act as early ballot challengers for the
party.
   (b)   No party may have more than the number of such representatives or
alternates which were mutually agreed upon by each political party to be
present at one time. If such agreement cannot be reached, the number of
representatives shall be limited to one for each political party.
   (c)   An early ballot may be challenged on any grounds set forth in section
12-27. All challenges shall be made in writing with a brief statement of the
grounds prior to the early ballot being placed in the ballot box.
      (1)   If an early or mail ballot is challenged, it shall be set aside and
retained in the possession of the early ballot board or other officer in charge
of early ballot processing until a time that the early ballot board sets for
determination of the challenge.
      (2)   The early ballot board shall hear the grounds for the challenge and
shall decide what disposition shall be made of the early ballot by majority
vote. If the early ballot is not allowed, it shall be handled pursuant to
rejection procedures promulgated by the city clerk.
   (d)   Within twenty-four (24) hours of receipt of a challenge, the ballot
board or other officer in charge of early ballot processing shall mail, by
first class mail, a notice of the challenge including a copy of the written
challenge, and also including the time and place at which the voter may appear
to defend the challenge, to the voter at the mailing address shown on the
request for an early ballot or, if none was provided, to the mailing address
shown on the registration rolls.
      (1)   Notice shall also be mailed to the challenger at the address listed
on the written challenge and provided to the county chairman of each political
party represented on the ballot.
      (2)   The board shall meet to determine the challenge at the time
specified by the notice but, in any event, not earlier than ninety-six (96)
hours after the notice is mailed, or forty-eight (48) hours if the notifying
party chooses to deliver the notice by overnight or hand delivery, and not
later than 5:00 p.m. on the Monday following the election.
      (3)   The board shall provide the voter with an informal opportunity to
make, or to submit, brief statements regarding the challenge. The board may
decline to permit comments, either in person or in writing, by anyone other
than the voter, the challenger and the party representatives.
      (4)   The burden of proof is on the challenger to show why the voter
should not be permitted to vote. The fact that the voter fails to appear shall
not be deemed to be an admission of the validity of the challenge.
      (5)   The ballot board or other officer in charge of early ballot
processing is not required to provide the notices described in this subsection
if the written challenge fails to set forth at least one of the grounds listed
in section
12-27 as a basis for the challenge. In that event, the challenge will be
summarily rejected at the meeting of the board.
      (6)   Except for election contests pursuant to state law, the board's
decision is final and may not be appealed.
   (e)   If the vote is allowed, the board shall open the envelope containing
the ballot in such a manner that the affidavit thereon is not destroyed, take
out the ballot without unfolding it or permitting it to be opened or examined
and show by the records of the election that the elector has voted.
   (f)   If the vote is not allowed, the affidavit envelope containing the
ballot shall not be opened and the board shall mark across the face of such
envelope the grounds for rejection. The affidavit envelope and its contents
shall then be deposited with the opened affidavit envelopes and shall be
preserved with official returns.
      (1)   If the voter does not enter an appearance, the board shall send the
voter a notice stating whether the ballot was disallowed and, if disallowed,
providing the ground for the determination.
      (2)   The notice shall be mailed by first class mail to the voter's
mailing address as shown on the registration rolls within three (3) days after
the board's determination.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-30.   Rules determining residence of voter upon challenge; reading of
rules upon request.
   (a)   The election board, in determining the place of residence of a person,
shall be governed by the following rules, so far as applicable:
      (1)    The residence of a person is that place in which his habitation is
fixed and to which he has the intention of returning when absent.
      (2)   A person does not gain or lose his residence by reason of his
presence at or absence from a place while employed in the service of the United
States or of this state, or while engaged in navigation, or while a student at
an institution of learning or while kept in an almshouse, asylum or prison.
      (3)   A person does not lose his residence by leaving his home to go to
another county, state or foreign country for merely temporary purposes, with
the intention of returning.
      (4)   A person does not gain a residence in any county into which he
comes for merely temporary purposes, without the intention of making that
county his home.
      (5)   If a person removes to another state with the intention of making
it his residence, he loses his residence in this state.
      (6)   If a person removes to another state with the intention of
remaining there for an indefinite time, and of making the place his present
residence, he loses his residence in this state, even though he has an
intention of returning at some future period.
      (7)   The place where a person's family permanently resides is his
residence, unless he is separated from his family, but if it is a place of
temporary establishment for his family, or for transient purposes, it is
otherwise.
      (8)   If a person has a family residing in one place and he does business
in another, the former is his place of residence, but a person having a family
who has taken up his abode with the intention of remaining and whose family
does not so reside with him shall be regarded as a resident where his abode has
been taken.
      (9)   A United States citizen who has never resided in the United States
is eligible to vote in this state by using a federal write-in early ballot as
prescribed in sections A.R.S. 16-103 and 16-543.02 if both of the following
apply:
         a.   A parent is a United States citizen.
         b.   The parent is registered to vote in this state.
      (10)   The mere intention of acquiring a new residence without the act of
removal avails nothing and neither does the act of removal without the
intention.
   (b)   The term of residence shall be computed by including the day on which
the person's residence commenced and by excluding the day of election.
   (c)   Before administering an oath to a person touching his residence, the
inspector, if requested by any person, shall read to the person challenged the
rules set forth in subsection (a) of this section.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-31.   Release of unofficial election returns.
   Unofficial Returns for ballots that have been counted may be released to the
public at any time after 8:00 p.m. on Election Day.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-32.   Adoption of official canvass of election.
   (a)   As provided by the City Charter, the mayor and council shall convene
on the first Monday after Election Day in order to adopt the official canvass
of the election. If, at the time, the returns from the election are incomplete,
the official canvass shall be postponed from day to day, not to exceed twenty
(20) days following the election. The results printed by the vote tabulating
equipment, to which have been added write-in votes, shall, when certified by
the city clerk, constitute the official canvass of each precinct.
   (b)   Upon completion of the canvass, the mayor shall forthwith issue a
proclamation, proclaiming the whole number of votes cast for and against each
proposed constitutional amendment, and for and against each initiated or
referred measure, and declaring the amendments or measures which are approved
by a majority of those voting thereon to be law.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Secs. 12-33 – 12-38. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV.
VOTE BY MAIL ELECTIONS AND EARLY VOTING
Sec. 12-39.   Election Notice.
   (a)   Not less than ninety (90) days before any regularly scheduled city
primary election not being conducted as vote by mail, the city clerk shall mail
an election notice to all eligible city voters who are included on the Pima
County Permanent Early Voting List. For vote by mail elections, the city clerk
shall mail a notice to every active registered voter within the city limits.
The notice shall be mailed by non-forwardable mail that is marked with the
statement required by the postmaster to receive an address correction
notification. The notice shall include:
      (1)   The date(s) of the election(s) that are the subject of the notice.
      (2)   The date(s) that the voter's ballot is expected to be mailed.
      (3)   The address where the ballot will be mailed.
   (b)   If the voter is not registered as a member of one of the political
parties that is recognized for purposes of that primary, the notice shall
include information on the procedure for the voter to designate a political
party ballot.
   (c)   The notice shall be delivered with return postage prepaid and shall
also include a means for the voter to do any of the following:
      (1)   Change the mailing address for the voter's ballot for the upcoming
election or elections indicated on the notice.
      (2)   Update the voter's residence address.
      (3)   Request that the voter not be sent a ballot for the upcoming
election or elections indicated on the notice.
   (d)   If the voter is not registered as a member of a recognized political
party and fails to notify the city clerk of the voter's choice of a political
party ballot within forty-five (45) days before the primary election, the
following apply:
      (1)   The voter shall not automatically be sent a ballot for that
partisan open primary election only and the voter's name shall remain on the
permanent early voting list for future elections.
      (2)   To receive an early ballot for the primary election, the voter
shall submit the voter's choice for political party ballot to the city clerk.
   (e)   A voter may make a written request to the Pima County Recorder at any
time to be removed from the permanent early voting list.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-40.   Mailing vote by mail ballots.
   (a)   Not more than twenty-seven (27) days before the election and not fewer
than fifteen (15) days before the election, the city clerk shall send by non-
forwardable mail all official ballots with printed instructions and a return
envelope bearing a printed ballot affidavit to each active registered voter
entitled to vote in the election. The envelope in which the ballot is mailed
shall be clearly marked with the statement required by the postmaster to
receive an address correction and notification.
   (b)   In a primary election, any qualified elector not registered as a
member of a political party qualified for the ballot, shall have the
opportunity to designate the ballot of one of the political parties that is
qualified for the ballot. The elector may receive and vote the ballot of only
that one political party. By voting for one of these parties, it will not
change the voter registration status of the elector.
   (c)   The mayor and council shall determine whether the voter or the city
will pay for the postage for the return of electors' marked ballots. An elector
who votes in a vote by mail election shall return the elector's marked ballot
to the city clerk or to a designated depository site no later than 7:00 p.m. on
the day of the election.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-41.   Request for early ballots; on-site early voting; emergency voting
of electors.
   (a)   Within ninety-three (93) days before any city election not being
conducted as vote by mail, an elector may make a request to the city clerk for
an early ballot. The request shall include the name, the residence or temporary
address and date of birth of the requester.
   (b)   If a request is made by a qualified and registered elector within
twenty-seven (27) days before the election, the city clerk shall mail the
ballot together with the affidavit postage prepaid to the elector within forty-
eight (48) hours after receipt of the request. If an early ballot request is
received on or before the thirty-first day before the election, the early
ballot shall be distributed not earlier than the twenty-seventh day before the
election and not later than the twenty-fourth day before the election.
   (c)   All requests must be received by 5:00 p.m. on the eleventh (11th) day
before the election. If the request indicates that the elector desires a
general election ballot as well as a primary election ballot, the city clerk
shall honor the request, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and other legal
holidays.
   (d)   Upon specific request by a qualified elector, or where the city clerk
deems hand delivery appropriate, the city clerk may, in lieu of mailing,
authorize deputy city clerks to hand deliver the ballot, together with the
affidavit, to the elector.
   (e)   Any qualified elector who is unable to go to the voting location
because of confinement due to a continuing illness or physical disability, may
request that the city clerk have a special election board personally deliver a
ballot to the qualified elector at their place of confinement. Such requests
must be made by 5:00 p.m. on the second (2nd) Friday before the election. This
paragraph shall not be construed to limit the city clerk's powers regarding
emergency voting under subsection (f) below.
   (f)   At the city clerk's discretion, a qualified elector may request to
vote early, between 5:00 p.m. on the eleventh (11th) day before the election
and 5:00 p.m. on the Monday preceding the election, as a result of an
emergency. For purposes of this section, "emergency" means any unforeseen
circumstances that would prevent the elector from voting.
   (g)   The city clerk may, in the city clerk's discretion, establish on site
early voting locations. Any qualified elector who appears no later than 5:00
p.m. on the Friday before the election at an on-site early voting location
shall be permitted to vote at the on site location.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-42.   Early ballot request forms distributed by candidates or political
committees.
   (a)   A candidate, political committee or other organization may distribute
early ballot request forms to voters. If the early ballot request forms include
a printed address for return, the addressee shall be the city. Failure to use
the city as the return addressee is punishable by a civil penalty of up to
three (3) times the cost of the production and distribution of the request.
   (b)   All original and completed early ballot request forms that are
received by a candidate, political committee or other organization shall be
submitted to the city clerk within six (6) business days after receipt by a
candidate, political committee or other organization or eleven (11) days before
the election day, whichever is earlier.
   (c)   Any person, political committee or other organization that fails to
submit a completed early ballot request form to the city clerk within the
prescribed time is subject to a civil penalty of up to twenty-five dollars
($25) per day for each completed form withheld from submittal. Any person who
knowingly fails to submit a completed early ballot request form before the
submission deadline for the election immediately following the completion of
the form is guilty of a class 6 felony.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-43.   Mailing early ballots.
   (a)   The city clerk shall mail the early ballot and the envelope for its
return postage prepaid to the address provided by the requesting elector within
five (5) days after receipt of the printed ballots, except that early ballot
mailings shall not begin more than twenty-seven (27) days before the election.
If an early ballot request is received on or before the thirty-first (31st) day
before the election, the early ballot shall be distributed not earlier than the
twenty-seventh (27th) day before the election and not later than the twenty-
fourth (24th) day before the election.
   (b)   If a request is made by the elector within twenty-seven (27) days
before the election, the mailing of the early ballot must be made within forty-
eight (48) hours after receipt of the request. Saturdays, Sundays and legal
holidays are excluded from the computation of the forty-eight (48) hour period
prescribed by this subsection.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-44.   Instructions to vote by mail and early voters.
   (a)   The city clerk shall supply printed instructions to vote by mail and
early voters in substantially the following form that direct them to:
      (1)   sign the affidavit
      (2)   mark the ballot
      (3)   place the ballot inside the signed affidavit
      (4)   return both in the enclosed tamper-evident, self-addressed envelope
   (b)   The instructions shall include the following statement:
   "In order to be valid and counted, the ballot and the affidavit must be
delivered to the city clerk or deposited at any voting location in the city no
later than 7:00 p.m. on election day. WARNING - it is a felony to offer or
receive any compensation for a ballot."
   (c)   Only the elector may be in possession of that elector's unvoted
ballot.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-45.   Duties of city clerk on receiving a returned vote by mail or
early ballot.
   (a)   Upon receipt of the affidavit containing a returned vote by mail or
early ballot, the city clerk shall compare that signature with the signature on
any of the following:
      (1)   A signature roster from a prior election which was prepared and
certified as required by law.
      (2)   A verified vote by mail or early ballot affidavit from a prior
election.
      (3)   Any other current form of reliable signature maintained as an
official public record.
   (b)   At the sole discretion of the city clerk, in place of the procedures
in subsection (a), contract with the Pima County Recorder to act as the agent
to the city for comparing voter signatures.
   (c)   The city clerk shall then secure the affidavit unopened in the city
clerk vault until delivery to the ballot board.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-46.   Replacement ballots.
   Any elector who receives a vote by mail ballot may request a replacement
ballot, subject always to verification by the city clerk that the elector has
not already voted. The elector shall be permitted to vote as follows:
   (a)   The elector may request a replacement ballot from the city clerk; or
   (b)   The elector may vote in person at a voting location on election day.
   (c)   The recorder or other officer in charge of elections shall keep a
record of each replacement ballot provided pursuant to this section.
   (d)   If an elector to whom a replacement ballot is issued votes more than
once, only the first ballot received shall be counted.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-47.   Provisional ballots.
   In a polling place election, a voter may vote a provisional ballot pursuant
to A.R.S. § 16-584 or its successor provisions.
   (a)   At an on-site early voting location on or before the Friday preceding
election day; or
   (b)   At the qualified elector's designated voting location on election day.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Secs. 12-48 – 12-53. Reserved.
ARTICLE V.
FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE
Sec. 12-54.   Duty to file financial disclosure statement; exceptions.
   (a)   In addition to other statements and reports required by law, every
elected city officer, as a matter of public record, shall file with the city
clerk on a form prescribed by the city clerk a financial disclosure statement
as prescribed by state law covering the preceding calendar year ending December
31.
   (b)   The statement required to be filed pursuant to subsection (a) shall be
filed by all persons who qualified as elected city officers at any time during
the preceding calendar year on or before January 31 of each year, with the
exception that a local public officer appointed to fill a vacancy shall, within
sixty (60) days following the taking of such office, file a financial
disclosure statement covering the twelve (12) month period ending with the last
full month prior to the date of taking office.
   (c)   A candidate for elected city office shall file a financial disclosure
statement covering the preceding twelve (12) month period on a form prescribed
by the city clerk at the time of filing a nomination paper and declaration and
at any other time prescribed by statute.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-55.   City clerk to provide forms and guidelines.
   The city clerk shall prepare written guidelines and forms for completing a
verified financial disclosure statement required by this section. A copy of the
guidelines and forms shall be distributed to each elected city officer and
shall be made available to each candidate required to file a financial
disclosure statement.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-56.   Violation; classification.
   (a)   Any elected city officer or candidate who knowingly fails to file a
financial disclosure statement required by this article, who knowingly files an
incomplete financial disclosure statement or who knowingly files a false
financial disclosure statement is guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor.
   (b)   Any elected city officer or candidate who violates this article is
subject to a civil penalty of fifty dollars ($50) for each day of noncompliance
but not more than five hundred dollars ($500) that may be imposed as prescribed
in A.R.S. § 16-937 and 938.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Secs. 12-57 – 12-63. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI.
NOMINATIONS; CANDIDATES
Sec. 12-64.    Qualifications of candidates.
   (a)   Candidates for the office of mayor and council member shall be duly
qualified electors of the city under the laws of the State of Arizona and under
the provisions of the Tucson Charter. Candidates shall be qualified electors of
the city for not less than three (3) years immediately prior to becoming a
candidate.
   (b)   Candidates for council member shall have resided in their respective
ward for at least one (1) year prior to becoming a candidate.
   (c)   Time of residence and being a qualified elector shall be counted as
residence and electoral qualifications within the city of Tucson one (1) year
after said area becomes annexed to the city.
   (d)   At the time a candidate files a nomination paper, declaration and
financial disclosure statement, the city clerk shall obtain the candidate's
voter registration history from the County Recorder to verify qualifications.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-65.   Number of signatures required.
   (a)   Candidates for the office of mayor must obtain signatures from
qualified signers of the city equal to at least five percent (5%) and not more
than ten percent (10%) of the designated party vote in the city in the
preceding mayoral election.
   (b)   Candidates for the office of council member must obtain signatures
from qualified signers of the city equal to at least five percent (5%) and not
more than ten percent (10%) of the designated party vote in the ward in the
preceding election for that ward.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-66.   Nomination petition signers.
   (a)   Each signer of a nomination petition must be a qualified signer and
member of the political party from which the candidate is seeking nomination,
or a member of a political party that is not qualified for representation on
the ballot pursuant to State law or the signer is registered as independent or
party not determined.
   (b)   Each signer of a nomination petition shall sign only one (1) petition
for the same office.
   (c)   A signature shall not be counted on a nomination petition unless the
signature is upon a sheet bearing the form prescribed by the city clerk.
   (d)   Each signer of a nomination petition for the office of mayor shall, at
the time of signing, be a qualified elector residing in the city of Tucson.
   (e)   Each signer of a nomination petition for the office of council member
shall, at the time of signing, be a qualified elector residing in the ward the
candidate is seeking to represent.
   (f)   If an elector signs more nomination petitions than permitted by
subsection (a) of this section, the earlier signatures of the elector are
deemed valid, as determined by the date of the signature as shown on the
petitions. If the signatures by the elector are dated on the same day, all
signatures by that elector on that day are deemed invalid. Any signature by
that elector on a nomination petition on or after the date of the last
otherwise valid signature is deemed invalid and shall not be counted.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-67.   Nomination petition circulators.
   (a)   Circulators who are not residents of this state must be registered as
circulators with the secretary of state before circulating petitions.
   (b)   The circulator, before whom the signatures were written on the
signature sheet, shall:
      (1)   Certify that the circulator is qualified to register to vote in the
State of Arizona.
      (2)   Certify, if the circulator is not a resident of Arizona, that prior
to circulating the petition the circulator registered as an out of state
circulator with the Secretary of State.
      (3)   Certify that each of the names on the petition was signed in the
circulator's presence on the date indicated.
      (4)   Certify that in the circulator's belief each signer was a qualified
elector who resided at the address given as the signer's residence on the date
indicated.
      (5)   Circulators must sign the petition and type or print the
circulator's name under the circulator's signature.
      (6)   Type or print the circulator's actual residence address or, if no
street address, a description of the circulator's residence location.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-68.   Nomination petition signature withdrawal.
   Qualified electors wishing to withdraw their signatures from a nomination
petition may do so by notifying the city clerk by a signed, written statement
any time prior to the time the petition is filed with the city clerk.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-69.   Filing of nomination paper, declaration and financial disclosure
statement.
   (a)   Any person desiring to become a candidate for any city office shall be
qualified pursuant to section
12-64 of this code and shall file the following with the city clerk at the city
clerk's office, or at a location specified by the city clerk:
      (1)   Nomination paper in a form prescribed by the city clerk stating the
exact manner in which the candidate desires to have their name printed on the
official ballot.
      (2)   The declaration including facts sufficient to show that, other than
the residency requirement provided in subsection (a) of this section and the
satisfaction of any monetary penalties, fines or judgments as prescribed in
subsection(d) of this section, the candidate will be qualified at the time of
election to hold the office the person seeks, and that for any monetary
penalties, fines or judgments as prescribed in subsection(d) of this section,
the candidate has made a complete payment before the time of filing.
      (3)   Financial Disclosure Statement covering the preceding twelve (12)
month period.
   (b)   The nomination paper, declaration and financial disclosure statement
must be filed together, not less than ninety (90) nor more than one hundred
twenty (120) days before the primary election day.
   (c)   A person who does not file a timely nomination paper, declaration and
financial disclosure statement that comply with this section is not eligible to
have the person's name printed on the official ballot for that office.
   (d)   Except in cases where the liability is being appealed, the city clerk
shall not accept the nomination paper of a candidate if the person is liable
for an aggregation of one thousand dollars ($1,000) or more in fines,
penalties, late fees or administrative or civil judgments, including any
interest or costs, in any combination, that have not been fully satisfied at
the time of the attempted filing of the nomination paper and the liability
arose from failure to comply with or enforcement of this code.
   (e)   If, after the verification of the qualifications pursuant to section
12-64(d) of this code, it is determined that the individual is not qualified
pursuant to sections 12-64(a-c), the city clerk shall reject the nomination
paper, declaration and financial disclosure statement of the individual.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-70.   Filing of nomination paper, declaration and financial disclosure
statement for write-in candidates.
   (a)   Any person desiring to become a write-in candidate for any city office
shall be qualified pursuant to section
12-64 of this code and shall file a nomination paper, declaration and financial
disclosure statement together at the city clerk's office, or at a location
specified by the city clerk.
      (1)   The nomination paper shall be in a form prescribed by the city
clerk stating that the candidate is qualified to hold the office they seek.
      (2)   The declaration shall include facts sufficient to show that, other
than the residency requirement provided in subsection (a) of this section and
the satisfaction of any monetary penalties, fines or judgments as prescribed in
section
12-69(d) of this code, the candidate will be qualified at the time of election
to hold the office the person seeks, and that for any monetary penalties, fines
or judgments as prescribed in section
12-69(d) of this code, the candidate has made a complete payment before the
time of filing.
      (3)   The financial disclosure statement shall cover the preceding twelve
(12) month period.
   (b)   A write-in candidate shall file the nomination paper not later than 5:
00 p.m. on the fortieth (40th) day before the election.
   (c)   Any person who does not file a timely nomination paper shall not be
counted in the tally of ballots.
   (d)   Except in cases where the liability is being appealed, the city clerk
shall not accept the nomination paper of a write-in candidate if the person is
liable for an aggregation of one thousand dollars ($1,000) or more in fines,
penalties, late fees or administrative or civil judgments, including any
interest or costs, in any combination, that have not been fully satisfied at
the time of the attempted filing of the nomination paper and the liability
arose from failure to comply with or enforcement of this code.
   (e)   A candidate may not file pursuant to this section if any of the
following applies:
      (1)   For a candidate in the primary election, the candidate filed a
nomination petition for the current primary election for the office sought and
failed to provide a sufficient number of valid petition signatures.
      (2)   For a candidate in the general election, the candidate ran in the
immediately preceding primary election and failed to be nominated to the office
sought in the current election.
      (3)   For a candidate in the general election, the candidate filed a
nomination petition for the immediately preceding primary election for the
office sought and failed to provide a sufficient number of valid petition
signatures.
      (4)   For a candidate in the general election, the candidate filed a
nomination petition for nomination other than by primary for the office sought
and failed to provide a sufficient number of valid petition signatures.
      (5)   The candidate is not qualified pursuant to section
12-64(a-c).
   (f)   A write-in candidate shall not be declared nominated unless the
candidate receives a number of votes equivalent to at least the same number of
signatures required for nominating petitions for the same office.
   (g)   If, after the verification of the qualifications pursuant to section
12-64(d) of this code, it is determined that the individual is not qualified
pursuant to sections
12-64(a-c), the city clerk shall reject the nomination paper, declaration and
financial disclosure statement of the individual.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-71.   Nomination other than by primary.
   Any qualified elector who is not a registered member of a political party
that is recognized pursuant to A.R.S. §§ 16-801 through 16-804 may be nominated
as a candidate for public office otherwise than by primary election or by party
committee pursuant to this section.
   (a)   Any person desiring to become a candidate for any city office shall be
qualified pursuant to section
12-64 of this code and shall file nomination petitions with the city clerk at
the city clerk's office, or at a location specified by the city clerk.
   (b)   The nomination petition shall conform as nearly as possible to the
provisions relating to nomination petitions of candidates to be voted for at
primary elections.
   (c)   The number of valid signatures must be at least three percent (3%) of
the total number of registered voters who are NOT members of a qualified
political party. For council member candidates, the total is calculated using
the total number of registered voters in the ward for which the candidate is
seeking office.
   (d)   The percentage of registered voters necessary to sign the nomination
other than by primary petition shall be determined by the total number of
registered voters as of March 1 of the year in which the general election is
held.
   (e)   The nomination paper, declaration and financial disclosure statement
must be filed together, not less than ninety (90) nor more than one hundred
twenty (120) days before the primary election day.
   (f)   Except in cases where the liability is being appealed, the city clerk
shall not accept the nomination paper of a candidate if the person is liable
for an aggregation of one thousand dollars ($1,000) or more in fines,
penalties, late fees or administrative or civil judgments, including any
interest or costs, in any combination, that have not been fully satisfied at
the time of the attempted filing of the nomination paper and the liability
arose from failure to comply with or enforcement of this code.
   (g)   If, after the verification of the qualifications pursuant to section
12-64(d) of this code, it is determined that the individual is not qualified
pursuant to sections 12-64(a-c), the city clerk shall reject the nomination
paper, declaration and financial disclosure statement of the individual.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-72.   Filing and form of nomination petitions.
   (a)   Any person desiring to become a candidate for any city office shall be
qualified pursuant to section
12-64 of this code and shall file nomination petitions with the city clerk at
the city clerk's office, or at a location specified by the city clerk.
Nomination petitions shall be in a form prescribed by the city clerk containing
the required number of signatures of qualified electors. Nomination petitions
shall be filed not less than ninety (90) nor more than one hundred twenty (120)
days before the primary election day.
   (b)   The nomination petitions shall be in substantially the following form:
      (1)   Petitions shall be on paper eleven (11) inches wide and eight and
one-half (8 1/2) inches long.
      (2)   Petitions shall be headed by a caption stating the purpose of the
petition, followed by the body of the petition stating the intent of the
petitioners.
      (3)   There shall be ten (10) lines spaced one-half (1/2) of an inch
apart and consecutively numbered one (1) through ten (10).
      (4)   The signature portion of the petition shall be divided into columns
headed by the following titles:
         a.   Signature.
         b.   Printed name.
         c.   Actual residence address, description of place of residence or
Arizona post office box address, city or town.
         d.   Date of signing.
      (5)   A photograph of the candidate may appear on the nomination
petition.
   (c)   The following shall appear on the petition:
      Instructions for circulators
      (1)   All petitions shall be signed by the circulator.
      (2)   Circulator is not required to be a resident of this state but
otherwise must be qualified to register to vote in this state and, if not a
resident of this state, shall register as a circulator with the secretary of
state.
      (3)   Circulator's name shall be typed or printed under the circulator's
signature.
      (4)   Circulator's actual residence address or, if no street address, a
description of residence location shall be included on the petition.
   (d)   The city clerk will not accept supplements to nomination petitions.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-73.   Penalty for petition forgery.
   In addition to the procedures set forth in this article, all petitions that
have been submitted by a candidate who is found guilty of petition forgery
shall be disqualified and that candidate shall not be eligible to seek election
to a public office for a period of not less than five (5) years.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-74.   Limitations on appeals of validity of nomination petitions;
disqualification of candidate.
   (a)   Any elector filing any court action challenging the nomination of a
candidate as provided for in this chapter shall do so no later than 5:00 p.m.
of the tenth (10th) day, excluding Saturday, Sunday and legal holidays, after
the last day for filing nomination papers and petitions. The elector shall
specify in the action the petition number, line number and basis for the
challenge for each signature being challenged. Failure to specify this
information shall result in the dismissal of the court action.
   (b)   Any elector may challenge a candidate for any reason relating to
qualifications for the office sought as prescribed by law, including age,
residency, or failure to fully pay fines, penalties or judgments.
   (c)   For the purposes of an action challenging nomination petitions, the
city clerk acts as the person's agent to receive service of process. Process in
an action challenging a nomination petition shall be served immediately after
the action is filed and in no event more than twenty-four (24) hours after
filing the action, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays.
   (d)   Immediately on receipt of process served on the city clerk as agent
for a person filing a nomination petition, the city clerk shall mail the
process to the person and shall notify the person by telephone of the filing of
the action.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Secs. 12-75 – 12-80. Reserved.
ARTICLE VII.
CAMPAIGN FINANCE; CANDIDATES, POLITICAL ACTION COMMITTEES, AND PUBLIC FUNDING
PROGRAM
   The provisions of this article shall apply to all political committees
making contributions to candidates for the offices of mayor or council member,
and all candidate committees in any city election. Political action committees
intending to influence any petition drive must also comply with provisions of
article XI of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-81.   Public matching funds program; campaign contract.
   (a)   In exchange for public matching funds, a candidate for mayor or
council member may file a signed, notarized contract with the city agreeing to
abide by limitations on the candidate's contributions, limitations on campaign
expenditures, and limitations on the use of all contributions as specified in
the City Charter, and pursuant to the Campaign Finance Administration Rules and
Regulations adopted by the mayor and council.
   (b)   An individual wishing to become a public funding candidate must sign a
campaign contract within thirty (30) days after the first of any of the
following events occur:
      (1)   The individual circulates or files nomination papers for a
specified election; or
      (2)   The individual publicly or formally declares candidacy for a
specified election; or
      (3)   The individual accepts a contribution or makes an expenditure for a
specified election.
   (c)   A candidate who signs a contract shall comply with all contribution
and expenditure limitations, even if the candidate never qualifies to receive
public funds.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-82.   Campaign finance administrator; duties thereof.
   (a)   The city clerk or other officer appointed by the mayor and council
shall administer the public matching funds program as the "campaign finance
administrator." The office of the campaign finance administrator shall not be
included in the classified civil service.
   (b)   The campaign finance administrator shall be responsible for the
management of said office, shall administer the program, and is authorized to
adopt, promulgate, amend, and rescind administrative rules and regulations to
carry out the policies and purposes of the program. Prior to becoming
effective, such rules and regulations shall be approved by the mayor and
council.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-83.   Registration of political committees.
   (a)   A candidate for election shall register as a candidate committee if
the candidate receives contributions or makes expenditures, in any combination,
of at least five hundred dollars ($500) in connection with that candidacy.
   (b)   For public funding candidates any contributions received prior to the
filing of a statement of organization will not be matched with public funds.
   (c)   A person that qualifies as a committee as prescribed by this section
shall report all contributions, expenditures and disbursements that occurred
before qualifying as a committee and shall maintain and produce records as
prescribed by section
12-85 of this code.
   (d)   An entity shall register as a political action committee if both of
the following apply:
      (1)   The entity is organized for the primary purpose of influencing the
result of an election.
      (2)   The entity knowingly receives contributions or makes expenditures,
in any combination, of at least one thousand one hundred dollars ($1,100) in
connection with any election during a calendar year.
   (e)   Notwithstanding the provisions set forth in subsection (d) above, a
person shall register as a political action committee prior to the circulation
of initiative, referendum or recall petitions.
   (f)   The city clerk shall make a rebuttable presumption that an entity is
organized for the primary purpose of influencing the results of an election if
it meets the requirements found in A.R.S. § 16-905 (c).
   (g)   A fund that is established by a corporation, limited liability
company, labor organization or partnership for the purpose of influencing the
result of an election shall register as a political action committee.
   (h)   A committee is not subject to state income tax and is not required to
file a state income tax return.
   (i)   The dollar amounts prescribed by this section shall be increased
pursuant to A.R.S. § 16-931.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18; Ord. No. 11813, § 1, 1-20-21)
Sec. 12-84.   Organization of political committees.
   (a)   A committee shall file a statement of organization with the city clerk
within ten (10) days after qualifying as a committee.
   (b)   A statement of organization shall include the following committee
information:
      (1)   The committee name, mailing address, e-mail address, website, if
any, telephone number, if any, and type of committee. The committee name shall
include:
         a.   For a candidate committee, the candidate's first or last name and
office sought.
         b.   For a political action committee that is sponsored, the sponsor's
name or commonly known nickname.
      (2)   The name, mailing address, e-mail address, website, if any, and
telephone number of any sponsor.
      (3)   The name, physical location or street address, e-mail address,
telephone number, occupation and employer of the committee's chairperson and
treasurer. For a candidate committee, the candidate may serve as both
chairperson and treasurer.
      (4)   For a candidate committee, the candidate's party affiliation.
      (5)   A listing of all banks or other financial institutions used by the
committee.
      (6)   A statement that the committee chairperson and committee treasurer
have read the city clerk's campaign finance and reporting guide, agree to
comply with this article and all relevant provisions of A.R.S. Title 16,
Chapter 6, and all successor provisions, and agree to accept all notifications
and service of process via the e-mail address provided by the committee.
   (c)   A committee shall file an amended statement of organization within ten
(10) days after any change in committee information.
   (d)   On the filing of a statement of organization a political action
committee shall be issued a city identification number.
   (e)   A standing committee shall file a statement of organization with the
secretary of state and a copy of the statement with the city clerk. Only the
secretary of state shall issue an identification number.
   (f)   A candidate may have only one (1) committee in existence for the same
office during the same election cycle.
   (g)   On filing a statement of organization, a political action committee or
political party may perform any lawful activity, including making
contributions, making expenditures or conducting issue advocacy, without
establishing a separate committee for each activity or specifying each activity
in its statement of organization.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-85.   Committee recordkeeping; treasurer; accounts.
   (a)   A committee treasurer is the custodian of the committee's books and
accounts. A committee may not make a contribution, expenditure or disbursement
without the authorization of the treasurer or the treasurer's designated agent.
   (b)   All committee monies shall be deposited in one or more bank accounts
held by the financial institutions listed in the committee's statement of
organization. Committee bank accounts shall be segregated as follows:
      (1)   Committee monies shall be segregated in different bank accounts
from personal monies.
      (2)   Contributions from individuals, partnerships, candidate committees,
political action committees or political parties shall be segregated in
different bank accounts from contributions from other donors.
      (3)   Contributions to a political party to defray operating expenses or
support party-building activities shall be segregated in different bank
accounts from contributions used to support candidates.
      (4)   For a committee that is a political party, the committee may
commingle monies from any source in a single bank account if the account is
maintained as prescribed in 11 code of federal regulations section 106.7.
      (5)   For contributions intended to influence a recall election, the
committee shall segregate those contributions into bank accounts that are
different from those intended to influence any other election and those recall
contributions may not be used to influence any other election.
   (c)   A committee shall exercise its best effort to obtain the required
information for any incomplete contribution received that is required to be
itemized and reported. The committee shall clearly ask for identification and
inform the contributor that the committee is required by law to seek
identification. The committee shall report in an amended report any contributor
identification obtained after the contribution has been disclosed on a campaign
finance report.
   (d)   A committee shall keep records of the following:
      (1)   All contributions made or received by the committee.
      (2)   The identification of any contributor that contributes in the
aggregate at least fifty dollars ($50) to the committee during the election
cycle, the date and amount of each contribution and the date of deposit into
the committee's account.
      (3)   Cumulative totals contributed by each contributor during the
election cycle.
      (4)   The name and address of every person that receives a contribution,
expenditure or disbursement from the committee, including the date and amount,
and, for any expenditure or disbursement, the purpose of the expenditure or
disbursement.
   (e)   A committee may accept a cash contribution. Cash contributions are
subject to the identification requirements set forth in subsection (d)(2) of
this section.
   (f)   A committee may accept a contribution by written or electronic
instrument, including a check, credit card, payroll deduction, online payment
or electronic transfer, if the contributor is an account holder of the
instrument. Unless designated as a joint contribution, a contribution shall be
attributed to the account holder that signs the instrument or authorizes the
transaction.
   (g)   A committee shall preserve all records required to be kept by this
section for two (2) years following the end of the election cycle.
   (h)   On request of the city clerk or city attorney, a committee that has
filed a statement of organization shall produce any of the records required to
be kept pursuant to this section to the city clerk or city attorney.
   (i)   A person that qualifies as a committee as prescribed by A.R.S. § 16-
905 shall report all contributions, expenditures and disbursements that
occurred before qualifying as a committee and shall maintain and produce
records as prescribed by this section.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-86.   Contribution limits.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, public funding candidates
must comply with the requirements of the Tucson Charter and the campaign
finance administration rules and regulations.
   (a)   No individual shall make a contribution of more than five hundred
dollars ($500) to any candidate for mayor or council member during any campaign
period.
   (b)   A political action committee may contribute up to one thousand dollars
($1,000) to any candidate for mayor or council member. No individual member of
such committee shall contribute more than five hundred dollars ($500) toward
the contribution, nor an aggregate amount of more than five hundred dollars
($500) to any candidate whether through a committee contribution or a personal
contribution.
   (c)   No candidate for mayor or council member shall accept or receive a
campaign contribution of more than five hundred dollars ($500) from any
individual or more than one thousand dollars ($1,000) from any political action
committee during any campaign period.
   (d)   An individual may only make contributions using personal monies,
except that a contribution from an unemancipated minor child shall be treated
as a contribution by the child's custodial parent or parents.
   (e)   A candidate committee shall not make contributions to a candidate
committee for another candidate.
   (f)   A candidate committee may transfer unlimited contributions to any one
or more other candidate committees for that same candidate under the following
conditions:
      (1)   A candidate committee for mayor or council member shall not
transfer contributions to that same candidate's committee for a statewide or
legislative office.
      (2)   If a candidate committee for mayor or council member transfers
contributions to a candidate committee for a county office for that same
candidate, the candidate committee for the county office shall not transfer
contributions to a statewide or legislative candidate committee for that same
candidate during the twenty-four (24) months immediately following that
transfer of contributions to the county candidate committee.
      (3)   Contributions originally made to the transferring candidate
committee are deemed to be contributions to the receiving candidate committee.
On transfer, an individual's aggregate contributions to both candidate
committees during the election cycle shall not exceed the individual's
contribution limit for that candidate.
   (g)   A candidate committee shall not knowingly accept contributions in
excess of the contribution limits prescribed by law. A candidate committee that
unknowingly accepts an excess contribution shall refund or reattribute any
excess contribution within sixty (60) days after receipt of the contribution. A
candidate committee may reattribute an excess contribution only if both of the
following apply:
      (1)   The excess contribution was received from an individual
contributor.
      (2)   The individual contributor authorizes the candidate committee to
reattribute the excess amount to another individual who was identified as a
joint account holder in the original instrument used to make the excess
contribution.
   (h)   A candidate committee may accept contributions only from an
individual, a partnership, a candidate committee, a political action committee
or a political party.
   (i)   A candidate committee may make unlimited contributions to a person
other than a candidate's committee.
   (j)   A candidate may contribute unlimited personal monies to the
candidate's own candidate committee.
   (k)   A political action committee may only contribute to a candidate
committee using monies contributed by an individual, a partnership, a candidate
committee, a political action committee or a political party.
   (l)   A political action committee may make unlimited contributions to
persons other than candidate committees.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-87.   Exemption from definition of contribution.
   (a)   A person may make any contribution not otherwise prohibited by law.
   (b)   The following are not contributions:
      (1)   The value of an individual's volunteer services or expenses that
are provided without compensation or reimbursement, including the individual's:
         a.   Travel expenses.
         b.   Use of real or personal property.
         c.   Cost of invitations, food or beverages.
         d.   Use of e-mail, internet activity or social media messages, only
if the individual's use is not paid for by the individual or any other person
and if the e-mails, social media messages or other internet activities do not
contain or include transmittal of a paid advertisement or paid fund-raising
solicitation.
      (2)   The costs incurred for covering or carrying a news story,
commentary or editorial by a broadcasting station or cable television operator,
an internet website, a newspaper or another periodical publication, including
an internet-based or electronic publication, if the cost for the news story,
commentary or editorial is not paid for by and the medium is not owned or under
the control of a candidate or committee.
      (3)   Any payment to defray the expense of an elected official meeting
with constituents or attending an informational tour, conference, seminar or
presentation, if the payor or the elected official does not attempt to
influence the result of an election and the payment is reported if required
pursuant to A.R.S. Title 38.
      (4)   The payment by a political party to support its nominee, including:
         a.   The printing or distribution of, or postage expenses for, voter
guides, sample ballots, pins, bumper stickers, handbills, brochures, posters,
yard signs and other similar political party expenditures.
         b.   Coordinated political party expenditures.
      (5)   The payment by any person to defray a political party's operating
expenses or party-building activities, including:
         a.   Party staff and personnel.
         b.   Studies and reports.
         c.   Voter registration, recruitment, polling and turnout efforts.
         d.   Party conventions and party meetings.
         e.   Construction, purchase or lease of party buildings or facilities.
      (6)   The value of any of the following to a committee:
         a.   Interest earned on the committee's deposits or investments.
         b.   Transfers between committees to reimburse expenses and distribute
monies raised through a joint fund-raising effort, if the transfers comply with
an agreement to reimburse and distribute monies that was executed before the
joint fund-raising effort occurred.
         c.   Payment of a committee's legal or accounting expenses by any
person.
         d.   An extension of credit for goods and services on a committee's
behalf by a creditor if the terms are substantially similar to extensions of
credit to nonpolitical debtors that are of similar risk and size of obligation.
The creditor must make a commercially reasonable attempt to collect the debt,
except that if an extension of credit remains unsatisfied by the committee
after six (6) months the committee is deemed to have received a contribution
but the creditor is not deemed to have made a contribution.
      (7)   The value of nonpartisan communications that are intended to
encourage voter registration and turnout efforts.
      (8)   Any payment to the city clerk for arguments in a publicity
pamphlet.
      (9)   The payment by any sponsor or its affiliate for the costs of
establishing, administering and soliciting contributions from its employees,
members, executives, stockholders, and retirees and their families to the
sponsor's separate segregated fund.
      (10)   Any payment by any entity for the costs of communicating with its
employees, members, executives, stockholders and retirees and their families
about any subject, without regard to whether those communications are made in
coordination with any candidate or candidate's agent.
      (11)   The value of allowing a candidate or a committee's representative
to appear at any private residence or at the facilities of any entity to speak
about the candidate's campaign or about a ballot measure, if the venue is
furnished by the venue's owner, is not paid for by a third party and is not a
sports stadium, coliseum, convention center, hotel ballroom, concert hall or
other similar arena that is generally open to the public.
      (12)   The costs of hosting a debate or candidates' forum, if at least
two (2) opposing candidates, with respect to any given office sought, or
representatives of at least two (2) opposing ballot measure campaigns, with
respect to any measure on the ballot, are invited with the same or similar
advance notice and method of invitation.
      (13)   The preparation and distribution of voter guides, subject to the
following:
         a.   A featured candidate or ballot measure shall not receive greater
prominence or substantially more space in the voter guide than any other
candidate or ballot measure.
         b.   The voter guide shall not include any message that constitutes
express advocacy.
      (14)   Monies that are loaned by a financial institution in the ordinary
course of business and not for the purpose of influencing the results of an
election, except that the loan is deemed a pro rata contribution by any
endorser or guarantor, other than the candidate's spouse.
      (15)   The costs of publishing a book or producing a documentary, if the
publication and production are for distribution to the general public through
traditional distribution mechanisms or a fee is obtained for the purchase of
the publication or viewing of the documentary.
   (c) This section does not imply that any transactions that are not
specifically listed in subsection (b) of this section are contributions unless
those transactions otherwise meet the definition of contribution defined in
A.R.S. § 16-901.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-88.   Advertising and fund-raising disclosure statements.
   (a)   A person that makes an expenditure for an advertisement or fund-
raising solicitation, other than an individual or a natural person, shall
include the following disclosures in the advertisement or solicitation:
      (1)   The words "paid for by", followed by the name of the person making
the expenditure for the advertisement or fund-raising solicitation.
      (2)   Whether the expenditure was authorized by any candidate, followed
by the identity of the authorizing candidate, if any.
   (b)   Any person purchasing literature or advertisements for the purpose of
making an independent expenditure must also comply with Article XII of this
code.
   (c)   In addition to the disclosure required by subsection (a) of this
section, a political action committee that makes an expenditure for an
advertisement shall include a disclosure stating the names of the three (3)
political action committees making the largest aggregate contributions to the
political action committees making the expenditure and that exceed twenty
thousand dollars ($20,000) during the election cycle, as calculated at the time
the advertisement was distributed for publication, display, delivery or
broadcast.
   (d)   If a disclosure contains any acronym or nickname that is not commonly
known, the disclosure shall also spell out the acronym or provide the full
name.
   (e)   If the advertisement is:
      (1)   Broadcast on radio, the disclosure shall be clearly spoken at the
beginning or end of the advertisement.
      (2)   Delivered by hand or mail or electronically, the disclosure shall
be clearly readable.
      (3)   Displayed on a sign or billboard, the disclosure shall be displayed
in a height that is at least four percent (4%) of the vertical height of the
sign or billboard.
      (4)   Broadcast on television or in a video or film, both of the
following requirements apply:
         a.   The disclosure shall be both written and spoken at the beginning
or end of the advertisement, except that if the written disclosure statement is
displayed for the greater of at least one-sixth (1/6) of the broadcast duration
or four (4) seconds, a spoken disclosure statement is not required.
         b.   The written disclosure statement shall be printed in letters that
are displayed in a height that is at least four percent (4%) of the vertical
picture height.
   (f)   This section does not apply to:
      (1)   Social media messages, text messages or messages sent by a short
message service.
      (2)   Advertisements that are placed as a paid link on a website, if the
message is not more than two hundred (200) characters in length and the link
directs the user to another website that complies with this section.
      (3)   Advertisements that are placed as a graphic or picture link, if the
statements required in this section cannot be conveniently printed due to the
size of the graphic or picture and the link directs the user to another website
that complies with this section.
      (4)   Bumper stickers, pins, buttons, pens and similar items on which the
statements required in this section cannot be conveniently printed.
      (5)   A solicitation of contributions by a separate segregated fund.
      (6)   A communication by a tax-exempt organization solely to its members.
      (7)   A published book or a documentary film or video.
   (g)   A person who violates this section is subject to the penalties
provided for in section
12-96 of this code.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-89.   Exemptions from definition of expenditure.
   (a)   A person may make any expenditure not otherwise prohibited by law.
   (b)   The following are not expenditures:
      (1)   The value of an individual's volunteer services or expenses that
are provided without compensation or reimbursement, including the individual's:
         a.   Travel expenses.
         b.   Use of real or personal property.
         c.   Cost of invitations, food or beverages.
         d.   Use of e-mail, internet activity or social media messages, only
if the individual's use is not paid for by the individual or any other person
and if the e-mails, social media messages or other internet activities do not
contain or include transmittal of a paid advertisement or paid fund-raising
solicitation.
      (2)   The value of any news story, commentary or editorial by any
broadcasting station, cable television operator, programmer or producer,
newspaper, magazine, website or other periodical publication that is not owned
or operated by a candidate, a candidate's spouse or any committee.
      (3)   The payment by any person to defray a political party's operating
expenses or party-building activities, including:
         a.   Party staff and personnel.
         b.   Studies and reports.
         c.   Voter registration, recruitment, polling and turnout efforts.
         d.   Party conventions and party meetings.
         e.   Construction, purchase or lease of party building or facilities.
      (4)   The value of any of the following to a committee:
         a.   Interest earned on the committee's deposits or investments.
         b.   Transfers between committees to reimburse expenses and distribute
monies raised through a joint fund-raising effort, except that contributions
shall be allocated as described in the fund-raising solicitation and expenses
shall be allocated in the same proportion as contributions.
         c.   Payment of a committee's legal or accounting expenses.
         d.   An extension of credit for goods and services on a committee's
behalf by a creditor if the terms are substantially similar to extensions of
credit to nonpolitical debtors that are of similar risk and size of obligation.
The creditor must make a commercially reasonable attempt to collect the debt,
except that if an extension of credit remains unsatisfied by the committee
after six (6) months the committee is deemed to have received a contribution
but the creditor is not deemed to have made a contribution.
      (5)   The value of nonpartisan communications that are intended to
encourage voter registration and turnout efforts.
      (6)   Any payment by a person that is not a committee to the city clerk
for arguments in a publicity pamphlet.
      (7)   Any payment for legal or accounting services that are provided to a
committee.
      (8)   The payment of costs of publishing a book or producing a
documentary, if the publication and production are for distribution to the
general public through traditional distribution mechanisms or a fee is obtained
for the purchase of the publication or viewing of the documentary.
   (c)   This section does not imply that any transactions that are not
specifically listed in subsection (b) of this section are expenditures unless
those transactions otherwise meet the definition of expenditure as defined in
A.R.S. § 16-901.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-90.   Deceptive mailings.
   (a)   A person is prohibited from attempting to influence the outcome of an
election by delivering or mailing any document that:
      (1)   Purports to be authorized, approved, required, sent or reviewed by
the state government, a county, city, or town, or any other political
subdivision, or
      (2)   Falsely simulates a document from any of these governmental
entities.
   (b)   The penalty for deceptive mailings (civil penalty) is equal to twice
the total cost of the mailing, or five hundred dollars ($500), whichever amount
is greater.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-91.   Contribution restrictions.
   (a)   A corporation, limited liability company or labor organization shall
not make contributions to a candidate committee.
   (b)   A corporation, limited liability company or labor organization may
make unlimited contributions to persons other than candidate committees.
   (c)   A corporation, limited liability company or labor organization may
sponsor a separate segregated fund. Employees, members, executives,
stockholders and retirees and the families of a corporation, limited liability
company or labor organization and any subsidiary or affiliate of a corporation,
limited liability company or labor organization may make contributions to the
separate segregated fund provided that the separate segregated fund has
registered as a political action committee subject to the provisions of A.R.S.
§ 16-916 (c).
   (d)   A partnership may not contribute to a candidate for mayor or council
member more than the contribution limits of section
12-86 of this code.
   (e)   A partnership may make unlimited contributions to persons other than
candidate committees.
   (f)   Partnership contributions are subject to the following:
      (1)   Partnership contributions shall be attributed to each contributing
partner as designated by the partnership. The partnership shall provide the
recipient committee written notice identifying the contributing partners and
the amount attributed to each.
      (2)   Partnership contributions shall count against both the
partnership's and the individual partners' contribution limits to a recipient.
The portion attributed to each partner shall be aggregated with the individual
partner's non-partnership contributions to that recipient and shall not exceed
the individual partner's contribution limit.
      (3)   The partnership shall not attribute any contribution to a partner
that is a corporation, limited liability company or labor organization.
      (4)   Partnership contributions need not be accompanied by the signature
of each contributing partner.
   (g)   A partnership may establish a separate segregated fund and register it
as a political action committee.
   (h)   A contributor shall not give and a committee shall not accept a
contribution that has been earmarked for a candidate.
   (i)   If an anonymous contribution is accepted because it is received in a
non-returnable form, it must be segregated from other funds and must be
disposed of pursuant to section
12-97 of this code.
   (j)   A contribution by an individual or a political committee to two (2) or
more candidates in connection with a joint fund-raising effort shall be divided
among the candidates in direct proportion to each candidate campaign
committee's share of the expenses for the fund-raising effort.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-92.   Campaign finance violations; classifications.
   (a)   It is unlawful for a corporation, limited liability company or labor
organization to make a contribution to a candidate committee. A corporation,
limited liability company or labor organization that violates this subsection
is guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor. The individual through whom the violation
is effected is guilty of a class 6 felony. This subsection does not apply to a
committee that is incorporated or organized for a limitation of liability.
   (b)   It is unlawful for any person to make a contribution in the name of
another person, knowingly permit a person's name to be used to effect a
contribution in the name of another person or knowingly accept a contribution
made by a person in the name of another person. A person who violates this
subsection is guilty of a class 6 felony.
   (c)   It is unlawful for any person to make a contribution or expenditure
using money or anything of value secured by physical force, job discrimination
or financial reprisal including threats of any force, discrimination or
reprisal. A person who violates this subsection is guilty of class 6 felony.
   (d)   It is unlawful for any person to make a contribution or expenditure
using dues, fees or other monies required as a condition of membership in a
labor organization or as a condition of employment. A person who violates this
subsection is guilty of a class 6 felony.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-93.   Campaign finance reports required.
   (a)   A committee shall file campaign finance reports with the city clerk.
Public funding candidates must comply with the requirements of the Tucson
Charter and the campaign finance administration rules and regulations. For
other committees, the secretary of state's instructions and procedures manual
adopted pursuant to A.R.S. § 16-452 shall prescribe the format for all reports
and statements.
   (b)   A campaign finance report shall set forth:
      (1)   The amount of cash on hand at the beginning of the reporting
period.
      (2)   Total receipts during the reporting period, including:
         (a)   An itemized list of receipts in the following categories,
including the source, amount and date of receipt, together with the total of
all receipts in each category:
            (i)    Contributions from individuals whose contributions exceed
fifty dollars ($50) for that election cycle, including identification of the
contributor's occupation and employer.
            (ii)    Contributions from candidate committees.
            (iii)    Contributions from political action committees.
            (iv)    Contributions from political parties.
            (v)    Contributions from partnerships.
            (vi)   For a political action committee or political party,
contributions from corporations and limited liability companies, including
identification of the corporation's or limited liability company's file number
issued by the corporation commission.
            (vii)   For a political action committee or political party,
contributions from labor organizations, including identification of the labor
organization's file number issued by the corporation commission.
            (viii)   For a candidate committee, a candidate's contribution of
personal monies.
            (ix)   All loans, including identification of any endorser or
guarantor other than a candidate's spouse, and the contribution amount endorsed
or guaranteed by each.
            (x)   Rebates and refunds.
            (xi)   Interest on committee monies.
            (xii)   The fair market value of in-kind contributions received.
            (xiii)   Extensions of credit that remain outstanding, including
identification of the creditor and the purpose of the extension.
         (b)   The aggregate amount of contributions from all individuals whose
contributions do not exceed fifty dollars ($50) for the election cycle.
      (3)   An itemized list of all disbursements in excess of two hundred
fifty dollars ($250) during the reporting period in the following categories,
including the recipient, the recipient's address, a description of the
disbursement and the amount and date of the disbursement, together with the
total of all disbursements in each category:
         (a)   Disbursements for operating expenses.
         (b)   Contributions to candidate committees.
         (c)   Contributions to political action committees.
         (d)   Contributions to political parties.
         (e)   Contributions to partnerships.
         (f)   For a political action committee or political party,
contributions to corporations and limited liability companies, including
identification of the corporation's or limited liability company's file number
issued by the corporation commission.
         (g)   For a political action committee or political party,
contributions to labor organizations, including identification of the labor
organization's file number issued by the corporation commission.
         (h)   Repayment of loans.
         (i)   Refunds of contributions.
         (j)   Loans made.
         (k)   The value of in-kind contributions provided.
         (l)   Independent expenditures that are made to advocate the election
or defeat of a candidate, including identification of the candidate, office
sought by the candidate, election date, mode of advertising and distribution or
publication date.
         (m)   Expenditures to advocate the passage or defeat of a ballot
measure, including identification of the ballot measure, ballot measure serial
number, election date, mode of advertising and distribution or publication
date.
         (n)   Expenditures to advocate for or against the issuance of a recall
election order or for the election or defeat of a candidate in a recall
election, including identification of the officer to be recalled or candidate
supported or opposed, mode of advertising and distribution or publication date.
         (o)   Any other disbursements or expenditures.
      (4)   The total sum of all receipts and disbursements for the reporting
period.
      (5)   A certification by the committee treasurer, issued under penalty of
perjury, that the contents of the report are true and correct.
   (c)   For the purposes of reporting under subsection (b) of this section:
      (1)   A contribution is deemed to be received either on the date the
committee knowingly takes possession of the contribution or the date of the
check or credit card payment. For an in-kind contribution of services, the
contribution is deemed made either on the date the services are performed or
the date the committee receives the services.
      (2)   An expenditure or disbursement is deemed made either on the date
the committee authorized the monies to be spent or the date the monies are
withdrawn from the committee's account. For a transaction by check, the
expenditure or disbursement is deemed made on the date the committee signs the
check. For a credit card transaction on paper, the expenditure or disbursement
is deemed made on the date the committee signs the authorization to charge the
credit card. For an electronic transaction, an expenditure or disbursement is
deemed made on the date the committee electronically authorizes the charge. For
an agreement to purchase goods or services, the expenditure or disbursement is
deemed made either on the date the parties enter into the agreement or the date
the purchase order is issued.
      (3)   A committee may record its transactions using any of the methods
authorized by this subsection but for each type of contribution, expenditure or
disbursement made or received, the committee shall use a consistent method of
recording transactions throughout the election cycle.
   (d)   The amount of an in-kind contribution of services shall be equal to
the usual and normal charges for the services on the date performed.
   (e)   If any receipt or disbursement is earmarked, the committee shall
report the identity of the person to whom the receipt or disbursement is
earmarked.
   (f)   Candidate committee reports shall be cumulative for the election cycle
to which they relate. Political action committee and political party reports
shall be cumulative for a two (2) year election cycle ending in the year of a
statewide general election. If there has been no change during the reporting
period in an item listed in the immediately preceding report, only the amount
need be carried forward.
   (g)   For a political action committee that receives individual
contributions through a payroll deduction plan, that committee is not required
to separately itemize each contribution received from the contributor during
the reporting period. In lieu of itemization, the committee may report all of
the following:
      (1)   The aggregate amount of contributions received from the contributor
through the payroll deduction plan during the reporting period.
      (2)   The individual's identity.
      (3)   The amount deducted per pay period.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-94.   Campaign finance reporting period.
   (a)   Candidate committees, political action committees and political
parties shall file a campaign finance report covering each reporting period as
follows:
      (1)   For a calendar quarter without an election, the political action
committee or political party shall file a quarterly report. The quarterly
report shall be:
         (a)   Filed not later than the fifteenth (15th) day after the calendar
quarter.
         (b)   Complete through the last day of the calendar quarter.
      (2)   For a calendar quarter with an election, the political action
committee or political party shall file a preelection and postelection report
as follows:
         (a)   A preelection report shall be:
            (i)   Filed not later than ten (10) days before the election.
            (ii)   Complete from the first (1st) day of the applicable calendar
quarter through the seventeenth (17th) day before the election.
         (b)   A postelection report shall be:
            (i)   Filed not later than the fifteenth (15th) day after the
applicable calendar quarter.
            (ii)   Complete from the sixteenth (16th) day before the election
through the last day of the applicable calendar quarter.
   (b)   A committee shall file campaign finance reports until terminated.
   (c)   Public funding candidates must also comply with the requirements of
the Tucson Charter and the campaign finance administration rules and
regulations.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-95.   Failure to file; penalties; notice; suspension.
   (a)   If a committee fails to timely file a complete report as prescribed by
this code, the city clerk shall send a written notice by e-mail to the
committee within five (5) days after the filing deadline that identifies the
late report, describes how fines accrue and identifies methods of payment.
   (b)   A committee that fails to timely file a report shall pay the city
clerk a penalty of ten dollars ($10) for each day that the filing is late
during the first fifteen (15) days after the filing deadline and twenty-five
dollars ($25) for each subsequent day that the filing is late. Penalties accrue
until the late report is filed. The city clerk shall not accept the late report
until all penalties accrued pursuant to this section have been paid.
   (c)   If a committee fails to file a complete report within thirty (30) days
after the filing deadline and being provided notice pursuant to subsection (a)
of this section, the city clerk may notify the city attorney who may proceed
pursuant to section
12-96 of this code.
   (d)   For any political action committee or political party that fails to
file three (3) consecutive complete reports, the city clerk shall send by e-
mail to the committee a notice of temporary suspension and the following apply:
      (1)   On receipt, the committee's authority to operate in the city is
temporarily suspended.
      (2)   The notice shall state that failure to comply with all filing and
payment requirements within thirty (30) days after the date of the notice shall
result in permanent suspension of the committee's authority to operate in the
city.
   (e)   After compliance with subsection (d) of this section, the city clerk
may permanently suspend the committee and shall notify the committee by e-mail
and is not required to provide any further notice. Permanent or temporary
suspension does not eliminate a committee's continuing obligation to file
reports and pay any outstanding and accruing penalties provided by law.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-96.   Enforcement authority; investigation; reasonable cause; notice of
violation; administrative appeal.
   (a)   Notwithstanding the provisions of A.R.S. § 16-1021, on receipt of a
complaint from a third party, the city clerk is the sole public officer who is
authorized to initiate an investigation into alleged violations of this
chapter, including the alleged failure to register as a committee. The city
clerk shall limit an investigation to violations that are within the city
clerk's jurisdiction.
   (b)   The secretary of state will establish guidelines in the instructions
and procedures manual adopted pursuant to A.R.S. § 16-452 that outline the
procedures, timelines and other processes that apply to investigations by all
filing officers in this state. Until the secretary of state establishes such
guidelines the city clerk shall promulgate necessary interim guidelines.
   (c)   If after providing the subject of an investigation a reasonable
opportunity to respond, the city clerk has reasonable cause to believe a person
violated this chapter, the city clerk shall refer the matter to the city
attorney.
   (d)   Before a reasonable cause determination is made as prescribed in
subsection (c) of this section, the city clerk, the city attorney and any other
public officer or employee may not order a person to register as a committee
and does not have audit or subpoena powers to compel the production of evidence
or the attendance of witnesses concerning a potential campaign finance
violation. The city clerk may request the voluntary production of evidence or
attendance of witnesses in making a reasonable cause determination. Public
funding candidates must also comply with the requirements of the campaign
finance administration rules and regulations.
   (e)   Only after receiving a referral from the city clerk, the city attorney
may:
      (1)   Conduct an investigation using the city attorney's subpoena powers,
except that the city attorney shall not compel a person to file campaign
finance reports unless the city attorney has determined that the person is a
committee.
      (2)   Serve the alleged violator with a notice of violation. The notice
shall state with reasonable particularity the nature of the violation, shall
specify the fine or penalty imposed and shall require compliance within twenty
(20) days after the date of issuance of the notice. The city attorney shall
impose a presumptive civil penalty equal to the value of amount of money that
has been received, spent or promised in violation of this chapter, except that
after a finding of special circumstances, the city attorney may impose a
penalty of up to three (3) times the amount of the presumptive civil penalty,
based on the severity, extent or willful nature of the alleged violation. If
the notice of violation requires a person to file campaign finance reports, the
reports are not required to be filed until the city attorney's notice of
violation has been upheld after any timely appeal.
      (3)   Keep any nonpublic information gathered by the city attorney in the
course of the committee status investigation confidential until the final
disposition of any appeal of the enforcement order.
   (f)   The city attorney has the sole and exclusive authority to initiate any
applicable administrative or judicial proceedings to enforce an alleged
violation of this article and of this chapter that have been referred by the
city clerk.
   (g)   If the alleged violator:
      (1)   Takes corrective action within twenty (20) days after the date of
the issuance of the notice of violation by the city attorney, the alleged
violator is not subject to any penalty.
      (2)   Does not take corrective action within twenty (20) days after the
date of issuance of the notice of violation by the city attorney, the city
attorney shall impose the penalty set forth in the notice and shall provide
formal notice that the imposition of the penalty is an appealable agency action
pursuant to A.R.S. §§ 41-1092.03 and 41-1092.04.
      (3)   If due to the nature of the violation, no corrective action is
possible, the city attorney shall issue an order of compliance and may impose a
penalty of up to three (3) times the amount of the presumptive civil penalty,
based on the severity, extent or willful nature of the alleged violation.
   (h)   Within thirty (30) days after receiving from the city attorney the
notice of violation or an order of compliance with penalty under subsection (g)
(3) of this section, the alleged violator may request a hearing pursuant to
A.R.S. Title 41, Chapter 6, Article 10.
   (i)   After the conclusion of the administrative appeal process prescribed
in A.R.S. Title 41, Chapter 6, Article 10, the alleged violator may appeal to
the superior court pursuant to A.R.S. Title 12, Chapter 7, Article 6 for
judicial review of the final administrative decision.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-97.   Transfer and disposal of committee monies; limitations.
   (a)   A committee that intends to terminate shall dispose of surplus monies
as follows:
      (1)   Donate surplus monies to the City of Tucson election campaign
account established pursuant to section
12-99 of this code.
      (2)   Donate surplus monies to a nonprofit organization that has tax
exempt status under section 501(c)(3) of the internal revenue code.
      (3)   Return surplus monies to the contributor.
      (4)   In the case of a candidate committee, contribute surplus monies to
a candidate committee for another candidate under the following conditions:
         a.   The candidate committee makes the contribution after the time
period for filing a nomination paper pursuant to section
12-69(b) of this code.
         b.   The candidate associated with the candidate committee that makes
the contribution did not file a nomination paper to run for election in the
current election cycle.
      (5)   For public funding candidates, if following the election wherein
the candidate is elected or defeated, the candidate has unexpended campaign
contributions, any surplus shall be returned to the election campaign account
until the full amount of public matching funds disbursed has been returned. Any
remaining unexpended campaign contributions shall be returned to the election
campaign account, contributors, or to a non-profit charitable organization. All
unexpended campaign contributions must be disbursed no later than the first
Monday in December following the election.
   (b)   Surplus monies shall not be used for or converted to personal use.
   (c)   This section does not preclude the repayment of a loan to a committee.
   (d)   Contributions of surplus monies shall be made pursuant to section
12-86 of this code.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-98.   Termination statement; filing; contents.
   (a)   A committee may terminate only when the committee treasurer files a
termination statement with the city clerk.
   (b)   In the termination statement, the committee treasurer shall certify
under penalty of perjury that all of the following apply:
      (1)   The committee will no longer receive any contributions or make any
disbursements.
      (2)   The committee either:
         a.   Has no outstanding debts or obligations.
         b.   Has outstanding debts or obligations, or both, that are all more
than five (5) years old, and that the committee's creditors have agreed to
discharge the debts and obligations and have agreed to the termination of the
committee.
      (3)   Any surplus monies have been disposed of and that the committee has
no cash on hand.
      (4)   All contributions and expenditures have been reported, including
any disposal of surplus monies.
   (c)   The city clerk may reject the termination statement if it appears that
the requirements in subsection (b) of this section have not been satisfied.
   (d)   After a termination statement is filed, a committee:
      (1)   Is not required to file any subsequent campaign finance reports.
      (2)   Shall have no further receipts or disbursements without filing a
new statement of organization.
   (e)   A standing committee may terminate its activities in the City and
remain active in other reporting jurisdictions, by filing a statement of that
intent with the city clerk.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-99.   Establishment of a restricted election campaign account.
   Pursuant to Tucson Charter Chapter XVI subchapter (b) section 6, the mayor
and council shall establish an election campaign account in the general fund
into which shall be deposited such sums as may be appropriated from time to
time in the annual budget, gifts and donations made to the city for the support
of public election campaign financing, and such sums as may otherwise be
appropriated to said account. Money in said account shall be restricted, and
expended for the purpose of assisting the financing of the public matching
funds program.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Secs. 12-100 – 12-109. Reserved.
ARTICLE VIII.
INITIATIVE
   Any proposed ordinance or amendment to the Charter of the City of Tucson may
be submitted to the mayor and council by a petition signed by fifteen (15)
percent of the qualified electors of the city, computed on the vote for the
candidates for mayor at the last preceding general municipal election at which
a mayor was elected.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-110.   Application to circulate petitions; filing of statement of
organization.
   (a)   A person or persons intending to circulate an initiative petition
shall, before causing the petition to be printed and circulated, file with the
city clerk an application on a form to be provided by the city clerk, stating
an intent to circulate and file a petition. The application shall set forth the
names, addresses and signatures of three (3) individuals ("petitioners") who
are responsible for the petition and who are to be notified of all proceedings
and actions taken in reference to the petition.
   (b)   The application shall be accompanied by the complete title and text of
the proposed measure to be initiated.
   (c)   On receipt of the application, the city clerk shall assign an official
serial number to the petition, which number shall appear in the lower right-
hand corner of each side of each page thereof, and issue that number to the
applicant. The serial numbers shall be assigned in numerical sequence. The city
clerk shall maintain a record of each application received, the numbers
assigned, and the applicant and petitioners to whom issued.
   (d)   The statement of organization required in section
12-84 of this code, and listing the chairperson and treasurer of the committee,
shall be filed with the city clerk at the time of application and before
circulating petitions. Signatures obtained before the filing of a completed
statement of organization with the city clerk are void and shall not be counted
in determining the legal sufficiency of any initiative petition(s).
   (e)   The city clerk shall make available to each applicant by electronic
means a copy of the text of this chapter governing the initiative and
referendum, a copy of A.R.S. Title 19 and all rules adopted by the secretary of
state pursuant to that title.
   (f)   The provisions of article VII of this chapter, "Campaign Finance;
Candidates, Political Action Committees, and Public Funding Program," shall
apply to initiative petitions.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-111.   Form of petition.
   (a)   The term "petition," as used in this article, includes the title and
text of the proposed measure, the signature sheets, and the affidavit of
circulator.
   (b)   The term "at all times during circulation" means the entire period
from the time the circulator receives any blank initiative petition for
circulation until the time the petition is filed with the city clerk.
   (c)   Any initiative petition desired to be submitted to the mayor and
council shall be presented upon a petition in the form prescribed by the city
clerk.
   (d)   The referendum and recall petitions filed with the city clerk must
strictly comply with the constitutional and statutory requirements for the
referendum and recall process. This includes the form of petition and the
requirement that the ward number shall be filled in on the signature sheet.
   (e)   It is the responsibility of the petitioners of the initiative petition
to ensure that at all times during circulation, the petition is in the required
form, that it contains all required information, and that all of its pages are
fully legible. Any deficiencies are subject to challenge by the public as well
as the city clerk.
   (f)   No additional information, instructions, symbols, or markings of any
kind are to be printed on any portion of the petition, including the back or
margins of any of the petition documents (title/text, signature sheet,
affidavit of circulator).
   (g)   The title and text of the measure proposed by the petition shall be
printed in at least eight (8) point type on either 8 1/2 x 11" or 8 1/2 x 14"
paper, portrait or landscape orientation, and shall include both the original
and (if applicable) amended text. The title and text shall indicate material
deleted, if any, by printing the material with a line drawn through the center
of the letters of the material, and shall indicate material added or new
material by printing the letters of the material in capital letters. The eight
(8) point type requirement does not apply to maps, charts, or other graphics.
   (h)   If the full printing of the title and text of the proposed measure
requires multiple pages, the title and text may be printed either on the front
of each page or on the front and back of each page, at the option of the
petitioners. Each and every page of the title and text shall be numbered
sequentially (e.g. Page 1 of 5, Page 2 of 5, etc.) and the number shall appear
in the upper right-hand corner of each page, immediately below the words
"Tucson, Arizona" and the date of issuance.
   (i)   The initiative petition shall be printed in black ink on white or
recycled white pages.
   (j)   The signature sheets shall be fourteen (14) inches in width by eight
and one-half (8 1/2) inches in length.
   (k)   All pages of the petition shall have a margin of at least one-half (1/
2) inch at the top and one-fourth (1/4) inch at the bottom of each page.
   (l)   The title of the petition shall read "CITY OF TUCSON" in the left
margin followed by "Initiative Description" centered.
   (m)   The following language shall appear in the uppermost right-hand corner
of the signature sheet: "It is unlawful to sign this petition before it has a
serial number."
   (n)   Immediately below the statement required in subsection (m) of this
section, each signature sheet shall have printed in capital letters in no less
than twelve (12) point bold-faced type the following:
   "                                 PAID CIRCULATOR"
   "                                 VOLUNTEER"
   (o)   Immediately below the heading required in subsection (l) of this
section, the petition shall include a description of no more than one hundred
(100) words.
   (p)   Immediately below the description required in subsection (o) of this
section, the following language shall be included: "Notice: This is only a
description of the proposed measure (or charter amendment) prepared by the
sponsor of the measure. It may not include every provision contained in the
measure. Before signing, make sure the title and text of the measure are
attached. You have the right to read or examine the title and text before
signing."
   (q)   Immediately below the notice required in subsection (p) of this
section, the following language shall be included in eight (8) point centered
type "Initiative Measure to be Submitted Directly to Electors". Immediately
below this centered heading, the following language shall be included: "To the
Honorable Mayor and Council, and the Clerk of the City of Tucson: We, the
undersigned, residents of the City of Tucson, Arizona, and duly qualified
electors therein, do hereby submit and propose to you, for adoption, the
following ordinance, and request that action be taken by you relative to the
adoption or rejection of such proposed ordinance, at the earliest possible
moment, and that the same be forthwith submitted to a vote of the people, to-
wit: __________________, as described in the attached Title and Text. Each
signer says: I have personally signed this petition with my first and last
names. I have not signed any other petition for the same measure. I am a
qualified elector of the City of Tucson, State of Arizona".
   (r)   Immediately following the language described subsection (q) above, the
following language shall be included: "Warning: It is a class 1 misdemeanor for
any person to knowingly sign an initiative petition with a name other than his
own, except in a circumstance where he signs for a person, in the presence of
and at the specific request of such person, who is incapable of signing his own
name because of physical infirmity, or to knowingly sign his name more than
once for the same measure, or to knowingly sign such petition when he is not a
qualified elector."
   (s)   The signature sheet shall include columns with the following headings:
      (1)   Signature
      (2)   Name (First and Last Name Printed)
      (3)   Actual Address (Street & Number, if no street address, describe
residence location)
      (4)   Arizona Post Office Box and Zip Code
      (5)   City or Town
      (6)   Ward No.
      (7)   Date Signed
   (t)   Each signature sheet shall contain lines for signatures numbered one
(1) through fifteen (15).
   (u)   Immediately below the fifteen (15) numbered lines described in
subsection (t) above, the following language shall be included: "The validity
of the signatures on this sheet must be sworn to by the circulator before a
notary public on the form appearing on the back of the sheet."
   (v)   The official serial number shall appear in the lower right-hand
corner, immediately preceded by the words "Serial Number" on both sides of the
signature sheet and the title and text page(s).
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-112.   Affidavit of circulator.
   (a)   The affidavit shall be in the following form printed on the reverse
side of each signature sheet: "Initiative Affidavit of Circulator".
   (b)   The words "Tucson, Arizona" and the date of issuance shall appear in
the upper right-hand corner.
   (c)   In the upper left-hand corner include the following:
State of Arizona      )
            ) ss.:
County of                       )
   (Where notarized)
   (d)   Immediately below the language described in subsection (c), the
following language shall be included:
   I,  (print name)  , a person who is not required to be a resident of this
state but who is otherwise qualified to register to vote in the County of
              , in the State of Arizona at all times during my circulation of
this petition sheet, and under the penalty of a class 1 misdemeanor, depose and
say that subject to section
19-115, Arizona Revised Statutes, each individual printed the individual's own
name and address and signed this sheet of the foregoing petition in my presence
on the date indicated and I believe that each signer's name and residence
address or post office address are correctly stated and that each signer is a
qualified elector of the City of Tucson and that at all times during
circulation of this signature sheet a copy of the title and text was attached
to the signature sheet (Ariz. Const. Art. IV, Pt. 1, §§ 1, ¶ 9, Arizona Revised
Statutes § 19-112 (B), (C), (D), 19-114 (A) Tucson Charter, Chapter XIX, § 2,
Tucson Code § 12-116(f)). The signatures appearing on this petition sheet are
the genuine signatures of the persons whose names they bear (Tucson Charter,
Chapter XIX, § 2). I retained direct custody and control of this signature
sheet, and personally observed each signer of this signature sheet actually
sign it (Tucson Code § 12-116(c)(h)). I crossed out and initialed blank
signature lines on this signature sheet prior to or at the time my signature on
this affidavit was notarized (Tucson Code § 12-116(j)).
   (e)   Immediately following the language in subsection (d), the following
shall be included: "The names of the petitioners who should be notified of all
proceedings and action taken in reference to this petition are:"
   (f)   Immediately below the information required in subsection (e), the
following shall be included: the petitioners' printed names, residence
addresses, street and number (if no street address, describe residence
location).
   (g)   Immediately below the statement described in subsection (f), the
following shall be included: the circulator signature, printed name, actual
residence address, street and number (if no street address, describe residence
location).
   (h)   Immediately following the circulator signature required in subsection
(g), the following shall be included:
Subscribed and sworn to (or affirmed) before me on
                                      (date)
                                         
   Notary Public
(Form shall include a designated location for notary stamp)
   (i)   The official serial number shall appear in the lower right-hand
corner, immediately preceded by the words "Serial Number" on both sides of the
signature sheet and the title and text page(s).
   (j)   The affidavit of circulator shall not be modified. Any petition that
contains a partially completed affidavit or any affidavit that has been
modified is invalid.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-113.   Final version of petition.
   Prior to the circulation of an initiative petition, the petitioners shall
file with the city clerk, as a public record, a blank final printed version of
the initiative petition to be circulated, showing the official serial number.
The city clerk shall time and date stamp the filed version. The initiative
petition must include the full and correct copy of the title and text of the
proposed measure to be initiated. The petition filed with the city clerk is the
only valid version for circulation.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-114.   Right of city clerk to review.
   The city clerk shall have the right, at any time, to review, challenge or
reject an initiative petition on the basis of any legal or procedural
insufficiency, including but not limited to the petition's failure to address
legislation that is subject to the initiative process. The city clerk's
administration of the initiative process does not represent an acceptance or
review of the petition, and the absence of objection at any particular time
does not bar subsequent rejection of the initiative petition by the city.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-115.   Registered circulators; requirements; definition.
   (a)   All circulators who are not residents of this state must register as
circulators with the secretary of state before circulating petitions pursuant
to A.R.S. § 19-118. The political action committee that is circulating the
petition shall collect and submit the registrations to the secretary of state.
The secretary of state shall establish in the instructions and procedures
manual issued pursuant to A.R.S. § 16-452 a procedure for registering
circulators and shall publish on a website maintained by the secretary of state
all information regarding circulators that is required pursuant to this
section. The city clerk shall disqualify all signatures collected by a
circulator who fails to register pursuant to this subsection.
   (b)   The registration required by subsection (a) of this section shall
include the following provisions:
      (1)   The circulator consents to the jurisdiction of the courts of this
state in resolving any disputes concerning the circulation of petitions by that
circulator.
      (2)   The circulator shall designate an address in this state at which
the circulator will accept service of process related to disputes concerning
circulation of that circulator's petitions. Service of process is effected
under this section by delivering a copy of the subpoena to that person
individually or by leaving a copy of the subpoena at the address designated by
the circulator with a person of suitable age.
   (c)   If a registered circulator is properly served with a subpoena to
provide evidence in an action regarding circulation of petitions and fails to
appear or produce documents as provided for in the subpoena, all signatures
collected by that circulator are deemed invalid. The party serving the subpoena
may request an order from the court directing the city clerk to remove any
signatures collected by the circulator.
   (d)   Any person may challenge the lawful registration of circulators in the
superior court of the county in which the circulator is registered. A challenge
may not be commenced more than ten (10) business days after the date on which
the petitions for which the circulator is required to be registered are filed
with the city clerk. The person challenging signatures may amend that complaint
after the city clerk has removed signatures and signature sheets. An action
pursuant to this section shall be advanced on the calendar and decided by the
court as soon as possible. Either party may appeal to the supreme court within
five (5) calendar days after entry of judgment. The prevailing party in an
action to challenge the registration of a circulator under this section is
entitled to reasonable attorney fees.
   (e)   The removal or disqualification of any one or more circulators does
not invalidate the random sample of signatures, and the city clerk shall not be
required to conduct any additional random sampling of signatures.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-116.   Circulation of petition.
   (a)   Prior to circulating the initiative or referendum petition, the
circulator shall state whether they are a paid circulator or a volunteer by
checking the appropriate line on the signature sheet. Signatures obtained on
referendum petitions in violation of this section are void and shall not be
counted in determining the legal sufficiency of the petition. For the purposes
of this chapter, "paid circulator:"
      (1)   Means a natural person who receives monetary or other compensation
that is based on the number of signatures obtained on a petition or on the
number of petitions circulated that contain signatures.
      (2)   Does not include a paid employee of any political action committee
organized pursuant to Arizona Revised Statutes Title 16, Chapter 6, unless that
employee's primary responsibility is circulating petitions to obtain
signatures.
   (b)   At all times during circulation, each signature sheet shall be
attached to a complete copy of the title and text of the proposed measure.
   (c)   For purposes of this article, the term "at all times during
circulation" means the entire period from the time the circulator receives any
blank initiative petition for circulation until the time the petition is filed
with the city clerk.
   (d)   With the exceptions listed in subsection (e) of this section, and
section
12-115(a) of this code, any person who is qualified to register to vote in the
State of Arizona may circulate an initiative or referendum petition.
   (e)   No county recorder or justice of the peace and no person other than a
person qualified to register to vote in the State of Arizona shall circulate an
initiative petition and all signatures verified by any such person shall be
void and shall not be counted in determining the legal sufficiency of the
petition.
   (f)   Each circulator of any petition page shall personally receive
sufficient information from each signer of the signature sheet, at the time the
signature is obtained, to ensure that the circulator can, as to all signers of
that page, depose and state in the affidavit required by the Tucson Charter
that each signature is genuine, and that each signer is a resident and
qualified elector of the City of Tucson.
   (g)   Every qualified elector signing a petition shall do so in the presence
of the person who is circulating the petition and who is to execute the
affidavit of circulator.
      (1)   At the time of signing, the qualified elector shall sign their
first and last names in the spaces provided and the elector so signing shall
print their first and last names and write, in the appropriate spaces following
the signature, the signer's residence address, giving street and number, and if
no street address, a description of the residence location.
      (2)   In the case of strict compliance of the referendum, the qualified
elector shall also print their ward number (see Tucson Code 12-151 (a)).
      (3)   The elector so signing shall write, in the appropriate spaces
following the elector's address, the date on which the elector signed the
petition.
   (h)   The circulator of any petition page shall retain direct custody and
control of the page at all times during circulation, except when a signer is
signing; personally give the page to, and take it from, each signer; and
personally observe each signer of the petition page actually sign the petition.
   (i)   Abandoned or stray petition sheets that are not or at any time have
not been under the direct custody and control of the circulator shall be
rejected in their entirety.
   (j)   Each circulator of an initiative petition shall cross out and initial
any blank signature lines on the signature sheet including those in the middle
of the sheet, prior to, or at the time, the circulator's signature on the
affidavit for that signature sheet is notarized.
   (k)   In the event that a circulator fails to cross out and initial any
blank signature lines before notarization then the entire signature sheet shall
be rejected and all signatures on that page will be void.
   (l)   Signatures obtained before the filing of a completed statement of
organization with the city clerk are void and shall not be counted in
determining the legal sufficiency of any initiative petition(s).
   (m)   The provisions of this section shall also apply to the circulation of
any referendum or recall petition.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-117.   Petition signature fraud.
   (a)   For the purposes of this chapter, a person commits petition signature
fraud if the person does either of the following with the intent to defraud:
      (1)   Intentionally collects for filing petition signature sheets with
the knowledge that the person whose name appears on the signature sheet did not
actually sign the petition.
      (2)   Uses any fraudulent means, method, trick, device or artifice to
obtain signatures on a petition.
   (b)   A person paid by a political committee to employ or subcontract with
persons who fraudulently obtain petition signatures or who obtain petition
signatures through other unlawful means is not guilty of a violation of
subsection (a) if the person does both of the following:
      (1)   Reports the suspected unlawful or fraudulent signature collection
to the city clerk.
      (2)   Refuses to file the suspected unlawful or fraudulent signatures.
   (c)   A person who violates subsection (a) is guilty of a class 1
misdemeanor, except that a person who engages or participates in a pattern of
petition signature fraud is guilty of a class 4 felony and shall be prohibited
from participating for five (5) years in any election, initiative, referendum
or recall campaign. For the purposes of this subsection, "pattern of petition
signature fraud" means that the person employs or subcontracts with persons to
obtain signatures and at least five (5) of the employees or subcontractor's
employees have been convicted of a violation of this section for one or more
elections or recall campaigns in an election cycle.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-118.   Procedure for withdrawing signatures.
   Qualified electors desiring to withdraw their signatures may do so by
executing and filing with the city clerk an affidavit in the form prescribed by
the city clerk.
   (a)   A withdrawal of signature must occur no later than 5:00 p.m. on the
date the petition containing their signature is actually filed.
   (b)   To withdraw a petition signature, a person may do any of the
following:
      (1)   Verify the withdrawal by signing a simple statement of intent to
withdraw at the office of the city clerk.
      (2)   Mail a signed, notarized statement of intent to withdraw to the
city clerk.
      (3)   Draw a line through the signature and printed name on the petition
at any time prior to filing.
   (c)   A signature withdrawn pursuant to subsections (a) and (b) of this
section shall not be counted in determining the legal sufficiency of the
petition.
   (d)   A person who knowingly gives or receives money or any other thing of
value for signing a statement of signature withdrawal pursuant to subsection
(b) of this section is guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-119.   Filing initiative petition.
   The city clerk is responsible for, and shall exercise final control over,
all aspects of the certification process relating to city initiative petitions.
In the event of evidence of fraud or other circumstances that the city clerk
determines may affect the security or integrity of the initiative petition, the
city clerk shall consult with the city attorney to take additional steps
necessary to ensure the security and integrity of the initiative petition
process and the proper validation of signatures. The precise steps will be
determined on a case-by-case basis.
   (a)   All signature sheets with the complete copy of the title and text of
the proposed measure to be initiated shall be filed with the city clerk as one
(1) instrument. For purposes of this chapter, a petition is filed when the
petition is tendered to the city clerk, and the city clerk takes custody of the
petition.
   (b)   The petitioners shall organize the signature sheets and group them by
circulator and are solely responsible for compliance with this section. The
city clerk shall return as unfiled any signature sheets that are not so
organized and grouped.
   (c)   Initiative petitions which have not been filed with the city clerk as
of 5:00 p.m. on the day four (4) months prior to the next ensuing city general
election after their issuance, shall be null and void.
   (d)   In no event shall the city clerk accept an initiative petition which
was issued for circulation more than twenty-four (24) months prior to the date
of the city general election at which the measure is to be included on the
ballot.
   (e)   Initiative petitions must be filed at a location specified by the city
clerk.
   (f)   A representative of the petitioners shall be present from the time the
city clerk begins processing the petition to the time the city clerk either
issues the interim receipt of sufficiency or rejects the petition for
insufficiency.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-120.   Issuance of a petition filing receipt to the petitioners.
   When a petition is filed, a receipt is immediately issued by the city clerk
containing:
   (a)   Part I- The petitioners' estimate of purported number of sheets and
signatures filed.
   (b)   Part II- The city clerk's estimate of purported number of sheets and
signatures filed.
      (1)   If the signature sheets appear to contain a number of signatures
equal to or exceeding the minimum number required, the city clerk shall
commence a verification process, examining the petition to determine if it
contains the requisite number of signatures of qualified electors as prescribed
by Chapter XIX of the Tucson City Charter and this chapter of the Tucson Code
in order to proceed with certification.
      (2)   If the number of estimated signatures does not appear to equal or
exceed the minimum number required, the city clerk shall reject the initiative
petition and immediately return it to the petitioners, without prejudice to the
filing of a new petition for the same purpose. The city clerk shall indicate
the reason for the rejection on the receipt.
   After the city clerk issues the receipt, no additional petition sheets may
be accepted for filing, and no additions, corrections, or adjustments to the
filed petition sheets are permitted.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-121.   Examination of petitions.
   Within ten (10) days after issuing the receipt, the city clerk shall
ascertain whether the petition is signed by the requisite number of qualified
electors to forward to the Pima County Recorder for further processing pursuant
to applicable state law along with a receipt specifying the number of signature
sheets and random sample signatures as determined by the city clerk.
   (a)   The city clerk shall examine the petition for improper formatting.
Examples of improperly formatted pages include, but are not necessarily limited
to, the following:
      (1)   Signature sheets that are not attached to a complete copy of the
title and text of the measure being proposed or referred;
      (2)   Failure by the petitioners to organize the signature sheets and
group them by circulator as required by section
12-119 (b) of this code. The city clerk shall return as unfiled any signature
sheets that are not so organized and grouped;
      (3)   Any petition page that does not bear the words "Tucson, Arizona"
and the date of issuance of the serial number in the upper right-hand corner;
      (4)   Signature sheets that either do not themselves bear the city
clerk's official serial number in the lower right-hand corner, or that are
attached to title and text pages which do not bear the official serial number,
or that have both of these defects;
      (5)   Signature sheets which are themselves, or whose attached title and
text pages are, damaged in such a manner that the format or legibility of the
petition is both in violation of this chapter and beyond correction (e.g. the
official serial number is torn off, the title and text is missing, etc.);
      (6)   Statutory language is missing from the signature sheet, including
but not limited to the "Notice", the "Warning" and the statement beginning with
"we the undersigned...."
   (b)   The city clerk shall examine the petition for defects. Signatures on a
signature sheet with the following defects in the circulator's affidavit shall
not be included in the count of signatures eligible for verification, and shall
be ineligible for inclusion in the total number of valid signatures:
      (1)   Is not completed or signed by the circulator;
      (2)   Is missing the designated county;
      (3)   Is not notarized;
      (4)   Is missing the notary's signature;
      (5)   Has been notarized by a notary whose commission has expired;
      (6)   Does not have the notary's seal affixed or whose seal is not in
compliance with the Arizona Revised Statutes relating to notaries public and
the Secretary of State's Arizona Notary Public Reference Manual;
      (7)   Does not bear a notarization date;
      (8)   Contains a notary signature that is dated earlier than the date on
which any elector signed the signature sheet;
      (9)   Is attached to a page where the circulator failed to cross out and
initial any blank signature lines at the time of or prior to notarization;
      (10)   The circulator is prohibited from participating in any election,
initiative, referendum or recall campaign pursuant to A.R.S. § 19-119.01 (D);
      (11)   The circulator did not mark whether they are a paid circulator or
a volunteer;
      (12)   Those sheets on which the circulator is required to be registered
with the secretary of state pursuant to Tucson Code § 12-115 and the circulator
is not properly registered at the time the petitions were circulated.
      (13)   In the opinion of the city clerk, it is otherwise defective.
   (c)   The disqualification of a signature sheet results in the invalidity
and removal of all signatures on that signature sheet, but not necessarily all
signature sheets circulated by that circulator without an independent reason
for disqualification of each signature sheet.
   (d)   Signatures on or attached to improperly formatted pages of the
petition shall not be included in the count of signatures eligible for
verification.
   (e)   Individual signature sheets that are damaged, illegible or improperly
formatted may be accepted for examination and verification at the city clerk's
discretion.
   (f)   The city clerk shall examine the individual signatures (or signature
lines) contained on each numbered signature sheet of the petition. A signature
is not eligible for verification, and is ineligible for inclusion in the total
number of valid signatures, if it meets any of the following criteria:
      (1)   The original signature is missing from the signature line;
      (2)   The residence address or description of the residence location is
missing (street and number; and/or if no street address, described residence
location) or the column contains only a post office box;
      (3)   The date of signing is missing;
      (4)   There is more than one (1) signature placed on the numbered
signature line, in which case only the signature which is actually on the line
will be eligible for verification and all other signatures shall be rejected;
      (5)   There is an excess of fifteen (15) signatures on the signature
sheet, in which case the one(s) in excess shall be rejected;
      (6)   The signature has been withdrawn, pursuant to controlling
legislation;
      (7)   The date of signature is after the date on which the Affidavit of
Circulator was notarized;
      (8)   The date the circulator or notary signed is earlier than the date
the sheet was signed.
      (9)   The signature has been crossed out, or otherwise defaced, prior to
being received by the city clerk.
      (10)   Ditto marks in any column except the signature column are
acceptable as long as the reiterated information is valid.
      (11)   The circulator has printed the elector's first and last name (or
other information) in violation of controlling legislation.
      (12)   The signature appears on a signature sheet that was circulated by
a county recorder, a justice of the peace, or a circulator who is not qualified
to register to vote in the State of Arizona at the time of circulation of the
signature sheet;
      (13)   The signature was obtained prior to the issuance of the petition
serial number;
      (14)   Signatures obtained by a person who is not a resident of the State
of Arizona and who failed to register with the secretary of state;
      (15)   For the provisions of referendum and recall petitions, the ward
number is missing;
      (16)   The signature or accompanying information is, in the opinion of
the city clerk, otherwise insufficient or defective.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-122.   Interim receipt of sufficiency.
   If, after the examination and removal of ineligible signatures, the number
of facially eligible signatures remaining on the signature sheets appears to
equal or exceed the minimum number required, the city clerk shall issue an
interim receipt of sufficiency to the petitioners, which shall list the number
of signature sheets in the possession of the city clerk, and also the total
number of signatures eligible for further examination and verification. The
issuance of an interim receipt of sufficiency to the petitioners shall not
preclude:
   (a)   The continuation or repetition of any examinations carried out prior
to its issuance;
   (b)   The initiation of examinations or verifications not yet begun;
   (c)   Any other activities the city clerk deems necessary to make a
thorough, accurate and complete examination of the petition;
   (d)   The exclusion from the total of valid signatures of any additional
signatures found ineligible, invalid or void under the criteria of this
chapter.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-123.   Receipt of insufficiency.
   If, after completion of the procedures described in this chapter, the number
of signatures remaining on the sheets which are eligible for verification does
not appear to equal or exceed the minimum number required, the city clerk shall
reject the initiative petition, without prejudice to the filing of a new
petition for the same purpose. Disposition of the insufficient petition shall
be pursuant to section
12-130 of this code.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-124.   Generation of random sample.
   (a)   After issuing the interim receipt of sufficiency to the petitioners
for the initiative petition, the city clerk shall, at random, select five
percent (5%) of the signatures determined to be eligible for verification. The
random sample signatures to be verified shall be drawn in such a manner that
every signature filed with the city clerk has an equal chance of being included
in the sample.
   (b)   Upon generation of the random sample, the city clerk shall reproduce a
facsimile of the front of each signature sheet containing a random sample
signature and shall forward those facsimile signature sheets to the county
recorder, who shall have fifteen (15) days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and
legal holidays, to complete their examination and certify the results of the
random sample.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec 12-125.   Disposition of petitions by city clerk.
   Within seventy-two (72) hours, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal
holidays, after receipt of the facsimile signature sheets and the certification
of the results of the random sample from the county recorder, the city clerk
shall determine the total number of valid signatures in the following manner:
   (a)   Subtract all signatures from the total number of eligible signatures
on petitions containing a defective circulator's affidavit.
   (b)   If a signer has signed more than once, subtract all but one otherwise
valid signature;
   (c)   Subtract all signatures that were found to be ineligible by the county
recorder or found to be ineligible by the city clerk that were not previously
subtracted;
   (d)   After determining the percentage of all signatures found to be invalid
in the random sample, subtract a like percentage from those signatures
remaining after all previous subtractions have been performed.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-126.   Certificate of sufficiency.
   If the actual number of signatures on the remaining sheets after all
subtractions equals or exceeds the minimum number required by the constitution
or if the number of valid signatures as projected from the random sample is at
least one hundred per cent (100%) of the minimum number required by the
constitution, the city clerk shall issue the following receipt to the person or
organization that submitted them:
            signature sheets bearing              signatures for initiative
petition serial number              have been refused for filing in this office
as provided by law. A total of              signatures included on the
remaining petition sheets were found to be ineligible. Of the total random
sample of              signatures, a total of            signatures were
invalidated by the county recorder resulting in a failure rate of             
per cent. The actual number of remaining signatures for such initiative
petition number              are equal to or in excess of the minimum required
by the constitution to place a measure on the next ensuing city general
election ballot. The number of valid signatures filed with this petition, based
on the random sample, appears to be at least one hundred per cent (100%) of the
minimum required or through examination of each signature has been certified to
be greater than the minimum required by the constitution.
Date:                                
                                          city clerk (Seal)
The city clerk shall then forthwith notify the mayor and council that a
sufficient number of signatures has been filed and the initiative shall be
forwarded to the mayor and council for action pursuant to section
12-128 of this code.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-127.   Certificate of insufficiency.
   If the number of valid signatures as projected from the random sample is
less than one hundred per cent (100%) of the minimum number required by the
constitution or if the actual number of signatures on the remaining sheets
after all subtractions from the random sample or after certification fails to
equal or exceed the minimum required by the constitution, the city clerk shall
dispose of the insufficient petition in the manner set forth in section
12-130 of this code and shall issue to the person or organization that
submitted them, a certified statement that, for the following reasons, the
petition lacks the minimum number of signatures to place it on the general
election ballot:
      (1)   Signature sheets bearing city clerk page numbers               and
bearing signatures of              persons appeared on petitions that were
required to be removed.
      (2)   A total of              signatures on the remaining petition sheets
were found to be ineligible.
      (3)   A total of              signatures included in the random sample
have been certified by the county recorder as ineligible at the time such
petition was signed and a projection from such random sample has indicated that
            more signatures are ineligible to appear on the petition.
   A copy of the certification of the county recorder pursuant to A.R.S. § 19-
121.02 shall accompany the certified statement.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-128.   City clerk to certify sufficient petitions to mayor and council;
mayor and council adopt ordinance or call an election.
   When the petition shall be found by the city clerk to be sufficient, the
city clerk shall submit the same, with the certificate of sufficiency without
delay, to the mayor and council; and the mayor and council shall either:
      (1)   Pass said initiative, without alteration, within twenty (20) days
after the attachment of the city clerk's certificate of sufficiency of the
accompanying petition, or
      (2)   Within twenty-five (25) days after the city clerk shall have
attached the certificate of sufficiency to the petition, the mayor and council
shall proceed to call a special election to be held in conjunction with the
next ensuing city general election at which said initiative without alteration
shall be submitted to the vote of the people.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-129.   Disposition of sufficient petitions.
   The city clerk shall retain an electronic copy of all signature sheets,
subsequently certified as sufficient, pursuant to the retention schedule
prescribed by the Arizona State Library, Archives and Public Records. After the
time period for legal challenges has elapsed, the original petitions shall be
made available to the applicant but may be disposed of by the city clerk after
a reasonable period of time.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-130.   Disposition of insufficient petitions.
   Insufficient petitions shall be retained by the city clerk until after the
conclusion of any litigation regarding the measure or until the time has
expired for any litigation to proceed. After the time period for legal
challenges has elapsed, the original petitions shall be made available to the
applicant but may be disposed of by the city clerk after a reasonable period of
time.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-131.   Number of proposed initiative measures to be voted on not
limited.
   Any number of proposed initiative measures may be voted upon at the same
election.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-132.   Arrangement for and conduct of election.
   Whenever any ordinance is required to be submitted to the voters of the
city, the mayor and council shall order such ordinance to be printed in the
official newspaper of the city, for three (3) consecutive days and posted in
the official posting location of the city. The mayor and council shall make, or
cause to be made, all arrangements for holding such election; and the same
shall be conducted, returned and result thereof declared, in all respects as
are other city elections.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Secs. 12-133 – 12-147. Reserved.
ARTICLE IX.
REFERENDUM
Sec. 12-148.   Applicability of referendum to city ordinances; 30-day period
for referendum to be calculated from the date ordinance is made available from
the city clerk.
   Referendum shall apply to City ordinances as provided in Chapter XX of the
City Charter. If petitioners file an application for referendum with the city
clerk relating to an ordinance, or a resolution having the effect of an
ordinance, or any item, section, or part thereof, that is subject to
referendum, and the city clerk is unable to provide petitioners with a copy of
the ordinance at the time of application for an official serial number or on
the same business day of the application, the thirty (30) day period for filing
the referendum petition shall be calculated from the date such ordinance is
made available from the city clerk.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-149.   Form of petition.
   (a)   The term "petition," as used in this article, includes the title and
text of the referred measure, the signature sheets, and the affidavit of
circulator.
   (b)   Any referendum petition desired to be submitted to the mayor and
council shall be presented upon a petition in the form prescribed by the city
clerk.
   (c)   The referendum and recall petitions filed with the city clerk must
strictly comply with the constitutional and statutory requirements for the
referendum and recall process. This includes the form of and the requirement
that the qualified elector shall print their ward number on the signature
sheet.
   (d)   It is the responsibility of the petitioners of the referendum petition
to ensure that at all times during circulation, the petition is in the required
form, including a complete copy of the measure sought to be referred, that it
contains all required information, and that all of its pages are fully legible.
   (e)   No additional information, instructions, symbols, or markings of any
kind are to be printed on any portion of the petition, including the back or
margins of any of the petition documents (title/text, signature sheet,
affidavit of circulator).
   (f)   The title and text of the measure referred by the petition shall be
printed in at least eight (8) point type on either 8 1/2" x 11" or 8 1/2" x 14"
paper, portrait or landscape orientation. The title and text shall indicate
material deleted, by printing the material with a line drawn through the center
of the letters of the material. The eight (8) point type requirement does not
apply to maps, charts, or other graphics.
   (g)   If the full printing of the title and text of the referred measure
requires multiple pages, the title and text may be printed either on the front
of each page or on the front and back of each page, at the option of the
petitioners. Each and every page of the title and text shall be numbered
sequentially (e.g. Page 1 of 5, Page 2 of 5, etc.) and the number shall appear
in the upper right-hand corner of each page, immediately below the words
"Tucson, Arizona" and the date of issuance.
   (h)   The referendum petition shall be printed in black ink on white or
recycled white pages.
   (i)   The signature sheets shall be fourteen (14) inches in width by eight
and one-half (8 1/2) inches in length.
   (j)   All pages of the petition shall have a margin of at least one-half (1/
2) inch at the top and one-fourth (1/4) inch at the bottom of each page.
   (k)   The title of the petition shall read "CITY OF TUCSON" in the left
margin followed by "Referendum Description" centered.
   (l)   Immediately below the title required in subsection (k) of this
section, the petition shall include a description of no more than one hundred
(100) words of the principal provisions of the measure sought to be referred.
   (m)   The following language shall appear in the uppermost right-hand corner
of the signature sheet: "It is unlawful to sign this petition before it has a
serial number."
   (n)   Immediately below the statement required in subsection (m) of this
section, each signature sheet shall have printed in capital letters in no less
than twelve (12) point bold-faced type the following:
   "                        PAID CIRCULATOR"
   "                        VOLUNTEER"
   (o)   The words "Tucson, Arizona" and the date of issuance shall appear in
the upper right-hand corner of both sides of the signature sheet.
   (p)   Immediately below the description required in subsection (l) of this
section, the following language shall be included: "Notice: This is only a
description of the measure sought to be referred prepared by the sponsor of the
measure. It may not include every provision contained in the measure. Before
signing, make sure the title and text of the measure are attached. You have the
right to read or examine the title and text before signing."
   (q)   In eight (8) point centered type, the following language shall be
included "Petition for Referendum".
   (r)   Immediately below the language required in subsection (q) above, the
following language shall be included: "To the City Clerk of the City of Tucson:
We, the undersigned, residents of the City of Tucson, Arizona, and duly
qualified electors therein, respectfully order that City of Tucson Ordinance
No.              entitled (title of act or ordinance, and if the petition is
against less than the whole act or ordinance
then set forth here the item, section, or part, of any measure on which the
referendum is used) passed by the Mayor and Council on             (date) and
petition that this ordinance be reconsidered by the Mayor and Council and, if
not repealed at the time of such reconsideration, the same shall be referred to
a vote of the qualified electors of the City of Tucson for their approval or
rejection at the next city election called pursuant to A.R.S. § 16-204. Each
signer for himself says: I have personally signed this petition with my first
and last names. I have not signed any other petition for the same measure. I am
a qualified elector of the City of Tucson."
   (s)   Immediately following the language in subsection (r) above, the
following language shall be included: "Warning: It is a class 1 misdemeanor for
any person to knowingly sign a referendum petition with a name other than his
own, except in a circumstance where he signs for a person, in the presence of
and at the specific request of such person, who is incapable of signing his own
name because of physical infirmity, or to knowingly sign his name more than
once for the same measure, or to knowingly sign such petition when he is not a
qualified elector."
   (t)   The signature sheet shall include columns with the following headings
in bold-faced type:
      (1)   Signature
      (2)   Name (first and last name printed)
      (3)   Actual address (street & no. and if no street address, describe
residence location)
      (4)   Arizona post office address & zip code
      (5)   City or town (if any)
      (6)   Ward No.
      (7)   Date signed
   (u)   Each signature sheet shall contain lines for signatures numbered one
through fifteen.
   (v)   Immediately below the fifteen (15) numbered lines described in
subsection (t) above, the following language shall be included: "The validity
of the signatures on this sheet must be sworn to by the circulator before a
notary public on the form appearing on the back of the sheet."
   (w)   The official serial number shall appear in the lower right-hand
corner, immediately preceded by the words "Serial Number" on both sides of the
signature sheet and the title and text page(s).
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-150.   Affidavit of circulator.
   (a)   The affidavit shall be in the following form printed on the reverse
side of each signature sheet: "Referendum Affidavit of Circulator".
   (b)   The words "Tucson, Arizona" and the date of issuance shall appear in
the upper right-hand corner.
   (c)   In the upper left-hand corner include the following:
   State of Arizona      )
               ) ss.:
   County of                           )
      (Where notarized)
   (d)   Immediately below the language described in subsection (c) above, the
following language shall be included:
   I,  (print name) , a person who is not required to be a resident of this
state but who is otherwise qualified to register to vote in the county of
               , in the state of Arizona at all times during my circulation of
this petition sheet, and under the penalty of a class 1 misdemeanor, depose and
say that subject to section
19-115, Arizona Revised Statutes, each individual printed the individual's own
name and address and signed this sheet of the foregoing petition in my presence
on the date indicated and I believe that each signer's name and residence
address or post office address are correctly stated and that each signer is a
qualified elector of the City of Tucson and that at all times during
circulation of this signature sheet a copy of the title and text was attached
to the signature sheet (Ariz. Const. Art. IV, Pt. 1, § 1, ¶ 9, A.R.S. §§ 19-112
(B), (C), (D), 19-114(A), Tucson Charter, Chapter XIX, § 2). The signatures
appearing on this petition sheet are the genuine signatures of the persons
whose names they bear and each and all of them are residents and duly qualified
electors of the City of Tucson (Tucson Charter, Chapter XIX, § 2).
   (e)   Immediately following the language in subsection (d), the following
language shall be included: "The names of the persons procuring this petition
and who should be notified of all proceedings and action taken in reference to
this petition are (Tucson Charter, Chapter XIX, § 2):".
   (f)   Immediately below the information required in subsection (e), the
following shall be included: the petitioners' printed names, residence
addresses, street and number (if no street address, describe residence
location).
   (g)   Immediately below the information required in subsection (f), the
following shall be included:
   Signature of affiant                                          
   Typed or Printed Name of affiant (Circulator)
                                           
   (Residence address, street and number of affiant, or if no street address, a
description of residence location)
                                                                             
   (h)   Immediately following the circulator signature required in subsection
(g), the following shall be included:
      Subscribed and sworn to (or affirmed) before me on                       
(date)
                                                                    
   Notary Public
(Form shall include a designated location for notary stamp)
   (i)   The official serial number shall appear in the lower right-hand
corner, immediately preceded by the words "Serial Number" on both sides of the
signature sheet and the title and text page(s).
   (j)   The affidavit of circulator shall not be modified. Any petition that
contains a partially or incorrectly completed affidavit or any affidavit that
has been modified is invalid.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-151.   Provisions applicable to referendum.
   (a)   Pursuant to the strict compliance provisions relative to referendum,
and the specific provisions of the Tucson Charter, the qualified elector shall
print their ward number on the referendum petition.
   (b)   The title and text of a referendum petition must include a complete
copy of the ordinance, item, section, or part of the ordinance sought to be
repealed or referred, and all attachments.
   (c)   The provisions of article VII of this chapter, "Campaign Finance;
Candidates, Political Action Committees, and Public Funding Program," shall
apply to referendum petitions.
   (d)   The provisions of article VIII of this chapter, "Initiative," insofar
as they relate to applications to circulate petitions, final version of
petition, registered circulators, circulation of petitions, petition signature
fraud, procedure for withdrawing signatures, filing petitions, examination and
certification and disposition of petitions, as therein set out, shall apply to
referendum petitions. These provisions shall not be construed to affect the
strict compliance standard imposed by the Arizona Supreme Court under the
Arizona Constitution and Arizona Revised Statutes.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-152.   Right of city clerk to review.
   The city clerk shall have the right, at any time, to review, challenge or
reject a referendum petition on the basis of any legal or procedural
insufficiency, including but not limited to the petition's failure to address
legislation that is subject to the referendum process. The city clerk's
administration of the referendum process does not represent an acceptance or
review of the petition, and the absence of objection at any particular time
does not bar subsequent rejection of the referendum petition by the City.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-153.   Submission of sufficient petitions to mayor and council; mayor
and council repeal the part(s) protested or call an election.
   When the petition shall be found by the city clerk to be sufficient, the
city clerk shall submit the same, with the certificate of sufficiency, to the
mayor and council. It shall be the duty of the mayor and council to reconsider
such ordinance; and if the same, or item, section or part thereof protested be
not repealed, the mayor and council shall submit the ordinance or item, section
or part thereof protested to the electors of the city, either at the next
ensuing city general election or at a special election to be called for that
purpose; and such protested ordinance or protested item, section or part
thereof shall not go into effect or become operative unless a majority of the
qualified electors, voting on the same, shall vote in favor thereof, and until
the proclamation of the mayor is made.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-154.   Insufficient petitions; effective date of ordinance.
   The ordinance, item, section, or part thereof shall become effective if the
petition is determined to be insufficient and the effective date has passed.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Secs. 12-155 – 12-160. Reserved.
ARTICLE X.
RECALL
Sec. 12-161.   Petition authorized, number of signatures.
   Every public officer holding an elective office, either by election or
appointment, is subject to recall. The proposed recall of a public officer may
be submitted to the mayor and council by a petition signed by qualified
electors of the city equal in number to at least twenty-five (25) percent of
the total number of votes cast for all of the candidates including valid write-
in candidates for the office held by the officer sought to be removed, at the
last preceding general election.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-162.   Affidavit to circulate recall petitions.
   (a)   Any qualified elector of the city may make and submit to the city
clerk an affidavit containing the name of the officer to be removed and a
general statement, not to exceed two hundred (200) words, stating the grounds
for removal.
   (b)   The affidavit shall include an endorsement which shall set forth the
names and residence addresses of three (3) persons who are responsible for
endorsing the petition and who are to be notified of all proceedings and
actions taken in reference to the petition. The three (3) persons making the
endorsement in the affidavit will be deemed, and referred to collectively as,
the "petitioners of the recall petition" or simply "petitioners."
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-163.   Form of recall petition.
   (a)   The city clerk shall provide the elector submitting an affidavit to
circulate recall petitions a sufficient number of copies of petitions prepared
by the city clerk for such recall and removal.
   (b)   At the time of submission of the affidavit, the affiant or petitioners
intending to circulate a recall petition shall deposit with the city clerk the
fees sufficient to cover the printing and preparation of the recall petitions.
   (c)   The recall petition issued by the city clerk shall bear the electronic
signature of the city clerk and the official embossed seal of the City of
Tucson; shall be dated and addressed to the mayor and council and the city
clerk; and shall contain the names and residence addresses of the three (3)
petitioners responsible for endorsing the petition, the number of recall
petition forms issued, the name of the person sought to be removed, the office
from which such removal is sought, and the grounds for removal, as stated in
the affidavit.
   (d)   Only original recall petitions which have been printed and issued by
the city clerk can be circulated and submitted for verification.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-164.   Circulation of recall petitions.
   (a)   No recall petition shall be circulated against any officer until the
officer has actually held the office for at least six (6) months. The
commencement of a subsequent term in the same office does not renew the six (6)
month period delaying the circulation of a recall petition.
   (b)   A recall petition shall not be accepted for verification if more than
one hundred twenty (120) days have passed since the date of issuance of the
petition by the city clerk.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-165.   Notice to officer of issuance of recall petition.
   The city clerk shall notify the officer sought to be removed of the
submission of the affidavit and the issuance of a recall petition.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-166.   Provisions applicable to recall.
   (a)   The provisions of article VIII of this chapter, "Initiative," insofar
as they relate to registered circulators, circulation of petitions, petition
signature fraud, procedure for withdrawing signatures, submitting petitions,
and examination and certification thereof shall apply to recall petitions.
   (b)   The provisions of article XI of this chapter, "Campaign Finance;
Reporting for Political Action Committees Intending to Influence any Petition
Drive", shall apply to recall petitions.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-167.   Notice of insufficient petition.
   If the certificate shows the petition to be insufficient, the city clerk
shall at once notify in writing one (1) or more of the persons designated on
the petition as submitting the same. The city clerk shall return the petition
to one of the persons designated as submitting it, without prejudice, however,
to the submitting of a new petition for the same purpose.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-168.   Filing of sufficient petition; notice to officer; statement of
defense.
   (a)   When the petition shall be found by the city clerk to be sufficient,
the city clerk shall officially file the petition and shall submit the same
with the certificate to the mayor and council, without delay, and the mayor and
council shall immediately notify the officer sought to be removed pursuant to
subsection (b) of this section.
   (b)   Within forty-eight (48) hours, excluding Saturdays, Sundays or legal
holidays, of the filing of the recall petition, the city clerk shall give
written notice to the person against whom it is filed of the following:
      (1)   The notice shall state that a recall petition has been certified as
sufficient, shall set forth the grounds of the recall, and shall notify the
person to whom it is addressed that the officer has the right to prepare and
have printed on the ballot a statement containing not more than two hundred
(200) words defending the person's official conduct.
      (2)   The notice shall also state that if the officer fails to deliver
the defensive statement to the city clerk within ten (10) days thereafter, the
right to have a statement printed on the ballot shall be considered waived.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-169.   Resignation of officer.
   If a person against whom a recall petition is filed desires to resign, the
person may do so by filing a written tender thereof with the city clerk within
five (5) days after the official filing of the petition. In such event, the
person's resignation shall be accepted and effective immediately, and the
vacancy shall be filled as provided by law.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-170.   Failure to resign; call of election.
   If the officer does not resign within five (5) days after notification by
the mayor and council, the mayor and council shall, not less than twenty (20)
nor more than thirty (30) days from the date of the city clerk's certificate
that a sufficient petition is filed, order an election to be held on the next
following consolidated election date pursuant to A.R.S. § 16-204 that is ninety
(90) days or more after the order calling the election.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-171.   Candidacy of officer sought to be removed.
   An officer sought to be removed shall have their name placed on the official
ballot without nomination unless otherwise requested in writing to the city
clerk not less than sixty (60) days prior to the election.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-172.   Nomination of recall candidates.
   (a)   Candidates seeking nomination during a recall election must meet the
qualification requirements pursuant to section
12-64 of this code.
   (b)   In the situation that the incumbent was elected to office, candidates
other than the incumbent shall be placed upon the official recall ballot after
filing a nomination petition that is signed by a number of qualified electors
that is equal to at least two percent (2%) of the total votes cast for all
candidates for that office at the last general election.
   (c)   In the situation that the incumbent was appointed to the office,
candidates other than the incumbent shall be placed upon the official recall
ballot after filing a nomination petition that is signed by a number of
qualified electors that is equal to at least one-half of one per cent of the
total active registered voters in the City for mayor or in the ward represented
by that elective officer as determined on the date of the last general
election.
   (d)   Nomination petition signers shall be qualified electors of the city
for mayoral candidates and in the ward of the officer against whom the recall
petition is filed for council member candidates.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-173.   Filing of recall nomination petitions and papers.
   Recall nomination petitions must be filed with the city clerk pursuant to
section
12-69 of this code, except that such nomination petitions shall be filed not
more than ninety (90) days nor less than sixty (60) days prior to the date of
the recall election.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-174.   Arrangement for and conduct of election.
   The mayor and council shall make, or cause to be made, publication of
notice, and all arrangements for holding such election; and the same shall be
conducted, returned and result thereof declared, in all respects as are other
city elections. If any vacancy occurs in said office after a recall election
has been so ordered, the election shall nevertheless proceed as herein
provided.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-175.   Form of ballot.
   (a)   Ballots for the election shall contain the qualified elector's grounds
for the officer's recall.
   (b)   Ballots shall also contain the officer's justification of their
conduct in office, if timely filed pursuant to section
12-168 of this code.
   (c)   There shall be no party designation upon the recall ballot.
   (d)   The form of the ballot shall conform as nearly as practicable to the
ballot prescribed for general elections.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-176.   Incumbent to continue in office; costs for additional recall
effort.
   (a)   The incumbent shall continue to perform the duties of the office until
the result of said election shall have been officially declared. The candidate
receiving the highest number of votes shall be declared elected for the
remainder of the term. If the incumbent is not elected, they shall be deemed
removed from office upon the canvassing and declaring the results of the
election.
   (b)   If the officer sought to be recalled is elected, then no further
recall petition shall be filed against the same officer during the term
elected, unless petitioners first pay all expenses of the preceding election.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-177.   Appointing recalled officers to public office.
   No person who has been removed from an office by recall, or who resigned
from such office while recall proceedings were pending against that officer,
shall be appointed to any office within one (1) year after such removal or
resignation.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Secs. 12-178 – 12-180. Reserved.
ARTICLE XI.
CAMPAIGN FINANCE; REPORTING FOR POLITICAL ACTION COMMITTEES INTENDING TO
INFLUENCE ANY PETITION DRIVE
Sec. 12-181.   Definitions.
   As used in this article, unless otherwise stated:
   Petition means any City of Tucson initiative, referendum, or recall
petition.
   Petition drive means the circulation of any City of Tucson initiative,
referendum or recall petition. A petition drive is deemed to be occurring
independent of whether the petition is being actively circulated at any
particular point(s) in time or is actually submitted to or filed with the city
clerk for examination and certification.
   Petition drive political committee means a political action committee
intending to influence the result of any petition drive. The term includes, but
is not necessarily limited to, political action committees organized to
circulate or oppose petitions.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-182.   Requirements for petition drive political committees; no receipt
of contributions or expenditures until requirements met; financial records to
be preserved.
   (a)   A petition drive political committee applying for the issuance of a
petition serial number, and not previously registered with the city clerk as a
political action committee, shall file a statement of organization pursuant to
sections
12-83 and
12-84 of this code, with the city clerk at the same time the committee files
the application for a petition serial number. No petition drive political
committee shall receive any contribution, or make or promise to make any
expenditure prior to filing a statement of organization.
   (b)   The petition drive political committee shall file an amended statement
of organization reporting any change in the information prescribed in this
article within ten (10) days after the change.
   (c)   The name of each petition drive political committee shall include the
name of any sponsoring organization and the official serial number for the
petition, if assigned.
   (d)   A petition drive political committee shall have a chairperson and
treasurer. The position of chairperson and treasurer of a single petition drive
political committee may not be held by the same individual.
   (e)   On the filing of a statement of organization, a petition drive
political committee shall be issued a city identification number.
   (f)   Before any petition drive political committee accepts a contribution
or makes an expenditure it shall also designate one (1) or more state banks,
federally chartered depository institutions or depository institutions the
deposits or accounts of which are insured by the federal deposit insurance
corporation or the national credit union administration as its campaign
depository or depositories. The petition drive political committee shall notify
the city clerk of the designation of the financial institution either at the
time of filing its statement of organization or within ten (10) business days
after opening an account.
   (g)   All petition drive political committees shall preserve all their
financial records for two (2) years following the end of the election cycle.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-183.   Requirements for all other political committees.
   All political action committees intending to influence the result of any
petition drive, shall comply with the provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-184.   Time for filing of campaign finance reports by petition drive
political committees; opening and closing reporting dates.
   (a)   In addition to filing campaign finance reports required under section
12-94 of this code, the petition drive political committee that applied for the
petition serial number shall also file campaign finance reports with the city
clerk no later than:
      (1)   Sixty (60) days after the date of issuance of the serial number by
the city clerk, or on the date of filing the petition, whichever is earlier.
      (2)   At the time of filing a petition filed more than sixty (60) days
after the date of issuance.
      (3)   Thirty (30) days after the filing of the petition.
   (b)   In addition to filing campaign finance reports required under section
12-94 of this code, all other political action committees intending to
influence the outcome of the petition drive, shall also file campaign finance
reports with the city clerk no later than thirty (30) days after the filing of
the petition to which the petition drive political committee's activities
relate.
   (c)   The opening reporting date to be included in any campaign finance
report filed pursuant to this section is the date on which the first previously
unreported contribution or expenditure was received or made.
   (d)   Notwithstanding the provisions of section
12-94 of this code, the closing reporting date to be included in any campaign
finance report filed pursuant to this section is ten (10) days prior to the
filing of the report.
   (e)   In the case of any petition not filed with the city clerk within the
deadline for filing established by the Tucson Charter or this code, all
petition drive political committees shall file campaign finance reports twenty
(20) days after the expiration of said deadline.
   (f)   A campaign finance report filed pursuant to this section shall show
the aggregate sum of all contributions received, and of all expenditures made,
between the opening reporting date and the closing reporting date, and shall
itemize all expenditures and those contributions with a monetary value of more
than fifty dollars ($50), showing the specific amount and the identification of
the contributor.
   (g)   Each campaign finance report required to be filed pursuant to this
section shall be signed by the political committee's treasurer and shall
contain a certification by the committee treasurer, issued under penalty of
perjury, that the contents of the report are true and correct.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-185.   Notification requirements.
   (a)   In addition to the requirements relating to election contributions
prescribed in section
12-184 of this code, a petition drive political committee and a political
action committee intending to influence the outcome of the petition drive,
shall give notice to the city clerk of any contribution or group of
contributions to the committee that is made from a single source less than
twenty (20) days before the day of the election if it exceeds two thousand five
hundred dollars ($2,500).
   (b)   In addition to the requirements in section
12-184 of this code, a petition drive political committee and a political
action committee intending to influence the outcome of the petition drive shall
give notice to the city clerk each time any of the following occurs:
      (1)   The committee has received contributions totaling ten thousand
dollars ($10,000) or more.
      (2)   The committee has made expenditures totaling ten thousand dollars
($10,000) or more.
      (3)   The committee has received contributions totaling ten thousand
dollars ($10,000) or more from a single source.
      (4)   The committee has received contributions totaling ten thousand
dollars ($10,000) or more from different additional single sources.
   (c)   The notices prescribed by this section shall be filed within twenty-
four (24) hours, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays. All notices
shall include the identification of the contributors, the dates of receipt and
the amounts of the contributions or the date, amount, recipient and purpose of
the expenditures. Contributions subject to the notification requirements of
this section shall be included in the next report filed pursuant to section
12-184 of this code.
   (d)   For the purposes of this section, "single source" includes principals
of the same partnership, corporation, limited partnership, limited liability
company, limited liability partnership or association.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-186.   Regulations for administration and enforcement; interpretation
of reporting provisions.
   (a)   The city clerk is authorized and directed to promulgate regulations
for the administration of this article.
   (b)   It is the intent of this article that the procedures for reporting
shall, to the extent possible, be consistent with those found in A.R.S. Title
16, Chapter 6 or any successor provision(s).
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Sec. 12-187.   Failure to comply a civil infraction.
   (a)   If a political committee fails to file a report in a timely manner as
required by section
12-184 of this code, the report is not signed, or a good faith effort is not
made to complete the report, it shall be a failure to file and penalties shall
be assessed pursuant to section
12-95 of this code.
   (b)   Where a political committee has failed to file, improperly filed, or
refused to file any notice as required by section
12-185 of this code, it shall be liable in a civil action for a civil penalty
up to three (3) times the amount improperly reported or unreported.
Additionally, the political committee shall not continue its activities,
receive contributions, or make or promise to make any expenditure until the
required notice is filed properly.
   (c)   It shall be a civil infraction for any person or political committee
to make any statement or report required by this article, and therein knowingly
misrepresent, misstate or fail to fully disclose the facts of any contribution
or expenditure required to be reported pursuant to this article. Penalties
shall be pursuant to Article VII of this chapter.
   (d)   The provisions of this section supplement, and do not supersede, any
civil or criminal penalties provided under state law, and are in addition to
any other rights or remedies available to the city.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Secs. 12-188 – 12-190. Reserved.
ARTICLE XII.
REPORTING OF INDEPENDENT EXPENDITURES
Sec. 12-191.   Supplemental reporting of independent expenditures in city
limits.
   Statement of purposes. This article's purposes are to:
      (1)   Allow voters access to information about who supports or opposes
candidates financially;
      (2)   Allow the city clerk to more effectively distinguish independent
expenditures from expenditures made by candidates or candidates' campaign
committees; and
      (3)   Deter corruption and the appearance of corruption.
   (a)   Additional notification. In addition to the reporting required in
subsections(g) and (k), a person that makes independent expenditures relating
to any one candidate or office within sixty (60) days of the election shall:
      (1)   Send by certified mail a copy of the campaign literature or
advertisement to each candidate named or otherwise referred to in the
literature or advertisement twenty-four (24) hours after depositing it at the
post office for mailing, twenty-four (24) hours after submitting it to a
telecommunications system for broadcast or twenty-four (24) hours after
submitting it to a newspaper for printing.
      (2)   The copy of the literature or advertisement sent to a candidate
pursuant this section shall be a reproduction that is clearly readable,
viewable or audible.
   A person who violates this subsection is subject to a civil penalty of three
(3) times the cost of the literature or advertisement that was distributed in
violation of this subsection. This civil penalty shall be imposed as prescribed
in sections 12-95 and 12-96 of this code.
   (b)   Contents of report. Any report under this article shall, in addition
to providing all other required information, identify any person who has
contributed five hundred dollars ($500) or more.
   (c)   Determining whether expenditure is for communication that expressly
advocates the election or defeat of a clearly identified candidate. In
determining whether an expenditure should have been reported pursuant to
subsections(g) and (k), the city clerk shall consider whether the expenditure
was for a communication that expressly advocates the election or defeat of a
clearly identified candidate and was not made with prior consent, cooperation,
or consultation with any candidate or committee or agent of the candidate and
that is not made in concert with or at the request or suggestion of a
candidate, or any committee or agent of the candidate. In determining that a
communication expressly advocates the election or defeat of a candidate, rather
than a communication that advocates in favor of or against an issue, the city
clerk will consider the following three (3) components:
      (1)   Even if it is not presented in the clearest, most explicit
language, speech is express if its message is unmistakable, unambiguous, and
suggestive of only one plausible meaning.
      (2)   Speech may only be termed advocacy if it presents a clear plea for
action, and thus speech that is merely informative is not covered by this
article.
      (3)   It must be clear what action is advocated. Speech cannot be
considered express advocacy of the election or defeat of a clearly identified
candidate when reasonable minds could differ as to whether it encourages a vote
for or against a candidate or encourages the reader to take some other kind of
action. If any reasonable alternative reading of speech can be suggested, it
cannot be express advocacy subject to this article's disclosure requirements.
   (d)   Exception for independent expenditures previously reported.
Subsections(g) and (k) shall not apply to any independent expenditure already
reported by the person making the independent expenditure pursuant to the
requirements of A.R.S. §§ 16-926 and 16-927, and the amount of that already
reported independent expenditure shall not be used in calculating the trigger
amounts for original and supplemental reports set forth in subsections(g) and
(k).
   (e)   Literature or Advertisements. Any person purchasing literature or
advertisements for the purpose of making an independent expenditure must also
comply with this code.
   (f)   Misdemeanor. Any person who makes a knowingly false filing relating to
an independent expenditure pursuant to this section is guilty of a class 1
misdemeanor.
   (g)   Original report. Any person who makes independent expenditures related
to a particular city office or ballot measure cumulatively exceeding one
thousand dollars ($1,000) during a campaign period, shall file reports with the
city clerk in accordance with this subsection so indicating.
      (1)   The name, address, title, email address and telephone number of the
person making the independent expenditure.
      (2)   The date and amount of the expenditure, and the name of the vendor
or other payee receiving the expenditure.
      (3)   The name of the candidate(s) and race(s) in which the expenditure
was made and whether the expenditure was in support of or opposition to the
candidate(s).
      (4)   The communication medium and description of what was purchased with
the expenditure.
      (5)   An expenditure or disbursement is deemed made either on the date
the committee authorizes the monies to be spent or the date the monies are
withdrawn from the committee's account. For a transaction by check, the
expenditure or disbursement is deemed made on the date the committee signs the
check. For a credit card transaction on paper, the expenditure or disbursement
is deemed made on the date the committee signs the authorization to charge the
credit card. For an electronic transaction, an expenditure or disbursement is
deemed made on the date the committee electronically authorizes the charge. For
an agreement to purchase goods or services, the expenditure or disbursements is
deemed made either on the date the parties enter into the agreement or the date
the purchase order is issued.
   (h)   Penalty for failure to file required report. Any person who fails to
file a report as required, or provide information, as required by this article
shall be subject to a civil penalty of up to three (3) times the total amount
of independent expenditures not reported. In the case of a political action
committee, the civil penalty may be assessed against the political action
committee's chairperson, its treasurer, or both.
   (i)   "Person" includes a political committee as defined in A.R.S. § 16-901,
as well as a natural person.
   (j)   Severability. If a provision of this section or its application to any
person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other
provisions or applications of the section that can be given effect without the
invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this
article are severable.
   (k)   Supplemental report. Any person who has previously reached the dollar
amount specified in subsection(g) for filing an original report shall file a
supplemental report each time previously unreported independent expenditures
specified by subsection(g) exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000).
   (l)   Time of filing. Any person who must file an original report pursuant
to subsection(g), or who must file a supplemental report for previously
unreported amounts pursuant to subsection(k), shall file the report with the
city clerk not later than one (1) day after making the expenditure, excluding
Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays.
   (m)   All civil penalties paid under this section shall be appropriated to
the election campaign account established pursuant to section
12-99 of this code.
   Corporations, limited liability companies and labor organizations making
independent expenditures relating to the City of Tucson candidates must comply
with the provisions of A.R.S. Title 16.
(Ord. No. 11525, § 2, 2-21-18)
Chapter 12A
BUSINESS SERVICES DEPARTMENT
Sec.
12A-1.   Business services department established; director established; powers
and duties; definitions; finance and procurement functions.
Sec.
12A-2.   Director, assignment powers.
Sec.
12A-3.   Reserved.
Sec.
12A-4.   Reserved.
Sec.
12A-5.   Interest on past due accounts receivable.
Sec.
12A-6.   Director to execute and endorse checks.
Sec.
12A-7.   Dishonored check fee.
Sec.
12A-8.   Collection fee.
Sec. 12A-1. Business services department established; director established;
powers and duties; definitions; finance and procurement functions.
   (a)   There is hereby established a business services department in
accordance with the provisions of
Chapters V [Section 2(14)],
XV, and
XXIX of the Charter.
   (b)   The head of the business services department shall be the director of
such department, who shall have the duties and powers as set forth in the
Charter, including those described in subsection (c) below, and as otherwise
established elsewhere in the Charter and this Code.
   (c)   The director shall have the duties and powers as set forth in
Chapter XV of the Charter and
Chapter 28 of this Code, relating to the director of procurement; and as set
forth in
Chapter XXIX of the Charter, relating to the director of finance. The director
shall be appointed and removed as provided in
Chapter V,
Section 6 of the Charter and
Chapter XXIX,
Section 4 of the Charter, each of which provides for appointment by the city
manager, subject to approval of the mayor and council, and removal by the city
manager.
   (d)   For the purposes of this Chapter, and unless the context plainly
requires otherwise, the following terms, phrases and words shall have the
meaning given herein:
   (1)   Department means the business services department, which includes both
the department of procurement and the department of finance.
   (2)   Director means the director of the business services department, who
also serves as the director of finance as provided in
Chapter XXIX of the Charter and elsewhere in the Charter and Code; and who
serves as the director of procurement as provided in
Chapter XV of the Charter and elsewhere in the Charter and Code, including but
not limited to
Chapter 28 of the Code.
   (e)   On and after the effective date of this Section, wherever any
provision of this Code refers to the director of procurement and/or the
director of finance, such reference means the director of the business services
department; and wherever any provision of this Code refers to the department of
finance and/or the department of procurement, such reference means the business
services department.
(Ord. 11524, § 1, 2-6-18)
Sec. 12A-2. Director, assignment powers.
Under the direction of the city manager, the director may assign such of the
director's duties and functions to others, or to departments, subdepartments or
divisions established to perform such assigned work.
(Ord. 11524, § 1, 2-6-18)
Sec. 12A-3. Reserved.
Sec. 12A-4. Reserved.
Sec. 12A-5. Interest on past due accounts receivable.
Interest shall accrue on all past due accounts receivable of the city at rates
to be determined and applied as established by the director subject to the
direction of the city manager.
(Ord. 11524, § 1, 2-6-18)
Sec. 12A-6. Director to execute and endorse checks.
The director is hereby authorized to execute checks for and on behalf of the
city utilizing a facsimile signature or mechanical stamps where necessary and
is authorized to endorse checks and other items payable to the city utilizing a
facsimile signature or mechanical stamps where necessary. The city clerk is
authorized to attest to the authenticity of the signature of the director.
(Ord. 11524, § 1, 2-6-18)
Sec. 12A-7. Dishonored check fee.
   (a)   The city shall charge a fee for each check returned for nonpayment for
any reason, including but not limited to insufficient funds, payment stopped,
or closed account.
   (b)   The director shall, on a periodic basis, determine the city's
administrative costs for processing checks returned for nonpayment, and set the
dishonored check fee at the amount necessary to recover these costs; EXCEPT
THAT the dishonored check fee shall not exceed the amount that may be charged
and collected pursuant to A.R.S. § 44-6852 or any successor state statute. The
fee set by the director shall apply to any check returned for nonpayment to the
city.
   (c)   Interest shall accrue on the dishonored check fee at rates to be
determined and applied as established by the director subject to the direction
of the city manager.
   (d)   Notwithstanding subsection (a) above, the director shall waive the
dishonored check fee authorized by this section when the director, in that
officer's sole discretion, determines that any of the following circumstances
exist:
   (1)   The financial institution of the person to whom the fee would
otherwise be charged has provided the director with adequate written
documentation showing that the financial institution made an error which caused
the person's check to be returned for nonpayment.
   (2)   The city, or the city's financial institution, has made an error which
caused the check to be returned for nonpayment.
   (3)   The person to whom the fee would otherwise be charged has been the
victim of crime, as documented in a police report made at or near the time of
the crime and provided by the person to the director, and has satisfactorily
demonstrated that the crime resulted in, or had as a consequence, the check's
return for nonpayment.
   (e)   The dishonored check fee authorized by this section, and any interest
accruing thereon, shall be in addition to any other rights and remedies
available to the city.
(Ord. 11524, § 1, 2-6-18)
Sec. 12A-8. Collection fee.
   (a)   The city shall charge a fee on any past due accounts receivable
submitted to a collection agency for the purpose of collecting and enforcing
payment of monies due to the city including, but not limited to, restitution,
fines, sanctions, surcharges, assessments, penalties, bonds, costs and fees due
to the city court.
   (b)   The amount of the fee shall equal the charge assessed by the
collection agency and shall be added to the sum due from and chargeable against
the obligor.
   (c)   The collection fee provided for in this section is hereby declared to
be a cost recovery measure administrative in nature.
   (d)   In addition to any other rights and remedies available to the city,
the city attorney is authorized to institute any appropriate civil action in
any court of competent jurisdiction for recovery of the collection fee
authorized under this section.
(Ord. 11524, § 1, 2-6-18)
Chapter 13
FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION*
__________
   *Editor's note – Ord. No. 4392, §§ 1, 2, adopted Oct. 13, 1975, amended the
Code by repealing § 13-1--13-7 and adding in lieu thereof new §§
13-1--
13-7 pertaining to the same subject matter. Former §§ 13-1--13-7 were derived
from the 1953 Code, ch. 12, § 10 and Ord. No. 4059, §§ 2, 3, 7-9-73.
Subsequently, § 1 of Ord. No. 5607, adopted December 13, 1982, repealed §§ 13-
1--13-11; § 2 adopted new §§
13-1--
13-6; and § 3 renumbered § 13.12 as §
13-7.
   Cross References – Building, electrical, gas, and other construction
regulations, ch.
6; regulation by blasting, §
11-4; regulation of burning of trash and other articles, §
11-5 et seq.; fireworks regulations, §§
11-22,
11-23; damaging hydrants prohibited, §
11-31; interference with fire department, §
11-110 et seq.; authority of firemen to regulate traffic, §
20-10; following and parking near fire apparatus, §
20-148; driving over fire hose, §
20-149.
__________
Sec.
13-1.   Duties of the fire chief.
Sec.
13-2.   Reserved.
Sec.
13-3.   Code adopted by reference.
Sec.
13-4.   Clerk to keep copies of fire code and of rules and regulations.
Sec.
13-5.   Amendments to fire code.
Sec.
13-6.   Reserved.
Sec.
13-7.   Reserved.
Sec.
13-8.   Assumption of fire prevention minimum standards jurisdiction.
Sec.
13-9.   Restrictions on transportation of hazardous and radioactive materials.
Sec.
13-10.   Permits for transport of hazardous materials.
Sec.
13-11.   Appeal from permit denial, suspension or revocation.
Sec.
13-12.   Fees for permits for transport of hazardous materials.
Sec.
13-13.   Operation of motor vehicles carrying hazardous materials.
Sec.
13-14.   Reporting requirements.
Sec.
13-15.   Suspension of operations.
Sec. 13-1. Duties of the fire chief.
The fire chief shall be responsible for the direction of all fire service
activities including: emergency medical response, fire prevention, and fire
safety education. The fire chief shall also be responsible for the planning and
development of programs to protect life and property from fire and hazardous
material releases. The fire chief shall also be responsible for the
establishment of departmental policies, administrative and command structure,
personnel assignments and rules necessary for the operation of the department.
(Ord. No. 5607, § 2, 12-13-82; Ord. No. 8609, § 1, 1-2-96)
Sec. 13-2. Reserved.
   Editor's note – Ordinance No. 8609, § 2, adopted January 2, 1996, deleted
section
13-2 in its entirety. Formerly, such section pertained to bureaus of the fire
department and derived from Ord. No. 5607, § 2, 12-13-82; Ord. No. 6738, § 1,
7-6-87.
Sec. 13-3. Code adopted by reference.
   The 2024 Edition of the International Fire Code published by the
International Code Council, with those local amendments attached as Exhibit A
to Ordinance 12115, is hereby adopted and made a part hereof as if set forth at
length and shall be the Fire Code of the City of Tucson.
(Ord. No. 5607, § 2, 12-13-82; Ord. No. 6029, § 1, 6-11-84; Ord. No. 6740, § 1,
7-6-87; Ord. No. 7445, § 1, 7-2-90; Ord. No. 8031, § 1, 4-26-93; Ord. No. 8609,
§ 1, 1-2-96; Ord. No. 9120, § 1, 9-28-98; Ord. No. 9609, § 1, 10-1-01; Ord. No.
10036, § 1, 9-7-04; Ord. No. 10437, § 1, 7-10-07; Ord. No. 11040, § 1, 12-18-
12, eff. 1-1-13; Ord. No. 11393, § 1, 8-9-16, eff. 9-1-16; Ord. No. 11556, § 1,
6-5-18, eff. 7-1-18; Ord. No. 12115, § 1, 8-27-24)
   Editor's note – Exhibit A is not printed herein but is on file in the office
of the city clerk and available for public inspection during regular business
hours.
Sec. 13-4. Clerk to keep copies of fire code and of rules and regulations.
Three (3) copies of the fire code adopted in section
13-3, of all fee schedules adopted pursuant to section
13-12, and of any amendments to any of the above shall be filed in the office
of the city clerk and made public records and shall be available for public use
and inspection during regular office hours and shall be of full force and
effect immediately upon such filing.
(Ord. No. 5607, § 2, 12-13-82; Ord. No. 6581, § 1, 12-8-86)
Sec. 13-5. Amendments to fire code.
The fire code adopted in section
13-3 may be amended from time to time by the mayor and council. Three (3)
copies of current ordinances amending the fire code shall be kept on file in
the office of the city clerk as public records and shall be available for
public use and inspection during regular office hours.
(Ord. No. 5607, § 2, 12-13-82)
Sec. 13-6. Violation declared a civil infraction.
   Editor's note – Ordinance No. 11040, § 2, adopted December 18, 2012 and
effective January 1, 2013, deleted section 13-6 in its entirety. Formerly, such
section pertained to violation declared a civil infraction and derived from
Ord. No. 5607, § 2, 12-13-82; Ord. No. 5721, § 2, 2-28-83; Ord. No. 6581, § 2,
12-8-86; Ord. No. 8958, § 4, 9-22-97; Ord. No. 9609, § 2, 10-1-01; and Ord. No.
10036, § 2, 9-7-04.
Sec. 13-7. Reserved.
   Editor's note – Section 13-7, relating to transportation of radioactive
materials, derived from Ord. No. 5148, § 1, adopted December 14, 1981, and Ord.
No. 5607, § 3, adopted December 13, 1982, was repealed by § 3 of Ord. No. 6581,
adopted December 18, 1986. See new §§
13-9--
13-15.
Sec. 13-8. Assumption of fire prevention minimum standards jurisdiction.
The city assumes from the state fire marshal all jurisdiction to prescribe
minimum standards for fire prevention throughout the territorial jurisdiction
of the city, except with respect to state- or county-owned and operated
buildings and public schools, wherever located therein.
(Ord. No. 6031, § 1, 6-11-84)
Sec. 13-9. Restrictions on transportation of hazardous and radioactive
materials.
Hazardous materials required to be placarded under 49 C.F.R. part 172, as
amended, and radioactive materials subject to regulation under 10 C.F.R.
section 71.5, as amended, may not be transported within the city except on
truck routes as established by section
20-15 of this Code, notwithstanding the fact that the transporting vehicle does
not exceed minimum qualifying weights or sizes as set out in that section.
(Ord. No. 6581, § 4, 12-8-86)
Sec. 13-10. Permits for transport of hazardous materials.
   (a)   A nontransferable permit for hazardous transport shall be required
annually for each person who transports in commerce through the city any
hazardous material, other than radioactive material, diesel fuel and gasoline,
in quantities required to be placarded by title 49 of the Code of Federal
Regulations. A permit for hazardous transport shall be required for gasoline or
diesel fuel transported in quantities of one hundred eleven (111) gallons or
more. A permit for hazardous transport shall expire one (1) year from the date
it is issued.
   (b)   Any person required by this section to obtain a permit for hazardous
transport shall apply to the fire chief for such a permit prior to the intended
date of movement of hazardous material into, through or within the city. A
permit application, in a form designated by the fire chief, in consultation
with the police chief, shall include the following information:
   (1)   A description of the hazardous materials likely to be transported
during the next twelve (12) months.
   (2)   Proof that the applicant has obtained liability insurance as required
by 49 C.F.R. 387.
   (3)   A showing that the carrier or shipper has selected a route which
complies with 49 C.F.R. 397.9, which requires that motor vehicles containing
hazardous materials avoid routes through or near heavily populated areas,
places where crowds are assembled, tunnels, narrow streets or alleys.
   (4)   Such other information as may be deemed necessary by the fire chief or
the police chief.
   (c)   The fire chief may submit permit applications hereunder to the police
chief for investigation.
   (d)   The fire chief shall deny the permit for hazardous transport if he
determines that adequate emergency response capability does not exist in case
of an accident with the material specified in the application or if he
determines that the applicant's proposed transportation would for any reason
violate applicable federal, state or local laws, regulations or standards
relating to motor vehicle safety or to transportation of hazardous materials. A
permit may only be denied for good cause shown after notice and opportunity for
a hearing if requested by the applicant.
   (e)   The fire chief may suspend or revoke a permit for failure to comply
with the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to this chapter or for
conviction of the permittee for the violation of any substantial federal, state
or local law, regulation or standard relating to motor vehicle safety or to
transportation of hazardous materials. For purposes of this subsection,
"substantial federal, state or local law, regulation or standard" shall mean a
law, regulation or standard the violation of which evidences as willful or
reckless disregard for public safety. A permit may only be suspended or revoked
for good cause shown after notice and opportunity for a hearing if requested by
the permittee.
   (f)   The fire chief shall compile an annual summary, to be submitted to the
mayor each July 1 of the permits of hazardous transportation issued during the
preceding twelve (12) months and the revenues therefrom.
(Ord. No. 6581, § 4, 12-8-86)
Sec. 13-11. Appeal from permit denial, suspension or revocation.
   (a)   A permit appeal board shall be established and maintained. The permit
appeal board shall consist of one (1) representative each from:
   (1)   The police department;
   (2)   The fire department; and
   (3)   The risk management division.
However, in no instance may the person who initiated the permit denial,
revocation or suspension serve on the board as it hears and decides the appeal
of said action. Meetings of the permit appeal board may be chaired by any of
its members.
   (b)   Any person denied a permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
or whose permit has been suspended, revoked or not renewed, may appeal in
writing to the permit appeal board within ten (10) days from said action,
stating reasons why the action was improper. The permit appeal board shall hear
the appeal on its merits not less than seven (7) nor more than thirty (30) days
following the filing of the appeal. The permit appeal board may uphold, modify
or reverse the previous action; and its decision shall be binding on the
applicant.
(Ord. No. 6581, § 4, 12-8-86)
Sec. 13-12. Fees for permits for transport of hazardous materials.
   (a)   Along with the application for a permit for hazardous transport, the
applicant shall submit a fee. That fee shall be based upon the number of
vehicles the applicant intends or expects to use to transport hazardous
materials in or through the city during the coming twelve (12) months and shall
be calculated using a fee schedule which shall be promulgated, adopted and
updated by the fire chief in consultation with the police chief.
   (b)   The fee schedule shall reflect the costs of administering this permit
program and of establishing and maintaining hazardous materials transportation
emergency response capabilities and may also reflect the relative hazard and
potential risk to the public of hazardous cargoes to be transported within the
city based on volume, toxicity, combustion potential and other risk factors
which may be deemed appropriate.
   (c)   The full fee shall be refunded to the applicant immediately upon
denial of a permit application. The applicant shall resubmit the full fee along
with the applicant's written appeal of such a permit denial should the
applicant wish to appeal. The full fee shall be refunded to the applicant
immediately upon a decision of the permit appeal board upholding a decision to
deny a permit.
(Ord. No. 6581, § 4, 12-8-86)
Sec. 13-13. Operation of motor vehicles carrying hazardous materials.
The following requirements shall apply to motor vehicle transportation within
the city of hazardous materials required to be placarded under title 49 of the
Code of Federal Regulations, as amended, and radioactive materials subject to
regulation under 10 C.F.R. section 71.5, as amended:
   (a)   Vehicles transporting hazardous materials shall operate at all times
with their headlights and taillights on and in good repair.
   (b)   Transporters of hazardous material shall not permit or cause to be
permitted the discharge of hazardous materials into or upon any street,
highway, sanitary sewer, drainage canal or ditch, storm drain or flood control
channel, or upon the ground, including private property, except when such
discharge is expressly permitted by the property owner and is otherwise legal.
   (c)   Transporters of hazardous material shall not create a hazard to the
public by the location or condition of their vehicles which contain hazardous
materials.
   (d)   Transporters of hazardous materials shall prominently display upon any
vehicle used to transport hazardous materials such proof of payment of
applicable city fees as required by the fire chief.
   (e)   A judgment of violation established pursuant to procedures set out in
chapter
28, for transporting hazardous materials within or through the city without
first obtaining a permit as required by this chapter, shall be punished by a
minimum mandatory fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first offense,
two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for a second offense and five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for each subsequent offense committed thereafter by that same
person. It shall be no defense under this section that the person cited for
failure to obtain a permit has, since the time of that citation, obtained the
appropriate permit or, except as set out in subsection (g) of this section,
that the vehicle and/or its load are owned by someone other than the driver of
the vehicle.
   (f)   A judgment of violation, established pursuant to procedures set out in
chapter
28, for transporting hazardous materials within or through the city after
denial of a permit pursuant to subsection (d) of this section or during
suspension or revocation of a permit as authorized in subsection (e) of this
section, shall be punished by a minimum mandatory fine of five hundred dollars
($500.00). It shall be no defense under this section that the denial,
revocation or suspension is under appeal or, except as set out in subsection
(g) of this section, that the vehicle and/or its load are owned by someone
other than the driver of the vehicle.
   (g)   The city may, at its sole discretion, issue citations or long-term
complaints for transporting hazardous materials despite revocation or
suspension of the requisite city permit or for transporting hazardous wastes
without first obtaining a permit as required by this chapter to either the
driver of the transporting vehicle or to an owner, lessee or other person
responsible for the vehicle, or to both. In cases in which the city elects to
cite only the driver of the transporting vehicle, that driver may be dismissed
from the prosecution and relieved of any further responsibility to defend the
charge or pay penalties if an owner, lessee or other party responsible for the
transporting vehicle comes forward in a time, place and manner satisfactory to
the city and concedes responsibility for the vehicle, its cargo and its
location at the time of the cited offense and moves to be, and is, substituted
for the driver as defendant in the prosecution.
(Ord. No. 6581, § 4, 12-8-86)
   Cross reference – Operation of motor vehicles generally, §
20-135 et seq.
Sec. 13-14. Reporting requirements.
Incidents involving releases or spills of hazardous materials or traffic
accidents involving vehicles transporting hazardous materials shall be reported
immediately to the fire department by telephone using the 911 number. The fire
chief shall file a standing request with the Materials Transportation Bureau of
the United States Department of Transportation for routine mailing to the fire
department of a copy of the written report required by 49 C.F.R. 171.16.
(Ord. No. 6581, § 4, 12-8-86)
Sec. 13-15. Suspension of operations.
The fire chief, the police chief or their designee may temporarily suspend the
operation within the city of some or all vehicles carrying hazardous materials
as defined in title 49, Code of Federal Regulations, without notice, whenever
road, weather, traffic or other hazardous circumstances warrant that action.
(Ord. No. 6581, § 4, 12-8-86)
Chapter 14
LABOR ORGANIZATION AND EMPLOYEE ASSOCIATION ELECTION PROCEDURE, MEET AND CONFER
AND MEET AND DISCUSS*
Sec.
14-1.   Purpose.
Sec.
14-2.   Requirement of good faith.
Sec.
14-3.   Definitions.
Sec.
14-4.   Labor organizations.
Sec.
14-5.   Employees ineligible for representation by a labor organization.
Sec.
14-6.   Petitioning for election to determine representation by labor
organizations.
Sec.
14-7.   Employee associations.
Sec.
14-8.   Employees ineligible for representation by an employee association.
Sec.
14-9.   Petitioning for election to determine representation by employee
associations.
Sec.
14-10.   Eligibility.
Sec.
14-11.   Application, form of petition and petition process.
Sec.
14-12.   Election procedures.
Sec.
14-13.   Recognition of labor organizations and employee associations.
Sec.
14-14.   Meet and confer.
Sec.
14-15.   Meet and discuss.
Sec.
14-16.   Meet and consult.
Sec.
14-17.   Monthly management-labor meetings.
Sec.
14-18.   City management rights.
Sec.
14-19.   City employee rights.
Sec.
14-20.   Prohibited activity.
Sec.
14-21.   No strike / lockout provisions.
Sec.
14-22.   Labor organization business.
__________
   *Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4382, § 1, adopted Aug. 4, 1975, amended the Code
by repealing arts. I – III, V of ch. 14, which pertained to food and food
handlers. Said chapter was derived from the Code of 1953, ch. 13, §§ 1-3.1, 9,
10, 21 – 32, 35 – 62; Ord. No. 1802, §§ 1 – 4, 1-6-58; Ord. No. 1804, § 4, 1-6-
58; Ord. No. 2077, § 2, 8-1-60 and Ord. No. 3220, § 1, 2-24-69. Article IV of
former ch. 14 was redesignated, pursuant to city instructions as art. VIII of
ch. 7.
   Current ch. 14 was enacted by Ord. No. 10880, §§ 1 and 2, 3-8-11.
Sec. 14-1.   Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to improve and maintain relations between
city employees and city management. This chapter establishes procedures for the
designation of labor organizations to represent certain employee groups, and an
orderly process to allow regular employees and their representatives, who have
been certified as the exclusive representative of a particular employee group,
to meet and confer with the city manager relating to wages, hours, benefits and
other conditions of employment to establish recommendations in the form of
labor agreements to be submitted to the mayor and council and labor
organization memberships for consideration and approval.
   This chapter also establishes procedures for the recognition of employee
associations that represent professional or supervisory employees and an
orderly process to allow the employee associations to meet with the city
manager and participate in the formulation of policies effecting annual
salaries and benefits.
   This chapter also establishes procedures for an orderly process to allow the
labor organizations to (1) meet with the city manager or designee outside of
the meet and confer process and consult regarding new or modified conditions of
employment being considered by management or by mayor and council that are not
addressed in approved labor agreements; and (2) meet with the city manager or
designee on a regularly scheduled basis to discuss any employment policy
matters of concern that any of them might have.
   This chapter will be interpreted and implemented consistent with the city's
authority under the Arizona Constitution and statutes, City Charter,
ordinances, resolutions and civil service rules and regulations.
(Ord. No. 10880, § 2, 3-8-11; Ord. No. 12069, § 2, 1-23-24)
Sec. 14-2.   Requirement of good faith.
   When the city manager or designee and the representatives of the labor
organizations meet and confer under Section
14-14, meet and discuss under Section
14-15, meet and consult under Section
14-16, and hold labor-management meetings under Section
14-17 of this chapter, they will do so in good faith.
(Ord. No. 12069, § 2, 1-23-24)
Sec. 14-3.   Definitions.
   The words, terms and phrases as used in this chapter shall have the same
meanings as defined in Sec.
10-3. In addition, the following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
   1.   Confidential employee means any individual who regularly assists or
acts in a confidential capacity to an individual, manager, or supervisor who
formulates, determines, and effectuates management, personnel, or labor
relations policies, or who has access to confidential or discretionary
information regarding the formulation of city policy or procedures; or whose
functional responsibilities or knowledge concerning employee relations makes
the employee's membership in an labor organization incompatible with that
employee's duties.
   2.   Day means calendar day except as otherwise stated.
   3.   Employee association means the group that represents or seeks to
represent professional or supervisory City employees in the meet and discuss
process.
   4.   Employee group may be members of an employee association or labor
organization.
   5.   Excluded employee employee means employees of the city manager's office
except employees of the manager's program offices; employees of the offices of
mayor and council; employees of the human resources department; police chief,
deputy police chief and assistant police chief; fire chief and assistant fire
chief; all department directors and deputy directors; program directors; and
nonpermanent employees.
   6.   Fiscal year means the budget term adopted by the city, July 1 through
June 30.
   7.   Initial probationary period means an employee's initial probationary
period in conformance with the civil service commission rules which must be
completed before the employee becomes a permanent city employee. For purposes
of this Chapter, an initial probationary employee may be eligible for
representation if designated in the labor agreement and may sign a petition or
vote in a representation election if represented under a current labor
agreement.
   8.   Labor agreement means a statement of agreed upon goals and intentions
to be implemented through the city's standard legislative and administrative
procedures . A labor agreement cannot contradict, supersede, conflict with or
modify the Tucson Charter, the Tucson Code, and/or the civil service commission
rules.
   9.   Labor organization means an organization recognized by the mayor and
council as authorized to represent employees in permanent positions in
specified classifications in the meet and confer process as described in this
chapter for the purpose of meeting and conferring relating to wages, hours,
benefits and other conditions of employment.
   10.   Management employee means any city employee who is engaged primarily
in executive and management functions and/or is charged with the responsibility
of developing, administering or effectuating management policies.
   11.   Meet and confer means a process requiring the city manager or
designee, together with other management representatives to meet with the
representatives of a labor organization to discuss and develop mutual
recommendations on issues affecting the city and members of the employee group
represented by the labor organization, with such mutual recommendations being
reduced to a written labor agreement signed by the parties subject to
ratification by the members of the employee group and adoption by the mayor and
council. The meet and confer process includes discussions of work issues
including wages (for purposes of Tucson City Charter
Chapter VII, Section 2), benefits, hours and other terms and conditions of
employment in connection with the negotiation of new or renewed labor
agreements.
   12.   Meet and consult means the process requiring good faith consultation
between the city manager or the manager's designee(s) and the representatives
of the labor organizations to discuss new or modified conditions of employment
that are proposed by the city manager outside of the meet and confer process
and that are not already addressed in approved labor agreements. The meet and
consult process is separate and distinct from the meet and confer and/or the
meet and discuss processes defined in this chapter. The meet and consult
process applies only as provided in Section
14-16 below.
   13.   Meet and discuss means the process for providing participation by
professional and/or supervisory employees in the formulation of policies
affecting their annual salaries and benefits, and requiring representatives of
the city manager and representatives of the employee association to personally
meet at reasonable times in advance of the budget making process and to discuss
the proposals for consideration before any recommendations are submitted to the
city council by the city manager.
   14.   Professional employee means city employees in classifications
identified as professional in accordance with the Fair Labor Standards Act.
   15.   Supervisory employee means any individual, except lead persons, police
sergeants and fire captains, having authority in the interest of the city
either to hire, transfer, suspend, lay-off, recall, promote, discharge, assign,
reward, or discipline other employees, or responsibility to direct them, or to
adjust their grievances, or effectively to recommend such action, if in
connection with the foregoing exercise of such authority is not of a merely
routine or clerical nature, but requires the use of independent judgment.
(Ord. No. 10880, § 2, 3-8-11; Ord. No. 11395, § 1, 8-9-16; Ord. No. 12069, § 2,
1-23-24)
Sec. 14-4.   Labor organizations.
   Sec. 14-4(a). The maximum number of labor organizations to be designated for
employee representation shall be limited to a total of four as follows:
   1.   One organization may represent employees consisting of commissioned
personnel of the Tucson police department through the rank of sergeant and non-
commissioned personnel employed as Community Service Officers (CSO).
   2.   One organization may represent employees consisting of commissioned
personnel of the Tucson fire department through the rank of captain.
   3.   One organization may represent employees consisting of all clerical,
administrative, professional and technical non-supervisory city employees as
set forth in the position compensation plan and designated by the director of
human resources and filed with the city clerk.
   4.   One organization may represent employees consisting of all labor and
trades non- supervisory employees (including lead persons) as set forth in the
position compensation plan and designated by the director of human resources
and filed with the city clerk.
   Sec. 14-4(b). Employees who have not successfully completed the initial
probationary period in conformance with the civil service commission rules may
be members of a labor organization subject to the labor agreement. Membership
and representation shall not affect the at-will status of the probationary
employee. For purposes of this Chapter, an initial probationary employee may be
eligible for representation if designated in the labor agreement and may sign a
petition or vote in a representation election if represented under a current
labor agreement.
(Ord. No. 10880, § 2, 3-8-11; Ord. No. 11395, § 1, 8-9-16; Ord. No. 11733, § 1,
3-3-20; Ord. No. 12069, § 2, 1-23-24)
Sec. 14-5.   Employees ineligible for representation by a labor organization.
   Sec. 14-5(a). The following employees are ineligible for representation by a
labor organization:
   1.   All commissioned fire personnel at or above the rank of battalion
chief.
   2.   All commissioned police personnel at or above the rank of lieutenant.
   3.    All other city employees who are supervisory, professional, excluded
or confidential employees.
   4.   Non-permanent (intermittent, seasonal and/or temporary employees as
defined in Tucson Code Section
10-3) employees and persons employed on a contract basis.
   Sec. 14-5(b). The director of human resources shall have the authority and
responsibility, subject to city manager review and approval, for determining
which employees are eligible for representation in employee groups consistent
with the provisions of this chapter. An employee or a labor organization
representing the employee group to which the employee would belong may request
that this determination be reviewed by the city manager. The request for review
shall set forth the reasons for the disagreement in writing. On review, the
city manager's decision to either uphold or overturn the initial determination
of eligibility shall be final.
(Ord. No. 10880, § 2, 3-8-11; Ord. No. 11395, § 1, 8-9-16; Ord. No. 12069, § 2,
1-23-24)
Sec. 14-6.   Petitioning for election to determine representation by labor
organizations.
   Sec. 14-6(a). If there is no current labor agreement in existence, eligible
members of the employee group may petition the city clerk to conduct an
election not later than one hundred eighty (180) days prior to the beginning of
the city's fiscal year to determine if representation is desired within the
employee group.
   Sec. 14-6(b). During the existence of a current labor agreement between the
city of Tucson and an employee group, eligible members of said group may
petition the city clerk to conduct an election to determine representation
within that group, not earlier than one hundred eighty (180) days prior to the
expiration date of the current existing agreement and no later than ninety (90)
days prior to the expiration of the then current existing agreement.
   Sec. 14-6(c). At any time not earlier than one hundred eighty (180) days and
no later than ninety (90) days prior to the expiration of an applicable labor
agreement, any member of an employee group can initiate an election to
decertify an exclusive representative by submitting a petition containing not
less than thirty-three percent (33%) of the eligible employees in the employee
group. The petition verification and election shall be conducted in the same
manner as a representation election.
   Sec. 14-6(d). No more than one (1) election per employee group may be held
within a fiscal year.
   Sec. 14-6(e). The petition and election procedures set forth in this Section
and in this Chapter are not required for the designation and recognition of a
successor labor organization. For the purposes of this Chapter, a successor
labor organization means a new local chapter of a national or international
labor organization that has already been recognized by the mayor and council as
authorized to represent eligible employees. Upon confirmation by the governing
national or international labor organization that the new local has been
approved, the successor labor organization will take the place of its
predecessor without an election; and the city manager may approve an amendment
to the applicable labor agreement to substitute the successor labor
organization for its predecessor.
(Ord. No. 10880, § 2, 3-8-11; Ord. No. 11395, § 1, 8-9-16; Ord. No. 12045, § 1,
10-3-23; Ord. No. 12069, § 2, 1-23-24)
Sec. 14-7.   Employee associations.
   Sec. 14-7(a). The maximum number of employee associations to be designated
for representation of professional and supervisory employees shall be limited
to a total of four (4) as follows:
   1.   One association may represent employees consisting of commissioned
personnel of the Tucson police department with the rank of lieutenant and
above.
   2.   One association may represent employees consisting of commissioned
personnel of the Tucson fire department with the rank of battalion chief and
above.
   3.   One association may represent employees consisting of all city
employees in professional classifications as set forth in the city’s position
compensation plan.
   4.   One organization may represent employees consisting of all supervisory
employees (excluding lead persons) as set forth in the city’s position
compensation plan.
(Ord. No. 10880, § 2, 3-8-11; Ord. No. 11395, § 1, 8-9-16; Ord. No. 12069, § 2,
1-23-24)
Sec. 14-8.   Employees ineligible for representation by an employee
association.
   Sec. 14-8(a). The following employees are ineligible for representation by
an employee association:
   1.   Employees eligible for representation by a labor organization.
   2.   All other city employees who are excluded or confidential employees.
   Sec. 14-8(b). The human resources director shall have the authority and
responsibility, subject to city manager review and approval, for determining
which employees are eligible for representation consistent with the provisions
of this chapter. An employee may request that this determination be reviewed by
the city manager. The request for review shall set forth the reasons for the
disagreement in writing. On review, the city manager’s decision to either
uphold or overturn the initial determination of ineligibility shall be final.
(Ord. No. 10880, § 2, 3-8-11; Ord. No. 11395, § 1, 8-9-16; Ord. No. 12069, § 2,
1-23-24)
Sec. 14-9.   Petitioning for election to determine representation by employee
associations.
   Sec. 14-9(a). If the City Manager has not recognized an employee association
to represent one of the professional/ supervisory employees defined in Section
14-7, eligible employees may file a petition with the city clerk to conduct an
election not later than ninety (90) days prior to the beginning of the city's
fiscal year to determine if representation is [desired].
   Sec. 14-9(b). During the time there is recognition of a professional/
supervisory employee group, an eligible member of said group may file a
petition with the city clerk to conduct an election to determine
representation, not earlier than one hundred eighty (180) days prior to the
beginning of the city's fiscal year.
   Sec. 14-9(c). No more than one election per employee group may be held
within a fiscal year.
(Ord. No. 10880, § 2, 3-8-11; Ord. No. 11395, § 1, 8-9-16; Ord. No. 12069, § 2,
1-23-24)
Sec. 14-10.   Eligibility.
   Sec. 14-10(a). Employees who hold a position, at the time the petition to
conduct an election is certified by the director of human resources and the
city clerk, as a permanent, full-time, employee in a job classification
included within the scope of the employee group for which an election is sought
shall be eligible to sign the petition. A probationary employee shall be
eligible to sign a petition if a then-current labor agreement provides that
probationary employees are represented.
   Sec. 14-10(b). Employees who hold a position, at the time of an election, as
a permanent, full-time, employee in a job classification included with the
scope of the employee group shall be eligible to vote in the election subject
to the petition. A probationary employee shall be eligible to vote in the
election if a then current labor agreement provides that probationary employees
are represented.
   Sec. 14-10(c). Employees who wish to petition for a call of an election to
determine representation by a labor organization or an employee association
must:
   1.   Be members of the employee group petitioning for an election as defined
and set forth in Section
14-4 or Section
14-7, and
   2.   Sign a valid petition requesting that an election be called for the
purpose of determining representation.
(Ord. No. 10880, § 2, 3-8-11; Ord. No. 11395, § 1, 8-9-16; Ord. No. 12069, § 2,
1-23-24)
Sec. 14-11.   Application, form of petition and petition process.
   Sec. 14-11(a). An employee who wishes to petition to conduct an election to
determine representation of an employee group must complete and file an
application for petition for election with the city clerk.
   Sec. 14-11(b). The form of the petition shall include the issue date,
petition number, name of labor organization or employee association, and
employee group seeking representation.
   Sec. 14-11(c). Each petition shall be in a form prescribed by the city
clerk.
   Sec. 14-11(d). A petition to conduct an election to determine representation
of an employee group must bear the signatures of eligible employees pursuant to
Sec. 14-10(a), of an employee group in a number equal to at least thirty-three
percent (33%) of the employees of the employee group as of the date the
application for a petition is submitted to the city clerk.
   Sec. 14-11(e). Within five (5) business days of issuing the petition, the
city clerk will notify the petitioners of the number of signatures needed equal
to at least thirty-three percent (33%) of the eligible employees.
   Sec. 14-11(f). Each petition submitted to the city clerk shall contain the
name of the employee group, the name of the labor organization or employee
association, signature, printed name, employee number, date of signature, and
employee position of each person signing the petition.
   1.   No signature on a petition shall bear a date greater than ninety (90)
days in advance of submittal.
   2.   If an eligible employee signs more than one (1) copy of the same
petition or more than one (1) petition if there are competing petitions, then
the earliest signature is the only valid signature unless it was officially
withdrawn in writing submitted to the city clerk. No supplemental filings are
allowed.
   Sec. 14-11(g). The signatures of employees on the petitions requesting an
election shall be verified by the director of human resources in order to
determine current employment within the employee group. A signature is not
eligible for verification and is ineligible for inclusion in the total number
of valid signatures (and shall immediately be so designated by the human
resources department by marking an encircled "hr" in the margin to the right of
the signature lines), if it meets any of the following criteria:
   1.   The signature is missing from the signature line.
   2.   The employee number or employee position is missing from the signature
line.
   3.   The date of signing is missing or incomplete (to be complete, the date
must include the month and day).
   4.   There is more than one (1) signature placed on the numbered signature
line, in which case only the signature which is actually on the line will be
eligible for verification and all other signatures shall be rejected.
   5.   The signature is made in the margin or otherwise outside the signature
space on the numbered signature line.
   6.   The signature has been withdrawn, pursuant to written authorization by
the signer.
   7.   The signature is by an employee who is ineligible.
   8.   The signature or accompanying information is, in the opinion of the
director of human resources, otherwise insufficient or defective.
   9.   Signatures which have been crossed out, or otherwise defaced, prior to
being received by the city clerk are not eligible for verification, and are
ineligible for inclusion in the total of valid signatures (and shall be so
designated by the city clerk by marking an encircled "cc" in the margin to the
right of the signature line).
   Sec. 14-11(h). The director of human resources shall, within thirty (30)
days from receiving the petition, verify that thirty-three percent (33%) of the
eligible employees within the designated group have signed the petition. The
city clerk and the director of human resources shall then promptly post
conspicuous notice of receipt of such petition and the result of the
verification process.
   Sec. 14-11(i). The city clerk shall conduct a representation election among
the employees in the employee group within thirty (30) days after verification
by the director of human resources that thirty-three percent (33%) of the
eligible employees within the designated group have signed the petition.
   Sec. 14-11(j). Once a petition has been filed with the city clerk calling
for a representation election, other organizations or associations in the same
employee group may seek to be placed on the ballot by filing an application for
petition.
   Sec. 14-11(k). The organization or association must also file a petition
containing the valid dated signatures of not less than thirty-three percent
(33%) of the employees in the employee group. This petition must be filed no
later than ten (10) days after the director of human resources and the city
clerk have posted a written notice that a petition containing the valid
signatures of employees has been filed by a labor organization or employee
association.
   Sec. 14-11(l). A labor organization or employee association that is
recognized pursuant to this article as the representative of an employee group
at the time a petition for an election is verified shall appear on the ballot
without the requirement to submit a petition.
(Ord. No. 10880, § 2, 3-8-11; Ord. No. 11395, § 1, 8-9-16; Ord. No. 12069, § 2,
1-23-24)
Sec. 14-12.   Election procedures.
   Sec. 14-12(a). Upon verification of the submitted petitions by the director
of human resources the city clerk shall conduct and supervise the election to
determine which, if any, labor organization or employee association shall be
recognized by the city for any employee group.
   Sec. 14-12(b). Upon verification by the director of human resources and the
city clerk of the submitted petitions, the city clerk shall provide a courtesy
notice to the interested parties. The notice should include the verification
and timeline for the election.
   Sec. 14-12(c). The requesting organization or association shall be allowed
use of bulletin boards in those departments, where employees eligible to vote
are located, to post organization or association related news bulletins, notice
of organization or association meetings and information relating to the
election. Prior to posting, materials shall be initialed by the department
director or designee and the city clerk or designee.
   Sec. 14-12(d). Ballots for the election shall be prepared by the city clerk,
and shall contain the names of those competing labor organizations or employee
associations and an option for no representation. Employees voting shall cast
only one (1) vote. The name of the requesting group shall be listed on the
ballot first, followed by the currently recognized group, if any, and any
competing groups in alphabetical order. Last choice shall be "No
Representation."
   Sec. 14-12(e). Ballot boxes shall be sealed by the city clerk.
   Sec. 14-12(f). Elections shall be conducted at a neutral location as
determined by the city clerk.
   Sec. 14-12(g). Voting shall be conducted between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
7:00 p.m. Each competing organization or association shall be allowed one (1)
representative as an observer during voting. Counting of ballots shall commence
immediately after the close of the polls.
   Sec. 14-12(h). No personal electioneering shall be permitted on City
property or during normal duty hours by any city employee or representative of
those labor organizations or employee association which are party to the
election. Electioneering occurs when an individual, by verbal expression and in
order to induce or compel another person to vote in a particular manner or
refrain from voting, expresses support for or opposition to a labor
organization or an employee group that appears on the ballot in that election.
   1.   There shall be no electioneering, photography, or videography with the
seventy-five (75) foot limit of any representation election voting location as
posted by the city clerk, or within seventy-five (75) feet of the main outside
entrance to any representation election voting location.
   2.   An election official or person who is authorized to be within the
seventy-five (75) foot limit, shall not wear, carry or display materials that
identify or express support for or opposition to the labor organization or
employee association which are party to the election and shall not electioneer
within the seventy-five (75) foot limit of a voting location.
   3.   Any city employee violating this section shall be subject to discipline
in accordance with city administrative directives. Any labor organization or
employee association representative violating this paragraph shall be denied
access to the department where the violation occurred until the election has
been conducted. Any issues may be reviewed by the city attorney on a case by
case basis.
   Sec. 14-12(i). There shall be no coercion or intimidation either directly or
indirectly upon or against any person in order to induce or compel such person
to vote or refrain from voting for or against a labor organization. Any city
employee violating this paragraph shall be subject to discipline in accordance
with city administrative directives. Any labor organization or employee
association representative violating this paragraph shall be denied access to
the department where the violation occurred until the election has been
conducted. Any issues may be reviewed by the city attorney on a case by case
basis.
   Sec. 14-12(j). The counting of the ballots shall be completed by the city
clerk. Each competing organization or association shall be allowed one (1)
representative as an observer during the counting of the ballots.
   Sec. 14-12(k). A plurality of those voting in the election shall prevail.
   Sec. 14-12(l). All of the costs of an election held as set forth in this
chapter shall be shared and paid for on an equal pro-rata basis by the city and
all labor organizations or employee associations represented on the ballot.
   Sec. 14-12(m). Election disputes shall be resolved by the city clerk and
city attorney whose decision shall be final and binding on the parties.
(Ord. No. 11395, § 1, 8-9-16; Ord. No. 12069, § 2, 1-23-24)
Sec. 14-13.   Recognition of labor organizations and employee associations.
   Sec. 14-13(a). The city clerk shall certify the organization or association
that receives the most votes as the exclusive representative for all employees
in the applicable employee group.
   Sec. 14-13(b). When a new labor organization is selected, the city manager
and/or the manager's designated representatives and the new organization shall
immediately commence the meet and confer process to establish a new labor
agreement between the city and the labor organization. The current organization
shall retain all benefits and privileges until the expiration of its agreement
with the city.
   Sec. 14-13(c). Recognized labor organizations and employee associations
shall have the right to bi-weekly payroll deductions. Deductions from the
payroll of any participating employees must be authorized by each individual
employee on the appropriate form provided by the finance department. No dues
may be deducted for any employee who has not authorized a deduction or who has
provided with city with a written statement withdrawing a prior authorization
for deduction of dues.
   Sec. 14-13(d). The city will not recognize any labor organization or
employee association that does not possess a current city employee membership
equal to at least fifteen percent (15%) of the total number of
employees in the employee group. Certification of such membership shall be made
by any labor organization or employee association at any time upon request of
the city manager. When a new labor organization or employee association is
selected through the election process, it shall have thirty (30) days to
certify its membership in the necessary number to the city manager.
   Sec. 14-13(e). If a labor organization's certification of membership does
not show that the labor organization possesses the prescribed minimum city
employee membership, any existing labor agreement between the city and the
labor organization shall be deemed to have lapsed and will automatically
terminate sixty (60) days after the date of the certification that showed the
deficiency in membership, unless the labor organization submits a new
certification showing that the labor organization possesses the prescribed
minimum city employee membership.
(Ord. No. 10880, § 2, 3-8-11; Ord. No. 11395, § 1, 8-9-16; Ord. No. 12069, § 2,
1-23-24)
Sec. 14-14.   Meet and confer.
   Sec. 14-14(a). The meet and confer process is used to develop mutual
recommendations in the form of a labor agreement for submittal to the mayor and
council. The meet and confer process may include discussions of work issues
including wages (for purposes of Tucson City Charter
Chapter VII, Section 2), benefits, hours and other terms and conditions of
employment. As the processes outlined in this chapter are for a public purpose,
the city may agree to provide paid release time for employees to conduct
activity for a recognized labor organization.
   Sec. 14-14(b). At least one hundred twenty (120) days prior to the
expiration date of an existing labor agreement, the city manager and/or
designated representatives and the designated representatives of the labor
organization shall commence the meet and confer process for the purpose of
reaching a new labor agreement.
   Sec. 14-14(c). If a labor organization questions the financial information
provided by the city manager's representative, and the question cannot be
resolved in the meet and confer process, the question shall be referred to the
Independent Audit and Performance Commission (IAPC) for resolution.
   Sec. 14-14(d). If the city manager and the labor organization reach a total
impasse that prevents reaching a labor agreement, either party may request that
the outstanding issues be mediated. The mediation will be conducted by a
mediator from the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service (FMCS). If the
mediation is unsuccessful, the mediator, in the mediator's discretion, may
submit a recommendation to the mayor and council on the resolution of the
impasse. If either the city manager or the labor organization declines to agree
to mediation, there shall be no mediation and that shall be reported to the
mayor and council.
   Sec. 14-14(e). When the city manager and the labor organization reach
agreement on the recommended terms and conditions of employment for those
persons in the represented classifications, that agreement shall be set forth
in a written labor agreement to be submitted to the mayor and council.
   Sec. 14-14(f). Final action by the mayor and council shall constitute
approval of the labor agreement. Within ninety (90) days of mayor and council
approval of the labor agreement, city staff shall amend city administrative
directives, and departmental procedures to conform to the labor agreement.
Revisions of Tucson City Code shall be recommended for adoption by the mayor
and council as necessary in order to implement the terms of a labor agreement.
Nothing herein shall limit the legal authority of the mayor and council to
unilaterally legislate the terms and conditions of employment or in any way
limit the legislative or annual budget discretion of the mayor and council. In
the event there is a conflict between the labor agreement and the civil service
commission rules and regulations, the civil service commission rules and
regulations shall prevail.
(Ord. No. 10880, § 2, 3-8-11; Ord. No. 11395, § 1, 8-9-16; Ord. No. 12069, § 2,
1-23-24)
Sec. 14-15.   Meet and discuss.
   Sec. 14-15(a). The scope of meeting and discussing shall be limited to
salaries and benefits for professional and supervisory employees.
   Sec. 14-15(b). An employee association may submit proposals to the city
manager no earlier than January 1 of any calendar year and not later than March
1 of the same calendar year. Upon receipt of the proposals the city manager
will schedule meetings between the association's representatives and the city
manager's representatives. The first meeting shall be scheduled on or before
March 15 and after a reasonable period of meeting and discussing the city
manager shall advise the association's representatives of the manager's budget
recommendations related to salary and benefits for professional and supervisory
employees.
   Sec. 14-15(c). If an employee association questions the financial
information provided by the city manager's representative, and the question
cannot be resolved in the meet and discuss process, the question shall be
referred to the Independent Audit and Performance Commission (IAPC) for
resolution.
   Sec. 14-15(d). The employee association shall inform the city manager of its
agreement or disagreement with the manager's recommendations and the city
manager shall forward the employee association's comments to the mayor and
council.
   Sec. 14-15(e). A representative of the employee association may present the
view of the association at a regular meeting of the mayor and council.
(Ord. No. 10880, § 2, 3-8-11; Ord. No. 11395, § 1, 8-9-16; Ord. No. 12069, § 2,
1-23-24)
Sec. 14-16.   Meet and consult.
   Sec. 14-16(a). Purpose. The meet and consult process is used to provide for
good faith consultation between the city manager or the manager's designee(s)
and the representatives of the labor organizations to discuss new or modified
conditions of employment that are proposed by the city manager outside of the
meet and confer process and that are not already addressed in approved labor
agreements. The meet and consult process is separate and distinct from the meet
and confer and/or the meet and discuss processes defined in this chapter. The
meet and consult process applies only as provided in this section.
   Sec. 14-16(b). Applicability. The meet and consult process applies when all
of the following conditions and circumstances are met:
   1.   The city manager intends to implement a new or modified condition of
employment for city employees through the exercise of the manager's
administrative authority or intends to recommend adoption of a new or modified
condition of employment to the mayor and council; and
   2.   The proposed new or modified condition of employment applies to all
city employees across the various city departments and divisions; and
   3.   The failure of an employee to satisfy the new or modified condition of
employment subjects that employee to discipline up to and including
termination; and
   4.   The new or modified condition of employment is not already addressed in
the city's approved labor agreements.
   Sec. 14-16(c). Process. Except as provided in subsection (d) below, the meet
and consult process will be as follows:
   1.   The city manager or the manager's designee will provide written notice
to the labor organizations of the proposed new or modified condition of
employment not less than twenty (20) days prior to the date of administrative
implementation; or in the case of a condition of employment that the manager
will recommend to the mayor and council for approval, not less than twenty (20)
days prior to the date for mayor and council consideration of that
recommendation. The written notice will provide a description of the proposed
new or modified condition of employment, and the sanctions for an employee's
failure to comply.
   2.   The city manager or the manager's designee(s) will meet in good faith
with representatives of the labor organizations not less than ten (10) days
prior to the date of implementation or the date of mayor and council
consideration (whichever applies) to provide the labor organizations the
opportunity to discuss, comment and consult with the manager or designee(s)
relating to the proposed new or modified condition of employment.
   3.   In the case of a proposed new or modified condition of employment that
the city manager recommends to the mayor and council for approval and that is
subject to the meet and consult process provided under this section, the labor
organizations will be provided an opportunity to submit written comments on the
proposed new or modified condition of employment to the mayor and council and
to address the mayor and council during the public meeting at which the mayor
and council consider the adoption and approval of the proposed new or modified
condition of employment.
   Sec. 14-16(d). Emergency Measures. If the city manager determines in writing
that the new or modified condition of employment must be implemented
immediately as an emergency measure in order to protect, promote or preserve
the health and safety of city employees and/or the community, the procedures
described in subsection (c) above do not apply. However, in the event that the
city manager proceeds with the implementation of a new or modified condition of
employment as an emergency measure under this subsection (d), the city manager
will:
   1.   Provide written notice of the new or modified condition of employment
to the labor organizations, using the email addresses provided by the labor
organizations for such emergency notifications, within seventy-two (72) hours
of the time of the emergency implementation; and
   2.   Meet with representatives of the labor organizations within five (5)
days of the date of emergency implementation to provide the labor organizations
the opportunity to discuss, comment and consult with the manager or designee(s)
relating to the new or modified condition of employment.
   3.   Any new or modified condition of employment implemented as an emergency
measure as provided in this section is temporary and shall expire forty-five
(45) days after implementation if the meet and consult meeting has not yet
occurred as of that date, through no fault of the labor organizations.
   All discipline contemplated by the new or modified condition of employment
shall be stayed until after the meet and consult meeting has been held.
(Ord. No. 12069, § 2, 1-23-24)
Sec. 14-17.   Monthly management-labor meetings.
   The city manager will meet, separately, with representatives of each of the
labor organizations every other month to discuss any employment policy matters
of concern to them, including but not limited to work issues such as wages,
benefits, hours, or terms or conditions of employment. The city manager will
ensure that the meetings are scheduled at least six (6) months in advance and
that representatives of each of the labor organizations are notified of their
meeting times and places, or the city manager and a labor organization can
agree on a standing meeting at a particular day and time each month.
(Ord. No. 12069, § 2, 1-23-24)
Sec. 14-18.   City management rights.
   Sec. 14-18(a). The rights of the city, through its management employees,
shall include, but shall not be limited to the following:
   1.   to determine the purpose of each of its departments;
   2.   to exercise control and discretion over the organization and efficiency
of operations of the city;
   3.   to set standards for services to be provided to the public;
   4.   to direct the employees of the city, including the right to assign work
and overtime;
   5.   to hire, compensate, examine, classify, promote, train, transfer,
assign and schedule city employees;
   6.   to suspend, demote, discharge, or take other disciplinary action
against employees for cause;
   7.   to increase, reduce change, modify or alter the composition and size of
the city work force, including the right to relieve employees from duties
because of lack of work, funds or a material change in the duties or
organization of a department;
   8.   to determine the location, methods means and personnel by which
operations are to be conducted, including the right to determine whether goods
or services are to be made or purchased;
   9.   to establish, modify, combine or abolish job classifications;
   10.   to change or eliminate existing methods, equipment or facilities.
   Sec. 14-18(b). The city's management rights are not subjugated or diminished
in any way by any expressed or implied duty or obligation to meet and confer.
Retained management rights are not subject to the grievance procedure contained
in any labor agreement, nor are they subject to any other appeal or complaint
process.
(Ord. No. 10880, § 2, 3-8-11; Ord. No. 11395, § 1, 8-9-16; Ord. No. 12069, § 2,
1-23-24)
Sec. 14-19.   City employee rights.
   Sec. 14-19(a). Eligible city employees shall have the right to form, join
and participate in any labor organization or employee association of their own
choosing, or to refrain from forming, joining, or participating in same. City
employees shall not be eligible for any paid release time for any elective or
appointive office in any labor organization or employee association until the
probationary period following their initial employment in a permanent position
in the classified service has been successfully completed.
   Sec. 14-19(b). This chapter does not prevent any city employee from
communicating with city management and the mayor and council, in person,
through a group, association or unrecognized organization or through counsel,
with respect to the terms and conditions of employment.
(Ord. No. 10880, § 2, 3-8-11; Ord. No. 11395, § 1, 8-9-16; Ord. No. 12069, § 2,
1-23-24)
Sec. 14-20.   Prohibited activity.
   Sec. 14-20(a). Employees, labor organizations, and employee associations and
their representatives shall not:
   1.   Discriminate against an employee with regard to labor organization
membership because of race, color, religion, creed, age, disability, sex,
national origin, sexual orientation, gender identity, familial status, or
marital status;
   2.   Discriminate against an employee because he/she has chosen not to form,
join or assist a labor organization or employee association;
   3.   Use city time, property or equipment for labor organization or employee
association business, except as specified in and consistent with this chapter;
use of city email is governed by the applicable administrative directive;
   4.   Interfere with, restrain or coerce any employee, elected or appointed
city official in the exercise of any right provided by the provisions of this
chapter;
   5.   Interfere with, restrain, threaten or coerce any elected or appointed
official, representative of the employer or city employee, for the purpose of
gaining a concession;
   6.   Refuse to meet and confer or meet and discuss or meet and consult in
good faith;
   7.   Refuse or fail to comply with any provision of this chapter;
   8.   Interfere with or coerce the city in the selection of its agents for
resolving grievances.
   Sec. 14-20(b). City management and its representatives shall not:
   1.   Discriminate against an employee with regard to terms and conditions of
employment because of the employee's membership in a labor organization or
employee association;
   2.   Interfere with, restrain or coerce any employee in the exercise of any
right provided under this chapter;
   3.   Dominate or interfere in the formation, existence or administration of
any labor organization or employee association;
   4.   Discriminate in regard to hiring, promotion or any term or condition of
employment in order to encourage or discourage membership in a labor
organization or employee association;
   5.   Discharge or otherwise discriminate against an employee because he/she
has signed or filed a petition, grievance or complaint or because an employee
is forming, joining or choosing to be represented by a labor organization or
employee association;
   6.   Refuse to meet and confer or meet and discuss or meet and consult in
good faith;
   7.   Refuse or fail to comply with any provisions of this chapter;
   8.   Coerce the labor organization in the selection of its agent for meeting
and conferring or adjustment of grievances.
(Ord. No. 10880, § 2, 3-8-11; Ord. No. 11395, § 1, 8-9-16; Ord. No. 12069, § 2,
1-23-24)
Sec. 14-21.   No strike/lockout provisions.
   Sec. 14-21(a). No employee, labor organization or employee association shall
cause, instigate, encourage, support, threaten or participate, directly or
indirectly, in a strike, slowdown, sickout, or work disruption of any type. The
city shall not cause, instigate or engage in any employee lockout.
   Sec. 14-21(b). In the case of an action by employees where the employer
alleges a strike or other work disruption has occurred, the mayor and council
may meet in emergency session and determine whether a strike or other work
disruption has indeed occurred.
   Sec. 14-21(c). Any labor organization or employee association whose
employees participate in, threaten, cause, instigate, encourage or support a
city employee strike, walkout, slowdown or other work disruption shall be
automatically decertified as the exclusive representative. In such a case, the
labor agreement shall be null and void in whole or in part at the discretion of
the city, the exclusive representative for that employee group may not collect
dues, meet and confer, meet and discuss or represent employees in any fashion,
and shall be barred from serving as the exclusive representative of any unit of
Tucson employees for a period of not less than three (3) years.
   Sec. 14-21(d). The provisions and sanctions in this section do not prohibit
the city from also taking disciplinary action, up to and including termination
of employment, against some or all of the employees who are in violation of the
provisions of this section, nor is the city prohibited from seeking other legal
remedies against the employee(s), labor organization(s) or employee association
(s).
(Ord. No. 10880, § 2, 3-8-11; Ord. No. 11395, § 1, 8-9-16; Ord. No. 12069, § 2,
1-23-24)
Sec. 14-22.   Labor organization business.
   All labor organization business shall be conducted only during non-working
time in non-working areas and shall not interfere with the work process, except
as otherwise specified in an applicable labor agreement.
(Ord. No. 10880, § 2, 3-8-11; Ord. No. 11395, § 1, 8-9-16; Ord. No. 12069, § 2,
1-23-24)
Chapter 15
ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICES DEPARTMENT*
__________
*   Editors Note: Ord. No. 10539, §§ 1--6, adopted June 3, 2008, effective July
1, 2008, amended Ch. 15 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch.
15, §§ 15-1--15-6, 15-10.1--15-24.7, 15-31, 15-31.1, 15-50, 15-51, pertained to
similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 9717, § 2, adopted June 10,
2002; Ord. No. 9816, §§ 11--13, adopted Feb. 24, 2003; Ord. No. 9861, § 5A--F,
adopted June 16, 2003; Ord. No. 9982, §§ 1--6, adopted June 14, 2004; Ord. No.
9989, § 1, adopted June 21, 2004; Ord. No. 10099, § 3, adopted Dec. 13, 2004;
Ord. No. 10348, §§ 2--4, adopted Nov. 28, 2006.
   Charter References: Authority to provide for garbage disposal,
ch. IV, § 1(6).
   Cross References: Disposal of manure, animal bedding and body waste of
domestic animals and pets, §
4-28; burning trash and other articles, §
11-5 et seq.; depositing offensive matter in water ditches and natural drainage
channels, §
11-58; department of public works, ch.
11A; disposal of trash in parks, §
21-3(3)(2).
__________
Art. I.   Definitions, § 15-1
Art. II.   Administration, §§ 15-2--15-9
Art. III.   Community Standards for Solid Waste Storage and Removal, §§ 15-10--
15-15
Art. IV.   City Residential and Commercial Collection Services, §§ 15-16--15-30
Art. V.   City Fees and Charges for Residential Collection, Commercial
Collection, and Disposal Services, §§ 15-31--15-49
   Div. 1. General Provisions, §§ 15-31--15-31.2
   Div. 2. Residential Collection, §§ 15-32--15-32.5
   Div. 3. Commercial Collection, §§ 15-33--15-33.9
   Div. 4. Disposal Services, §§ 15-34--15-35
   Div. 5. Special Fees,  §§ 15-36--15-49
Art. VI.   Disposal Facility Management – Reserved, §§ 15-50--15-59
Art. VII.   Plastic Bag Recycling, §§ 15-60--15-69
Art. VIII.   Litter Fee, §§ 15-70--15-79
Art. IX.   Waste Diversion Reporting, § 15-80
Article I. Definitions
Sec.
15-1.   Definitions.
Article II. Administration
Sec.
15-2.   Purpose.
Sec.
15-2.1.   Department of environmental services established; director of
environmental services as head of department.
Sec.
15-2.2.   Functions of the director.
Sec.
15-3.   Suspension or revocation of services.
Sec.
15-4.   Reserved.
Sec.
15-5.   Public nuisances, enforcement.
Sec.
15-6.   Parties liable.
Sec.
15-7.   Administrative appeal process.
Secs.
15-8, 15-9. Reserved.
Article III. Community Standards for Solid Waste Storage and Removal
Sec.
15-10.   General applicability.
Sec.
15-10.1.   Standards for storage and removal of solid waste.
Sec.
15-10.2.   Prohibited materials.
Sec.
15-10.3.   Scavenging prohibited.
Sec.
15-10.4.   Hauling of solid waste.
Sec.
15-10.5.   Commercial recycling facilities.
Secs.
15-11--15-15.   Reserved.
Article IV. City Residential and Commercial Collection Services
Sec.
15-16.   Collection from residential establishments by persons or entities
other than the city prohibited.
Sec.
15-16.1.   City collection services at residential establishments.
Sec.
15-16.2.   Customer responsibilities regarding recycling collection service.
Sec.
15-16.3.   Parameters for brush bulky collection service.
Sec.
15-16.4.   Assisted collection service to residential establishments.
Sec.
15-16.5.   Temporary suspension of service.
Sec.
15-16.6.   Neighborhood cleanup service.
Sec.
15-16.7.   City collection service at commercial establishments.
Sec.
15-16.8.   Violations of city collection service requirements.
Secs.
15-17--15-30.   Reserved.
Article V. City Fees and Charges for Residential Collection, Commercial
Collection, and Disposal Services
Division 1. General Provisions
Sec.
15-31.   Declaration of purpose; intent of mayor and council.
Sec.
15-31.1.   Deposits and refunds.
Sec.
15-31.2.   Returned checks.
Sec.
15-31.3.   Billing account activation.
Sec.
15-31.4.   Payment terms.
Sec.
15-31.5.   Discontinuance of service for non-payment.
Sec.
15-31.6.   Penalty fees for non-payment.
Sec.
15-31.7.   Service agreements.
Sec.
15-31.8.   Change of address.
Sec.
15-31.9.   Pilot programs and fees.
Division 2. Residential Collection
Sec.
15-32.   Basis for residential fees.
Sec.
15-32.1.   Responsibility for residential fee.
Sec.
15-32.2.   Requirements for payment of residential fees.
Sec.
15-32.3.   Fees for level of service.
Sec.
15-32.4.   Environmental services low income assistance program.
Sec.
15-32.5.   Residential fee schedules.
Sec.
15-32.6.   APC collection fuel surcharge.
Sec.
15-32.7.   APC collection recycling surcharge.
Division 3. Commercial Collection
Sec.
15-33.   Basis for commercial fees.
Sec.
15-33.1.   Commercial fee requirements.
Sec.
15-33.2.   Commercial fee schedules.
Sec.
15-33.3.   Commercial fuel surcharge.
Division 4. Disposal Services
Sec.
15-34.   Basis for disposal services fees.
Sec.
15-34.1.   Disposal services fee requirements.
Sec.
15-34.2.   Residential self-haulers.
Sec.
15-34.3.   Commercial haulers.
Sec.
15-34.4.   Unrestrained or uncovered load fee.
Sec.
15-34.5.   Waiver of fee for landfill construction materials.
Sec.
15-34.6.   Disposal service agreement.
Sec.
15-34.7.   Disposal services fee schedule.
Sec.
15-34.8.   Disposal services contract fee schedule.
Sec.
15-34.9.   Disposal services fuel surcharge.
Sec.
15-35.   Exemption of fees for waste residue from nonprofit recycling
establishments.
Division 5. Special Fees
Sec.
15-36.   Groundwater protection.
Secs.
15-37--15-49.   Reserved.
Article VI. Disposal Facility Management – Reserved
Secs.
15-50--15-59.   Reserved.
Article VII. Plastic Bag Recycling
Sec.
15-60.   Plastic bag recycling.
Secs.
15-61--15-69. Reserved.
Article VIII. Litter Fee
Sec.
15-70.   Refuse collection permit.
Sec.
15-70.1.   Proceeds from the refuse collection permit.
Sec.
15-71.   Suspension or revocation of permits.
Secs.
15-72--15-79. Reserved.
Article IX. Waste Diversion Reporting
Sec.
15-80.   Refuse and recyclable material collection permit.
ARTICLE I.
DEFINITIONS
Sec. 15-1. Definitions.
   (A)   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where a
different meaning is specified:
   APC (Automated Plastic Containers) collection service means collection of
refuse or recyclable materials in APCs.
   Brush bulky service means collection of bulky wastes, not containing
garbage, placed in piles at the location designated by the director and in
accordance with requirements set by the director.
   Bulky waste means large items of solid waste such as ovens, washers, dryers,
freezers, water heaters, refrigerators, other household or commercial
appliances, furniture, large auto parts, trees, branches, stumps, and other
oversize wastes whose large size precludes or complicates their handling by
normal solid waste collection, processing, or disposal methods.
   Carryout bag means a bag that is provided by a retail establishment at the
check stand, cash register, point of sale or other point of departure to a
customer for the purpose of transporting food or merchandise out of the
establishment. Carryout bags do not include:
   (a)   bags used by customers inside stores to package bulk items such as
fruit, vegetables, nuts, grains, candy, greeting cards, or small hardware
items, such as nails and bolts, or to contain or wrap frozen foods, meat or
fish, whether prepackaged or not, or to contain or wrap flowers or potted
plants, or other items where dampness may be a problem, or to contain unwrapped
prepared foods or bakery goods, or to contain prescription drugs, or to
safeguard public health and safety during the transportation of prepared take-
out foods and prepared liquids intended for consumption away from the retail
establishment; or
   (b)   newspaper bags, door-hanger bags, laundry-dry cleaning bags, or bags
sold in packages containing multiple bags intended for use as garbage, pet
waste, or yard waste bags.
   City means the City of Tucson.
   City fuel price means the price the city pays for equipment fuel and shall
be adjusted quarterly to the average fuel price over the prior three (3)
months.
   Collection agency means the person, company, or governmental agency
responsible for collection of solid waste from a residential or commercial
establishment.
   Collection services means services the city provides to collect any type of
solid waste from residential and commercial establishments.
   Commercial establishment means any building, lot, or complex that is not a
residential establishment.
   Commercial fees means fees the city charges for front load and roll off
collection service to any type of customer, fees for APC collection service to
commercial establishments, and fees for any other collection service provided
to commercial establishments.
   Commercial hauler means a person who transports solid waste to a disposal
facility or who collects, transports, or disposes of solid waste for pecuniary
or proprietary gain, benefit, or advantage, or who transports solid waste that
was generated by any commercial activity, whether the commercial activity
occurred on a commercial or residential establishment.
   Container means any receptacle built to hold refuse and to be emptied by
solid waste collection equipment.
   Customer means any person or business entity that receives or utilizes
services or programs offered by the department.
   Department means the city's environmental services department.
   Director means the director of the city's environmental services department,
or the director's authorized designee(s).
   Disposal facility means any active landfill, inactive landfill, debris fill,
transfer station, temporary drop off site for any solid waste, waste storage
site, or waste processing facility.
   Disposal services means the operation and remediation of city disposal
facilities for public use or benefit. Disposal services include landfilling or
other processing of waste materials accepted at city disposal facilities.
   Dwelling unit means an independent living space with its own permanent
provisions for entrance/exit, living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
   Environmental services fee means the fee or fees charged for standard
residential collection services provided to residential establishments.
   Front load collection service means collection of solid waste in metal
containers emptied with front loading trucks.
   Garbage means all animal and vegetable or food wastes resulting from the
processing, handling, preparation, cooking or consumption of food or food
materials, or other such matter the accumulation of which may create a nuisance
or be deleterious to public health or offensive to sight or smell.
   Green waste means waste derived from plants, including tree limbs and
branches, stumps, grass clippings and other waste plant material. Green waste
does not include processed lumber, paper, cardboard and other manufactured
products that are derived from plant material.
   Guesthouse means a single dwelling unit on a lot with a conventional house.
   Household hazardous waste means certain types of solid waste acceptable to
the household hazardous waste program and facility in accordance with 40 CFR
261.
   Lot means a separate parcel as recorded in county records.
   Material recovery facility (MRF) means a lawfully zoned and operated site
used for the processing and storage of recyclable materials.
   Mobile home means a non-motorized dwelling, transportable in one (1) or more
sections, constructed on a permanent chassis with wheels, suitable for year-
round residential occupancy and requiring the same method of water supply,
waste disposal, and electrical service as a site-built dwelling. This term does
not include a recreational vehicle or a trailer with provisions for living.
   Mobile home park means five (5) or more mobile homes or active spaces for
mobile homes on a lot where each mobile home does not have an individual city
water meter.
   Multifamily establishment means any real property that has one or more
structures and that contains five or more dwelling units for rent or lease that
are subject to Arizona Revised Statutes Title 33, Chapter 10, "Arizona
Residential Landlord and Tenant Act". This term does not include mobile home
parks. This definition is intended to be consistent with "Multifamily
residential properties" as defined in Arizona Revised Statutes Section 49-746.
   Owner means one (1) or more persons, jointly or severally, in whom is vested
all or part of the legal title to property, or all or part of the beneficial
ownership of property. By way of illustration, and not limitation, the term
includes any person who is a mortgagee in possession, a trustee, a trustor, or
a general or limited partner in a partnership.
   Person includes a corporation, company, partnership, firm, association,
society, or other legal entity, as well as a natural person.
   Recreational vehicle park means land that is designated "RV" (Land Use Code,
§ 2.5.7) with "Traveler's Accommodation" as its principal Permitted Land Use.
   Recyclable materials means materials that are diverted from landfill
disposal facilities for beneficial use, as part of a public program or private
endeavor. The director may list the materials that qualify based on changing
markets and practices.
   Refuse means solid waste that contains garbage and is suitable for
collection with standard containers and municipal waste collection equipment.
   Resident means a person that lives in a dwelling unit and controls the
generation and placement of solid waste.
   Residential establishment means any building, lot, or complex whose primary
use is for one (1) or more dwelling units. This term includes any single family
residence, any property with four (4) or fewer dwelling units, any mobile home
that is not in a mobile home park, or any establishment where the customer has
qualified for the environmental services low income program. The term does not
include multi- family establishments , mobile home parks, or recreational
vehicle parks. The term does not include complexes of twenty-five (25) or more
town homes that have front load collection service.
   Residential self-hauler means any person delivering refuse or other solid
waste to a city- operated solid waste disposal facility who is not a commercial
hauler.
   Responsible party means an owner, occupant, tenant, lessor, lessee,
resident, manager, licensee, or other person, corporation, company,
partnership, association or society residing on, owning or having control over
a building, lot or complex, or who possesses, handles, stores or disposes of
solid waste.
   Retail establishment means a business making sales at retail, other than a
food service establishment, that owns or controls more than ten thousand
(10,000) square feet of total retail space, and has more than two (2) locations
within the city limits where twenty-five (25) percent or more of gross sales
include medicines and/or any food, drink, confection or condiment sold in pre-
packaged form and/or intended to be prepared off the premises.
   Roll off collection service means collection of solid waste in metal
containers that are loaded onto a truck and transported to a disposal facility
to be emptied.
   Salvaging means the removal of solid waste from a disposal facility,
collection site, collection container, or collection equipment with the
permission of the owner or collection agency and in accordance with
requirements set by the owner or collection agency.
   Scavenging means the removal of solid waste from a disposal facility,
collection site, collection container, or collection equipment without the
permission of the owner or collection agency, or not in accordance with
requirements set by the owner or collection agency.
   Single family residence means: (a) a "single family dwelling, detached" as
defined in the city land use code, or (b) a "single family dwelling, detached"
plus one guesthouse.
   Single use plastic bag means any carryout bag made from plastic or any
material marketed or labeled as "biodegradable" or "compostable" that is
neither intended nor suitable for continuous reuse as a carryout bag or that is
less than 0.75 mil thick.
   Single use plastic bags per transaction shall be defined as how many single
use plastic bags are given to each customer during a single purchase or
transaction. For example, if a store gives out one hundred thousand (100,000)
bags during a reporting period and has conducted twenty thousand (20,000)
transactions the number reported for that quarter will be five (5) bags per
transaction.
   Single use plastic bag recycling formula shall be defined as tons of single
use plastic bag and plastic film collected by the retail establishments single
use plastic bag and film plastic recycling collection program multiplied by
thirty percent (30%). For example, if the total single use plastic bag and film
plastic collected by retail establishments equals one hundred (100) tons, the
amount recorded for recycling will be one hundred (100) tons multiplied by
three tenths (0.30), or thirty (30) tons.
   Small business waste acceptance program means the program and related
facilities that accept certain types of solid waste from conditionally exempt
small quantity generators in accordance with 40 CFR 261.
   Small multifamily establishment means a multifamily establishment with five
(5) to twenty-four (24) dwelling units.
   Solid waste means discarded materials resulting from common activities in a
municipal community. This term includes refuse, garbage, recyclable materials,
construction debris, demolition debris, green waste, and food waste.
   Standard residential collection services means APC collection service once
per week for refuse and recyclable materials, and brush bulky service twice per
year. The director may designate the volume collected under standard
residential collection service.
   Town home means a dwelling unit that is designated for separate ownership on
property commonly owned solely by the owners of the separate dwelling units.
This term does not include separately owned dwelling units that are operated as
a multi-family establishment, however designated. The terms condominium and
townhouse have the same meaning.
   (B)   Words, terms, and phrases used in this chapter and not specifically
defined in this section shall have the meaning commonly understood in the solid
waste industry.
(Ord. No. 10539, § 1, 6-3-08, eff. 7-1-08; Ord. No. 10642, § 1, 3-24-09, eff.
9-24-09; Ord. No. 10674, § 1, 6-2-09, eff. 7-1-09; Ord. No. 10796, § 1, 5-25-
10, eff. 7-1-10; Ord. No. 10895, § 2, 5-17-11, eff. 7-1-11; Ord. No. 11056, §
1, 3-19-13, eff. 7-1-13; Ord. No. 11178, § 1, 6-3-14, eff. 7-4-14; Ord. No.
11272, § 1, 6-9-15, eff. 7-1-15; Ord. No. 11377, § 1, 6-21-16, eff. 7-5-16)
ARTICLE II.
ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 15-2. Purpose.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to preserve the health, safety and
welfare of the citizens of the city through the management of solid waste. This
purpose shall be achieved through the establishment of minimum standards for
the safe and sanitary collection, storage, transportation, beneficial use and
disposal of solid waste managed by the city or within the city.
   (B)   Whenever this chapter conflicts with any other portion of this Code,
this chapter shall prevail with respect to any matters relating to solid waste
management. The mayor and council for the city hereby determines that the
regulations contained in this chapter are necessary and appropriate to protect
the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter is intended or shall be construed to impinge
upon or supplant the authority of the Pima County Health Department, Arizona
Department of Health Services or other public agency with jurisdiction.
(Ord. No. 10539, § 2, 6-3-08, eff. 7-1-08)
Sec. 15-2.1. Department of environmental services established; director of
environmental services as head of department.
The department of environmental services is established. The head of the
department shall be the director of environmental services whose appointment,
compensation and removal shall be in accordance with sections
2,
6, and
11 of chapter V of the Charter.
(Ord. No. 10539, § 2, 6-3-08, eff. 7-1-08)
Sec. 15-2.2. Functions of the director.
   (A)   The director shall implement and enforce the provisions of this
chapter for the promotion of the public health and safety; to regulate and
control the storage, collection, disposal, and salvaging of solid waste within
the city; to provide a public disposal site or sites for solid waste
originating within the City of Tucson; and to remediate environmental problems
resulting from solid waste. The director shall direct the establishment,
maintenance and operation of such disposal site or sites. The director is
further authorized to provide and/or approve of recyclable material collection
sites, so that approved recyclable materials may be safely and expeditiously
handled, and to direct the development, construction, maintenance, and
operation of such sites. The director shall have the responsibility for
environmental assessments of city acquisitions and dispositions of interest in
real property.
   (B)   The director is hereby authorized and directed to make and impose
administrative and operational rules, procedures and regulations necessary to
the efficient implementation and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter
including, but not limited to:
   (1)   The collection, recycling, disposal, storage, salvaging, hauling and
accumulation of solid waste by the city, residents, contractors, or any other
person engaged in those activities or processes;
   (2)   The operation of a transfer station(s), disposal site(s), recycling
site(s), transfer site(s), temporary collection site(s), waste collection
program(s), recycling or waste reduction program(s) or similar activities or
other similar facilities as approved by the mayor and council;
   (3)   The formulation of administrative policies and procedures regarding
the collection of fees and applicable charges;
   (4)   Such rules, procedures and regulations shall be binding upon and
obeyed by all persons affected by this chapter after three (3) copies of any
such rules, procedures and regulations shall have been filed in the office of
the city clerk as a public record and there kept for use or inspection by any
member of the public at any time during the regular office hours of that
office. A printed copy of such rules, procedures and regulations shall be
furnished any member of the public upon request.
   (C)   It is a civil infraction to violate standards established in the
rules, procedures and regulations.
(Ord. No. 10539, § 2, 6-3-08, eff. 7-1-08)
Sec. 15-3. Suspension or revocation of services.
In addition to the sanctions provided herein, the city may suspend or revoke
any collection, recycling or disposal services and related facilities provided
by the city, or by a contractor to the city, whenever it is found that the user
of such collection, recycling, or disposal services, commits a serious or
repeated violation of the laws of the state, the county, this chapter, or any
rules, procedures and regulations promulgated hereunder, or fails to fully pay
charges lawfully due the city or reimburse the city its costs associated with
the remedying of any violation of any applicable health codes and ordinances of
the city, county, state, and federal government.
(Ord. No. 10539, § 2, 6-3-08, eff. 7-1-08)
Sec. 15-4. Reserved.
Sec. 15-5. Public nuisances, enforcement.
   (A)   Civil infraction declared. Unless otherwise specifically stated in
this chapter, a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be deemed a
public nuisance and is punishable as a civil infraction pursuant to chapter
8 of this Code.
   (B)   Authority to enforce. Any police or peace officer or city code
enforcement officer or designated refuse official (herein, citing official) who
observes a violation of any provision of this chapter or of any civil
infraction in other chapters of this Code relating to the management and
maintenance of private property or waste collection within the city is
empowered to issue a citation or seek a complaint. This includes, but is not
limited to, sections in this Code where notices of violation may be issued by
any department. Prior to issuing a citation or seeking a complaint, the officer
or official may, in his or her discretion, issue a written notice of violation
allowing the alleged violator to remedy the complaint. An officer or official
may issue a citation without first issuing a notice of violation.
   (C)   Service. Service of a written notice of violation shall be deemed
effective on the date when written notice is hand delivered or on the date when
written notice is mailed by first class mail. Any notice served by first class
mail shall be mailed to the last known address of the owner, the owner's
authorized agent or the owner's statutory agent and to the address to which the
tax bill for the property was last mailed. If the premises are unoccupied,
service may be made by posting the notice in a conspicuous place on the
property such as a front door, entrance gate, or wall. Service of a notice of
violation to a commercial hauler in violation of the litter fee shall be mailed
to the commercial hauler's business address.
   (D)   Proceedings. Any civil infraction proceedings to enforce the
provisions of this chapter shall be commenced, and summons shall be issued in
accordance with the procedures set forth in Arizona Revised Statutes, city
ordinance or as provided in the Local Rules of Practice and Procedure - City
Court - City of Tucson. If the city is unable to personally serve the
complaint, the complaint may be served in the same manner prescribed for
alternative methods of service by the Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure or by
certified or registered mail, return receipt requested.
(Ord. No. 10539, § 2, 6-3-08, eff. 7-1-08; Ord. No. 10796, § 2, 5-25-10, eff.
7-1-10)
Sec. 15-6. Parties liable.
Any resident or responsible party is jointly and individually liable for
complying with the provisions of this chapter and for any violations thereof
which may occur on or about or issue from the property upon which the solid
waste, refuse, garbage, debris or recyclable material is kept, accumulated,
stored, salvaged or disposed from. Multiple residents sharing a refuse
container or containers shall be jointly and individually strictly liable for
complying with all the provisions of this chapter with regard to the placement
and use of refuse containers.
(Ord. No. 10539, § 2, 6-3-08, eff. 7-1-08)
Sec. 15-7. Administrative appeal process.
   (A)   Customers objecting to the actions, policies, or decisions of the
department may informally appeal by contacting the billing office supervisor or
administrator. If the problem is not resolved, the customer may request a
formal administrative hearing as described in subsection (B) below by
completing the request form established by the director.
   (B)   The director shall appoint a hearing officer to resolve customer
disputes on billing or other issues. For any particular dispute, the hearing
officer shall have had no previous involvement with the customer's case. In the
event that such involvement exists, the director shall designate another
hearing officer. This hearing officer shall be authorized to make a decision as
to the validity of the customer's dispute, and, if the customer's dispute is
found to be valid, make the appropriate corrections to the customer's account,
including the potential removal of delinquent service charges. If the hearing
officer requires a more complete set of facts than can be gathered at the time
of the hearing, the officer shall make whatever investigation is necessary
before rendering a decision. The hearing officer's determination is final.
   (C)   The customer's service(s) shall not be terminated until and unless the
hearing officer completes the investigation and finds the customer's dispute to
be without merit. However, as to any matters not in dispute, the hearing
process does not relieve the customer of the obligation to pay bills for
services rendered. The customer must continue to pay, in a timely manner, all
bills received or be subject to delinquent service charges when applicable.
(Ord. No. 10539, § 2, 6-3-08, eff. 7-1-08)
Secs. 15-8, 15-9. Reserved.
ARTICLE III.
COMMUNITY STANDARDS FOR SOLID WASTE STORAGE AND REMOVAL
Sec. 15-10. General applicability.
Unless otherwise specifically stated in this section, the standards set forth
in this article apply to any person, business or other entity that generates,
stores, transports, or processes solid waste.
(Ord. No. 10539, § 4, 6-3-08, eff. 7-1-08)
Sec. 15-10.1. Standards for storage and removal of solid waste.
   (A)   Any person, business or other entity that generates refuse or
recyclable materials must place the waste materials into the container(s)
designated for the property where the waste is generated. Refuse must be
removed from the property and transported to a permitted disposal facility
frequently enough to maintain sanitary conditions.
   (B)   Containers shall be rigid, durable, corrosion resistant, nonabsorbent,
watertight, rodent-proof, easily cleanable, suitable for handling, and equipped
with a tight fitting cover that prevents material from overflowing, spilling,
or scattering onto surrounding premises. All containers and their enclosures
shall be maintained in a sanitary and fire-preventive condition.
   (C)   Each residential or commercial establishment that generates waste must
have sufficient capacity in a sufficient number of containers to contain all
waste with the lid closed. Except in the case of bulky material collection,
storage of solid waste outside a container at the point of collection is
prohibited.
   (D)   Each residential or commercial establishment where the volume of solid
waste generated cannot be conveniently contained in APC containers with
capacity of three hundred (300) gallons or less shall obtain collection service
in metal containers.
   (E)   Each dwelling unit must have a minimum of forty-five (45) gallons of
refuse container capacity available for use during the period between scheduled
collection services. The director may waive capacity standards on a case-by-
case basis.
   (F)   Garbage must be placed in plastic bags that are tightly closed.
   (G)   The director or designee may enter any property where waste is
generated to inspect containers or stored solid waste for compliance with the
requirements of this code.
(Ord. No. 10539, § 4, 6-3-08, eff. 7-1-08; Ord. No. 10674, § 2, 6-2-09, eff. 7-
1-09; Ord. No. 10986, § 1, 5-22-12, eff. 7-1-12)
Sec. 15-10.2. Prohibited materials.
   (A)   Prohibited materials may not be placed in refuse or recycling
containers, in bulky material piles, in collection equipment, or in disposal
facilities. Prohibited material is any waste which because of its amount, size,
concentration, physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may pose a
threat to human health or the environment as determined by the director.
   (B)   Prohibited materials include but are not limited to materials
prohibited by state or federal law and materials that the director designates
in administrative rule.
(Ord. No. 10539, § 4, 6-3-08, eff. 7-1-08)
Sec. 15-10.3. Scavenging prohibited.
No person shall scavenge or otherwise disturb solid waste placed out for
collection by a collection agency. Once placed out for collection solid waste
becomes the property of the collection agency.
(Ord. No. 10539, § 4, 6-3-08, eff. 7-1-08)
Sec. 15-10.4. Hauling of solid waste.
It is a civil infraction for any person to haul or cause to be hauled on or
along any public street or alley any refuse unless it shall be contained in
vehicles or receptacles so constructed and maintained to prevent the contents
from falling, leaking, spilling or being otherwise lost or ejected from such
vehicle or receptacle, and to prevent flies, insects or rodents from having
access to contents. Each such vehicle or receptacle shall have securely
fastened thereto a cover, which may be a tarpaulin, netting or similar
material, of sufficient density and strength as to prevent ejection or loss of
any refuse from the vehicle or receptacle. Every person hauling any refuse on
or along any street or alley shall replace immediately in the conveyance used
for such hauling any of the contents which fall into or upon any street, alley
or public or private property.
(Ord. No. 10539, § 4, 6-3-08, eff. 7-1-08)
Sec. 15-10.5. Commercial recycling facilities.
Property used as a multi-material recycling center, sorting facility,
composting facility, materials recovery facility, and the like is exempt from
the prohibitions of Tucson Code chapter
16 pertaining to uncontained refuse, debris, recyclable materials or vegetation
as long as the materials are kept within the property barriers or fences on the
property and the property and business operations are properly zoned and
permitted by the city, county or state and in compliance with Tucson Code
section
16-13. Refuse, debris, recyclable materials or vegetation are only exempt under
this section if they are properly contained or stored for use as a commodity,
are not waste materials produced by the enterprise for landfill disposal, are
maintained in accordance with applicable sections of Tucson Code chapter
16 (as for composting), and are so maintained as to prevent any fire, health or
safety hazard to the occupants of the property or to neighboring inhabitants,
structures, or property.
(Ord. No. 10539, § 4, 6-3-08, eff. 7-1-08)
Secs. 15-11--15-15. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV.
CITY RESIDENTIAL AND COMMERCIAL COLLECTION SERVICES
Sec. 15-16. Collection from residential establishments by persons or entities
other than the city prohibited.
The collection of refuse or recyclable materials from any residential
establishment by any person, business, corporation or firm other than the city
is prohibited.
(Ord. No. 10539, § 4, 6-3-08, eff. 7-1-08)
Sec. 15-16.1. City collection services at residential establishments.
   (A)   Residential establishments that are capable of being occupied are
required to receive standard residential collection services and pay the
commensurate fee in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Residential establishments shall use only the containers issued by the
city for refuse and recycling collection, unless otherwise authorized by the
director, and shall not remove them from the intended establishment. Any
customer who removes a container or uses a container removed from a different
establishment shall be charged the account reconciliation fee.
   (C)   The director shall determine the point of collection, the method of
collection, the volume, the frequency of service, and the number of containers
issued to each residential establishment.
   (D)   The point of collection shall be immediately adjacent to or in a
public right-of- way wherever feasible, as determined by the director. A
customer may request the point of collection be moved from the location
determined by the director to where collection vehicles must enter private
property. Where the director approves a request, a permission agreement is
required and the customer is charged the private driveway fee in addition to
other fees, unless waived.
   (E)   The director may issue additional containers, and charge commensurate
fees, to residential establishments that consistently demonstrate inadequate
refuse container capacity to maintain sanitary conditions.
   (F)   Any residential establishment with an assisted living home license
shall have a minimum of one hundred eighty (180) gallons of weekly-serviced
refuse container capacity unless the director determines that less capacity is
adequate to maintain sanitary conditions.
   (G)   Shared front load service with a fee charged to individual dwelling
units shall be provided only upon the director's determination that it is the
most feasible method due to site and/or ownership conditions.
(Ord. No. 10539, § 4, 6-3-08, eff. 7-1-08; Ord. No. 10674, § 3, 6-2-09, eff. 7-
1-09; Ord. No. 10895, § 3, 5-17-11, eff. 7-1-11; Ord. No. 10986, § 2, 5-22-12,
eff. 7-1-12; Ord. No. 11272, § 2, 6-9-15, eff. 7-1-15)
Sec. 15-16.2. Customer responsibilities regarding recycling collection service.
Customers at residential and commercial establishments shall place in city
recycling containers only those recyclable materials designated as acceptable
by the director in this chapter and in administrative rules. Customers shall
handle specific types of recyclable materials in accordance with this chapter
and administrative rules.
(Ord. No. 10539, § 4, 6-3-08, eff. 7-1-08)
Sec. 15-16.3. Parameters for brush bulky collection service.
   (A)   Residential establishments will be provided brush bulky collection
service two (2) times each calendar year according to a schedule established by
the director. Up to ten (10) cubic yards of material requiring no more than
fifteen (15) minutes of collection effort will be collected from each
residential establishment at each scheduled service as part of standard
residential collection services.
   (B)   Commercial establishments primarily used for dwelling units will be
provided brush bulky service as part of standard commercial APC collection
service.
   (C)   Commercial establishments may obtain, with director approval,
collection service for bulky waste for the same fees as for special residential
brush bulky service as designated in this chapter.
   (D)   Vacant lots are not eligible to receive brush bulky service.
(Ord. No. 10539, § 4, 6-3-08, eff. 7-1-08; Ord. No. 10674, § 3, 6-2-09, eff. 7-
1-09)
Sec. 15-16.4. Assisted collection service to residential establishments.
A resident who has a qualified disability, under the Americans with
Disabilities Act, that prevents him/her using normal refuse or recycling
collection services at a residential establishment may request assisted
collection service. The requirements for assisted collection service shall be
established in administrative rule. Assisted collection service is provided
without additional fee.
(Ord. No. 10539, § 4, 6-3-08, eff. 7-1-08; Ord. No. 10674, § 3, 6-2-09, eff. 7-
1-09; Ord. No. 10796, § 3, 5-25-10, eff. 7-1-10)
Sec. 15-16.5. Temporary suspension of service.
   (A)   The director may temporarily suspend residential services and
commensurate fees at a residential establishment when the customer requests it
and it is feasible. The suspension may last up to eight (8) months, after which
time the fees will resume and service will resume when the customer requests
it. The department will pick up all containers when the suspension is
requested. APC removal and delivery fee shall be charged when the department
picks up containers for a temporary suspension.
   (B)   A customer that attempts to use any residential services during the
suspension period will be back billed for entire suspension period and will be
charged the account reconciliation fee.
(Ord. No. 10539, § 4, 6-3-08, eff. 7-1-08; Ord. No. 10895, § 3, 5-17-11, eff.
7-1-11)
Sec. 15-16.6. Neighborhood cleanup service.
   Neighborhood cleanup services can be provided to: registered City of Tucson
neighborhood associations (NAs), homeowners associations (HOAs), and
neighborhood enhancement programs designated by mayor and council. Outside a NA
or an HOA, neighborhood cleanup services can also be provided for cleanup of
public property or multiple private properties when requested by at least ten
(10) residential establishments paying the standard residential fee and when
the director deems that the cleanup improves a significant area of the
community. Neighborhood cleanup service consists of temporary roll off
collection service. The service can only be provided for no additional fee to
approved groups where all residential establishments are paying for standard
residential service. Neighborhood cleanup services require advance scheduling,
are limited by appropriated funds, and are subject to requirements established
in administrative rule.
(Ord. No. 10539, § 4, 6-3-08, eff. 7-1-08; Ord. No. 10674, § 3, 6-2-09, eff. 7-
1-09; Ord. No. 10986, § 2, 5-22-12, eff. 7-1-12; Ord. No. 11178, § 2, 6-3-14,
eff. 7-4-14)
Sec. 15-16.7. City collection service at commercial establishments.
Each commercial establishment shall arrange for an adequate level of collection
service from the city, or shall demonstrate other adequate management of
refuse, as determined by the director.
(Ord. No. 10539, § 4, 6-3-08, eff. 7-1-08)
Sec. 15-16.8. Violations of city collection service requirements.
   (A)   The director may issue notices to responsible parties at residential
or commercial establishments when the director identifies violations of the
requirements contained in this chapter or in an administrative rule or
regulation under this chapter.
   (B)   If three (3) or more notices for the same or related violation are
issued in any twelve (12) month period, then beginning with the third notice,
the director shall impose the following fees for processing the violation
notices the director issues:
   (1)   Third notice . . . . . $10.00
   (2)   Fourth or subsequent notice . . . . . 25.00
   (C)   A responsible party that has been issued three (3) notices for a
recycling container contaminated with unacceptable material shall be designated
a nonparticipant and charged a ten dollar ($10.00) fee. The director will
remove the recycling container, deliver a substitute refuse container, and
impose the fee for an additional refuse container. Recycling service will be
restored and the additional refuse container removed with director approval.
   (D)   It is a civil infraction for a customer at a residential establishment
to fail to pay fees for city residential services and thereby causing a
violation of any of the requirements of section
15-10.1. The fine for this infraction shall be between a minimum of seventy
five dollars ($75.00) and a maximum of three hundred dollars ($300.00). In lieu
of a fine, the court may substitute community service at a rate of ten dollars
($10) per hour.
(Ord. No. 10539, § 4, 6-3-08, eff. 7-1-08; Ord. No. 10674, § 3, 6-2-09, eff. 7-
1-09; Ord. No. 10895, § 3, 5-17-11, eff. 7-1-11; Ord. No. 11087, § 1, 6-18-13,
eff. 7-20-13)
Secs. 15-17--15-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE V.
CITY FEES AND CHARGES FOR RESIDENTIAL COLLECTION, COMMERCIAL COLLECTION, AND
DISPOSAL SERVICES
DIVISION 1.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 15-31. Declaration of purpose; intent of mayor and council.
   This article is enacted for the purpose of equitably securing funds with
which to pay the expenses arising from collection and disposal services the
city provides to residential and commercial establishments. It is the intent of
the mayor and council that the provisions of this article shall be construed
and interpreted, where necessary, to achieve such purpose.
(Ord. No. 10539, § 5, 6-3-08, eff. 7-1-08; Ord. No. 10986, § 3, 5-22-12, eff.
7-1-12; Ord. No. 11272, § 3, 6-9-15, eff. 7-1-15)
Sec. 15-31.1. Deposits and refunds.
   The director may require receipt of a deposit prior to beginning service.
When the account is terminated the adjusted value of the deposit shall be
computed by adding interest actually accrued on the deposit, with the interest
rate set at the average market rate earned by the City of Tucson's investment
pool during the past twelve (12) months. The adjusted value of the deposit will
be applied against any unpaid balance, and the remainder will be refunded to
the customer.
(Ord. No. 10674, § 4, 6-2-09, eff. 7-1-09; Ord. No. 10895, § 4, 5-17-11, eff.
7-1-11)
Sec. 15-31.2. Returned checks.
The city may impose a reasonable charge to handle the processing of checks
received as payment for fees from this chapter, when such checks are returned
for nonpayment for any reason.
(Ord. No. 10674, § 4, 6-2-09, eff. 7-1-09)
Sec. 15-31.3. Billing account activation.
   An account activation fee shall be charged when a billing account is
initiated for each residential, commercial, or disposal customer at each
service location.
(Ord. No. 10895, § 4, 5-17-11, eff. 7-1-11)
Sec. 15-31.4. Payment terms.
   Payment terms for billed fees under this chapter shall match the payment
terms in
chapter 27. For purposes of this section, "payment terms" means when bills are
due, the account balance triggering delinquency notices, the timing of
delinquency notices, the termination of accounts for delinquency, and directly
related terms.
(Ord. No. 10986, § 3, 5-22-12, eff. 7-1-12)
Sec. 15-31.5. Discontinuance of service for non-payment.
   If the delinquent balance of a customer's account is not paid within the
time frame designated in
chapter 27 for turn-off of water services, regardless of whether water charges
are included in the account, the director may discontinue services by not
collecting material, removing containers, and/or denying use of disposal
facilities. Customers with accounts in non-payment status must relinquish city
containers upon notice from the director.
(Ord. No. 10986, § 3, 5-22-12, eff. 7-1-12)
Sec. 15-31.6. Penalty Fees for non-payment.
   A penalty fee shall be charged to accounts with monthly charges over the
amount triggering a first written notice in
chapter 27, section
27-50 when the monthly charges are not paid within thirty (30) days of bill
date. The amount of the penalty fee shall be ten percent (10%) of the monthly
charges but the penalty fee shall not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) and
shall not be less than ten dollars ($10.00).
(Ord. No. 10986, § 3, 5-22-12, eff. 7-1-12)
Sec. 15-31.7. Service agreements.
   The director is authorized to prepare, enter into, implement, and administer
agreements for the services provided under this chapter. The service agreement
shall include the appropriate fees established pursuant to this chapter. The
service agreement may contain terms and conditions upon which service shall be
provided, payment terms, and penalty fees for non-payment. The service
agreement may contain such additional provisions as are within the custom and
practice of the industry, or are deemed necessary by the director.
(Ord. No. 10986, § 3, 5-22-12, eff. 7-1-12)
Sec. 15-31.8. Change of address.
   Customers shall notify the department of any change in mailing address, and/
or change in ownership/ responsible party within fifteen (15) days of the date
of change.
(Ord. No. 10986, § 3, 5-22-12, eff. 7-1-12)
Sec. 15-31.9. Pilot programs and fees.
   The director is authorized to establish pilot programs and fees to recover
the costs, for a period of up to one (1) year for purposes of evaluating the
feasibility of alternative solid waste collection or disposal programs.
(Ord. No. 10986, § 3, 5-22-12, eff. 7-1-12)
DIVISION 2.
RESIDENTIAL COLLECTION
Sec. 15-32. Basis for residential fees.
   (A)   Fees for APC collection, brush bulky collection, and special
collection services to residential establishments are based on the number of
dwelling units using the containers, and the volume and frequency of service. A
single family residence shall be counted as one dwelling unit. Fees for front
load or roll off services to residential establishments are based on the type,
volume, and frequency of service, and shall be the same as commercial fees for
these services.
   (B)   Individual fee for shared front load service. The fee for shared front
load service may be charged to customers at individual dwelling units when 1) a
complex has no common owner or manager to be billed for front load service, and
2) front load collection service is the only feasible method of refuse and
recycling service for the complex.
(Ord. No. 10539, § 5, 6-3-08, eff. 7-1-08; Ord. No. 10674, § 5, 6-2-09, eff. 7-
1-09)
Sec. 15-32.1. Responsibility for residential fee.
   (A)   The fees specified in this chapter for services provided to
residential establishments are imposed on the customer of record of each
residential establishment, as indicated in the department's records. The
customer of record is responsible for paying all charges for the provision of
services to a residential establishment, regardless of whether the customer of
record or another person has actually used the services. Where the
establishment receives city water service, the customer of record for services
from this chapter shall be the same person as the customer of record for city
water services, unless the director accepts an alternate person designated by
the owner.
   (B)   The director may elect to pursue collection of any outstanding charges
from the owner of the property if the customer of record does not pay for any
outstanding charges. In such a case, ownership of the property or premises
shall be determined by reference to public records maintained by the Pima
County Recorder's Office.
(Ord. No. 10539, § 5, 6-3-08, eff. 7-1-08; Ord. No. 10674, § 5, 6-2-09, eff. 7-
1-09; Ord. No. 10796, § 4, 5-25-10, eff. 7-1-10)
Sec. 15-32.2. Requirements for payment of residential fees.
   (A)   Initiation. Initiation of billing for services to a residential
establishment shall coincide with initiation of billing for city water service.
The charges for residential services for an account that does not have city
water charges shall begin when the customer becomes responsible, by virtue of
being the owner, renter, or authorized occupant, for the generation of solid
waste. The charges for residential services to a newly-constructed
establishment shall begin when the containers are delivered. The director, as a
condition precedent to providing collection services to any customer, shall
collect any amounts the customer owes the city for charges required by this
chapter or chapter
27. The account activation fee shall be charged when billing is initiated.
   (B)   Deposit for accounts without city water service. A customer who does
not have a city water account shall pay the residential account deposit when
the account for residential services is established, unless waived by the
director. When the account is terminated, the deposit may be refunded in
accordance with section
15-31.1.
   (C)   Termination. Termination of billing for the fees herein shall coincide
with termination of billing for city water service when both are provided. The
charges for residential services for an account that does not have a city water
account shall end when the services are stopped due to the customer notifying
the department or due to delinquency.
   (D)   Container delivery fees. The APC delivery fee shall be charged when
the number of containers at an establishment is increased, and when a customer
requests a change in container size (first two (2) per customer at
establishment are exempted). The APC removal/delivery fee shall be charged when
the department delivers containers at the initiation of an account that does
not have city water charges, and when the department picks up containers from a
customer who has requested a temporary suspension of residential services.
   (E)   Penalty fees. No penalty fees pursuant to section
15-31.6 shall be charged on residential fees.
(Ord. No. 10539, § 5, 6-3-08, eff. 7-1-08; Ord. No. 10674, § 5, 6-2-09, eff. 7-
1-09; Ord. No. 10796, § 4, 5-25-10, eff. 7-1-10; Ord. No. 10895, § 5, 5-17-11,
eff. 7-1-11; Ord. No. 10986, § 4, 5-22-12, eff. 7-1-12; Ord. No. 11272, § 4, 6-
9-15, eff. 7-1-15)
Sec. 15-32.3. Fees for level of service.
   The fees to be charged for standard residential collection services are
listed in the table in section
15-32.5. The director is authorized to charge additional fees as listed in the
table in section
15-32.5, or elsewhere in this chapter, to residential establishments that
receive additional or different service.
(Ord. No. 10539, § 5, 6-3-08, eff. 7-1-08; Ord. No. 10796, § 4, 5-25-10, eff.
7-1-10)
Sec. 15-32.4. Environmental services low income assistance program.
   (A)   Residential customers meeting Federal low income guidelines may be
eligible for the environmental services low income assistance credit from the
environmental services fund if they meet the requirements herein.
   (B)   Customers must reside in a residential establishment that receives APC
collection service, or shared metal service, and must directly pay the
environmental services fee on their city utility bill. Each customer may
receive the credit for services to only one dwelling unit.
   (C)   Customers must apply for the discount in writing on the application
forms approved by the director. Applications must include written proof of
income in the form determined by the director. Applications must be complete
and must have the customer’s original signature. The director may contact the
customer to verify or obtain additional information needed to process the
application.
   (D)   Eligibility will be determined before each benefit period.
   (E)   Once eligibility is verified, the credit shall be applied against each
monthly bill with the environmental services fee. The director may review
eligibility when there is a material change to the account, including, but not
limited to, customer account information or usage, and the director may
periodically audit accounts to verify whether they remain eligible. A prorated
credit shall be applied whenever the customer is eligible for only part of a
month or receives service for only part of a month.
   (F)   Customers may appeal determinations of eligibility or timing of credit
by following the administrative dispute process in this chapter.
(Ord. No. 10539, § 5, 6-3-08, eff. 7-1-08; Ord. No. 10674, § 5, 6-2-09, eff. 7-
1-09; Ord. No. 10796, § 4, 5-25-10, eff. 7-1-10; Ord. No. 10895, § 5, 5-17-11,
eff. 7-1-11; Ord. No. 11377, § 2, 6-21-16, eff. 7-5-16; Ord. No. 11519, § 1, 1-
23-18)
Sec. 15-32.5. Residential fee schedules.
The fees for collection services to residential establishments shall be as
follows:
RESIDENTIAL COLLECTION SERVICE FEES
Service Refuse Container size (gallons) Fees
RESIDENTIAL COLLECTION SERVICE FEES
Service                    Refuse Container size  Fees
                           (gallons)
Standard                   48                     $21.25 per month
Standard                   65                     $22.25 per month
Standard                   95                     $23.00 per month
Standard                   Any shared alley APC   $22.25 per month per
                                                  dwelling unit
Standard                   300 sole use           $54.25 per month per
                                                  container
Individual fee for shared                         $22.25 per month per
front load weekly refuse   Any                    dwelling unit
and recycling service
Additional refuse          Less than 100          $17.25 per month per
                                                  additional container
                           Each 30 gallon bag (or
Additional bag of refuse   equivalent) of refuse  $5.00 each
                           placed outside of
                           container
Additional service per     Any                    $31.25 per pickup per
week                                              container
Additional brush bulky     Above 10 cubic yards   $5.00 per cubic yard
service volume
Additional brush bulky     Above 15 minutes       $25.00 per each 15 minute
service time                                      interval
Special brush bulky                               $55.00 per event plus any
service                    Up to 10 cubic yards   applicable additional
                                                  service fees
                                                  $10.00 per month in
Private driveway           Any                    addition to other
                                                  applicable fees
Low income assistance      Any                    $12.00 per month
credit
APC delivery fee           Any                    $25.00
APC removal/delivery fee   Any                    $50.00
APC special order          Any                    $48.00 per initial delivery
container
Residential account        Any                    $5.00
activation fee
Residential account        Any                    $50.00
deposit
Account reconciliation fee Any                    $50.00
Household Hazardous Waste  Per visit              $25.00
Home Pickup
 
   The following requirements apply to residential APC services:
   (1)   The additional refuse container fee is imposed for each refuse
container of one hundred (100) gallons or less in addition to the first
container of one hundred (100) gallons or less per dwelling unit, or in
addition to shared three hundred (300) gallon service.
   (2)   A “sole use” three hundred-gallon container is dedicated for the
exclusive use of one residential establishment. A sole use three hundred-gallon
container is only permitted on private property where it is not available to
residents of other establishments.
(Ord. No. 10539, § 5, 6-3-08, eff. 7-1-08; Ord. No. 10674, § 5, 6-2-09, eff. 7-
1-09; Ord. No. 10796, § 4, 5-25-10, eff. 7-1-10; Ord. No. 10895, § 5, 5-17-11,
eff. 7-1-11; Ord. No. 10986, § 4, 5-22-12, eff. 7-1-12; Ord. No. 11087, § 2, 6-
18-13, eff. 7-20-13; Ord. No. 11983, § 2, 1-11-23, eff. 1-1-24)
Sec. 15-32.6. APC collection fuel surcharge.
   A fuel surcharge shall be added to the monthly fees for collection services
to residential or commercial establishments with APC services. The surcharge
shall be three cents ($0.03) per month for each ten cents ($0.10) of city fuel
price above three dollars and thirty cents ($3.30) per gallon. The surcharge
shall be revised every three (3) months based on the updated city fuel price.
(Ord. No. 10796, § 4, 5-25-10, eff. 7-1-10; Ord. No. 10895, § 5, 5-17-11, eff.
7-1-11)
Sec. 15-32.7. APC collection recycling surcharge.
   A recycling surcharge shall be added to the monthly fees for collection
services to residential or commercial establishments with APC services. The
surcharge shall not be added to APC service fees below fifteen dollars
($15.00)/month. The surcharge shall be applied to each APC recycling container
at locations with front load refuse collection service. The surcharge shall be
based on the quarterly revenue from the city's recycling processor. The maximum
value of the surcharge shall be when this quarterly revenue is zero dollars
($0), and the value of the surcharge shall be zero dollars ($0) when this
quarterly revenue exceeds one hundred eighty-seven thousand five hundred
dollars ($187,500) (equivalent to seven hundred fifty thousand dollars
[$750,000] per year). The surcharge shall be revised every quarter (three [3]
months) based on the quarterly revenue from the city's recycling processor for
the most recent three (3) months. The value of the surcharge shall be as
follows:
 
APC COLLECTION RECYCLING SURCHARGE
Range of Annual Recycling Range of Equivalent Quarterly APC Recycling Surcharge
Revenue                   Recycling Revenue
Below $250,001            Below $62,500                 $0.45/month
$250,001 to $500,000      $62,501 to $125,000           $0.30/month
$501,000 to $750,000      $125,001 to $187,500          $0.15/month
Above $750,000            Above $187,500                $0/month
 
(Ord. No. 11377, § 3, 6-21-16, eff. 7-5-16)
DIVISION 3.
COMMERCIAL COLLECTION
Sec. 15-33. Basis for commercial fees.
   Fees for any commercial collection service are based on the type, volume,
and frequency of service, and the type of property use.
(Ord. No. 10539, § 5, 6-3-08, eff. 7-1-08; Ord. No. 11377, § 4, 6-21-16, eff.
7-5-16)
Sec. 15-33.1. Commercial fee requirements.
   (A)   Commercial fees are subject to the requirements of this section and of
administrative rules and regulations under this chapter.
   (B)   Service agreements. Commercial establish-ments may obtain city
collection services by entering into a service agreement with the city. The
service agreement shall be signed by the person responsible for paying fees at
the establishment. The requirements of section
15-31 shall apply unless the director authorizes otherwise within the service
agreement.
(Ord. No. 10539, § 5, 6-3-08, eff. 7-1-08; Ord. No. 10986, § 5, 5-22-12, eff.
7-1-12; Ord. No. 11377, § 4, 6-21-16, eff. 7-5-16)
Sec. 15-33.2. Commercial fee schedules.
   (A)   Front load collection service fees. The monthly fees for front load
collection service (without compaction) are as follows:
FRONT LOAD COLLECTION SERVICE MONTHLY FEES
Container size Collections per week
               1 per two weeks 1 2 3 4 5 6
FRONT LOAD COLLECTION SERVICE MONTHLY FEES
Container size  Collections per week
                1 per two weeks 1       2       3       4       5       6
Refuse           
2 to 3 cu. yds. $73.00          $105.00 $175.00 $245.00 $315.00 $385.00 $455.00
4 cu. yds.      $75.00          $111.00 $186.00 $262.00 $337.00 $411.00 $490.00
6 cu. yds.      $78.00          $122.00 $209.00 $296.00 $383.00 $471.00 $557.00
8 cu. yds.      $81.00          $133.00 $232.00 $330.00 $429.00 $527.00 $625.00
Recycling        
With ES refuse
service - any   $55.00          $55.00  $83.00  $110.00 $138.00 $165.00
size
Without ES
refuse service  $88.00          $88.00  $146.00 $205.00 $263.00 $328.00
- any size
Container delivery: $55.00 for any number per request
Additional recycling container (with ES refuse service) onsite any size: $15.00
Additional refuse service per week: $33.00 per pickup per 2 to 4 cubic yard
container, $39.00 per 6 cubic yard, $44.00 per 8 cubic yard
Additional recycle service per week: $33.00 per pickup all sizes
Container cleaning at customer request: $110.00 per event per container
Container painting at customer request: $165.00 per event per container
 
   (B)   Compacted front load collection service fees. The monthly fees for
front load collection service with compaction in containers shall be as
follows:
COMPACTED FRONT LOAD COLLECTION SERVICE MONTHLY FEES
Container size Collections per week
               1 2 3 4 5 6
Refuse
COMPACTED FRONT LOAD COLLECTION SERVICE MONTHLY FEES
Container size  Collections per week
                1       2       3       4       5       6
Refuse
2 to 3 cu. yds. $130.00 $227.00 $294.00 $382.00 $517.00 $613.00
4 cu. yds.      $146.00 $257.00 $336.00 $437.00 $591.00 $705.00
6 cu. yds.      $176.00 $319.00 $418.00 $548.00 $747.00 $888.00
8 cu. yds.      $207.00 $381.00 $502.00 $660.00 $899.00 $1,073.00
Additional fee for leasing city compactor: $330.00 per month per
compactor
Container delivery: $55.00 for any number per request
Additional service per week: $49.00 per pickup per container
Container cleaning at customer request: $110.00 per event per container
Container painting at customer request: $165.00 per event per container
 
   (C)   Roll off collection service. The fees for roll off collection service
are as follows:
ROLL OFF COLLECTION SERVICE FEES
ROLL OFF COLLECTION SERVICE FEES
Refuse open top service                 
                                       $182.00 per pull plus landfill disposal
20, 30, 40 cu. yds.                    fees for services contracted before
                                       update
Recycle open top service                
                                       $143.00 per pull for services contracted
                                       before update
20, 30, 40 cu. yds.                    Loads which are not of standard
                                       recyclable materials will be charged the
                                       disposal fee from the receiving facility
Roll off compactor service              
                                       $182.00 per pull plus disposal fees for
                                       services
20, 30, 40 cu. yds.                    contracted before update
                                       Installation, removal and monthly lease
                                       fees also apply for city compactors.
Disposal fees                          Weight of contents times the applicable
                                       disposal fee from the receiving facility
                                       $72.00 per container for services
Initial delivery                       contracted on or after update
                                       $88.00 per container for services
                                       contracted before update
                                       $72.00 per container for services
Relocation                             contracted on or after update
                                       $88.00 per container for services
                                       contracted before update
                                       $72.00 per event per container for
Failed service attempt                 services contracted on or after update
                                       $88.00 per event per container for
                                       services contracted before update
Container cleaning at customer request $165.00 per event per container
Container painting at customer request $220.00 per event per container
Lease of city compactor and receiver   $341.00 per month per compactor plus box
box
Lease of city compactor receiver box   $110.00 per month per box
only
Base compactor installation            $1,045.00 per compactor
Base compactor removal                 $550.00 per compactor
 
 
The following requirements apply to roll off services:
   (1)   Scheduled/permanent roll off container service agreements are required
when a customer has a roll off at the same location for ninety (90) days or
more. At a minimum one roll off pull fee will be charged every thirty (30) days
for permanent service.
   (2)   Unscheduled/temporary roll off container service agreements are
required when a customer has a roll off at the same location for less than
ninety (90) days. Customers must contact the department when the container
needs to be emptied. At a minimum one roll off pull fee will be charged every
fifteen (15) days for unscheduled/temporary service.
   (3)   For purposes of this section, the terms are defined as follows:
   (a)   "Pull" means emptying a roll off container and returning it to the
site if needed.
   (b)   "Initial delivery" means the first time each container is delivered to
a site.
   (c)   "Relocation" means moving a container on the same site without
emptying it.
   (d)   "Failed service attempt" means a truck arrived at a container site but
a problem caused by the customer prevented service (also called a "dry run").
   (e)   "Base installation" means the installation of guides, power unit, and
power hook-up only. Customer request requiring additional materials and
modifications will be charged at direct cost for labor and materials. Removal
applies to disconnecting and removing city equipment whenever needed.
   (D)   Commercial APC collection service fees. The fees for APC collection
service to commercial establishments are as follows:
COMMERCIAL APC COLLECTION SERVICE FEES
Service Container size (gallons) Fees
COMMERCIAL APC COLLECTION SERVICE FEES
Service                     Container size (gallons) Fees
Standard                    48                       $20.35 per month per
                                                     container
Standard                    65                       $21.15 per month per
                                                     container
Standard                    95                       $22.00 per month per
                                                     container
Standard garbage            300                      $66.00 per month per
                                                     container
Standard recycling          300                      $58.00 per month per
                                                     container
Additional service per week Any                      $25.00 per pickup per
                                                     container
Standard to small           48, 65 or 95             Same as Residential
multifamily establishments
Standard to small           Any shared alley APC     Same as Residential
multifamily establishments
Standard to small           300 sole use             Same as Residential
multifamily establishments
Individual fee for shared
front load weekly refuse
and recycling service to    Any                      Same as Residential
small multifamily
establishments
Additional refuse to small  Less than 100            Same as Residential
multifamily establishments
Additional recycle beyond   100 or less              $10.00 per month per
second container                                     container
                                                     $10.00 per month per
Compostable material        100 or less              container per weekly
                                                     service
Container delivery          Any                      $20.00 for any number per
                                                     request
 
The following applies to commercial APC collection services fees:
   (1)   "Standard" means standard commercial APC service consisting of
collection once per week (in the selected size).
   (2)   Small multifamily establishments may receive standard residential
collection service and may enroll in the Environmental Services low income
assistance program.
   (E)   Fees for commercial special services. The fees for special services to
commercial establishments are as follows:
COMMERCIAL SPECIAL SERVICE FEES
Service Container size Fees
COMMERCIAL SPECIAL SERVICE FEES
Service                      Container size       Fees
Temporary APC refuse         48, 65 or 95 gallons $55.00 per service per
                                                  container
Temporary APC refuse         300 gallons          $83.00 per service per
                                                  container
                                                  $110.00 per container for
                                                  delivery/removal plus $33.00
Temporary front load refuse  2 – 8 cubic yards  per pickup per 2 to 4 cubic
                                                  yard container, $39.00 per 6
                                                  cubic yard, $44.00 per 8
                                                  cubic yard
                                                  $22.00 per delivery truck
Temporary APC recycle        95 gallons           load for delivery/removal
                                                  plus $11.00 per pickup
Temporary use of small                            $22.00 per delivery truck
recycling containers for     Less than 95 gallons load for delivery/removal
customers with city refuse
                                                  $110.00 per container for
Temporary front load recycle 2 – 8 cubic yards  delivery/removal and one
                                                  pickup, plus $33.00 per
                                                  additional pickup.
Delinquent retrieval fee     2 – 8 cubic yards  $55.00 per container
                                                  Same fees as charged for
Bulky material service                           special brush bulky service
                                                  to residential
                                                  establishments.
 
   (F)   Volume fee discounts for front load refuse services. Customers with
service agreements for front load refuse service shall be eligible for the
following discounts off the standard fees for scheduled monthly front load
refuse service:
   (1)   Customers with one (1) service location are eligible for the standard
fee on the first container, a five percent (5%) discount off the standard fee
for the second container, and a ten percent (10%) discount off the standard fee
for the third and all additional containers.
   (2)   Customers with two (2) to four (4) service locations are eligible for
a five percent (5%) discount off the standard fee for the first container at
each location except for the primary location, a five percent (5%) discount off
the standard fee for the second container at each location, and a ten percent
(10%) discount off the standard fee for the third and all additional containers
at each location. The first container at the primary location is charged the
standard fee.
   (3)   Customers with five (5) or more service locations are eligible for a
ten percent (10%) discount off the standard fee for each container at each
location, except for the first container at the primary location. The first
container at the primary location is charged the standard fee.
   (G)   Fees for shared centralized commercial services. The director may
provide commercial services at centralized locations for the shared use of
multiple customers where it is requested by the customers, it reduces service
costs compared to other collection methods, and it is advantageous for the
community. The director may establish fees for each customer using centralized
commercial services based on the following criteria:
   (1)   The fees for each customer are equitable and proportional to each
customer's usage.
   (2)   The sum of fees for each centralized service location shall be at
least one hundred percent (100%) and less than one hundred fifty percent (150%)
of the sum of the standard fees for each service at the centralized location.
   (3)   The fees for each customer shall be revised no more frequently than
six (6) months.
(Ord. No. 10539, § 5, 6-3-08, eff. 7-1-08; Ord. No. 10674, § 6, 6-2-09, eff. 7-
1-09; Ord. No. 10796, § 5, 5-25-10, eff. 7-1-10; Ord. No. 10895, § 6, 5-17-11,
eff. 7-1-11; Ord. No. 10986, § 5, 5-22-12, eff. 7-1-12; Ord. No. 11087, § 3, 6-
18-13, eff. 7-20-13; Ord. No. 11178, § 3, 6-3-14, eff. 7-4-14; Ord. No. 11272,
§ 5, 6-9-15, eff. 7-1-15; Ord. No. 11377, § 4, 6-21-16, eff. 7-5-16; Ord. No.
11983, § 3, 1-11-23, eff. 2-13-23)
Sec. 15-33.3. Commercial fuel surcharge.
   A fuel surcharge shall be added to the fees for front load, compacted front
load, and roll off collection services. The surcharge rate shall be 0.20
percent (0.002) for each ten cents ($0.10) of city fuel price above three
dollars and thirty cents ($3.30) per gallon. The fuel surcharge shall be the
applicable surcharge rate multiplied by the applicable fee, then rounded to the
nearest cent ($0.01). The surcharge shall be revised every three (3) months
based upon the updated city fuel price.
(Ord. No. 10539, § 5, 6-3-08, eff. 7-1-08; Ord. No. 10674, § 6, 6-2-09, eff. 7-
1-09; Ord. No. 10796, § 6, 5-25-10, eff. 7-1-10; Ord. No. 10895, § 6, 5-17-11,
eff. 7-1-11; Ord. No. 11178, § 3, 6-3-14, eff. 7-4-14)
DIVISION 4.
DISPOSAL SERVICES
Sec. 15-34. Basis for disposal services fees.
Fees for disposal services are based on the type of waste, the amount of waste,
the type of customer, and the type of service.
(Ord. No. 10539, § 5, 6-3-08, eff. 7-1-08)
Sec. 15-34.1. Disposal services fee requirements.
Disposal services fees are subject to the requirements of this section and of
administrative rules and regulations under this chapter. The disposal fees
collected shall be used for the construction, operation, remediation, closure,
and post closure maintenance of city disposal facilities.
(Ord. No. 10539, § 5, 6-3-08, eff. 7-1-08)
Sec. 15-34.2. Residential self-haulers.
   (A)   The fee for each load carried in a residential self-haulers vehicle,
trailer, or vehicle and trailer combined, and weighing two thousand (2,000)
pounds or less shall be the residential self-haul waste disposal fee. For each
load weighing more than two thousand (2,000) pounds, the fee shall be an amount
equal to the applicable commercial waste disposal fee applied to the weight of
the load, prorated and rounded to the nearest dollar. Residential self-haulers
shall also be subject to the special handling fee set forth in this chapter,
and shall be subject to the unrestrained or uncovered load fee set forth in
this chapter in addition to any other fees charged. A deposit may be required
upon entry for residential self-haul vehicle loads that, in the judgment of ES
staff, may exceed one ton (two thousand (2,000) pounds) in accordance with
guidelines established by the director. All fees from residential self-haulers
shall be due in cash, or in other form of payment as established by the
director, at the time the load is accepted.
   (B)   Recyclable materials and household hazardous waste, as determined by
the director, are exempt from disposal fees.
(Ord. No. 10539, § 5, 6-3-08, eff. 7-1-08; Ord. No. 10674, § 7, 6-2-09, eff. 7-
1-09; Ord. No. 11272, § 6, 6-9-15, eff. 7-1-15)
Sec. 15-34.3. Commercial haulers.
   (A)   Calculation of disposal fee. The per vehicle fee for disposal shall be
the greater of the minimum fee or an amount equal to the applicable disposal
fee in section
15-34.7 applied to the weight of the load, or the number of items in the load,
as appropriate, prorated and rounded to the nearest dollar. Where the term
"minimum fee" is used in this section, it shall mean fifteen dollars ($15.00)
or another minimum designated for the applicable fee in section
15-34.7.
   (B)   Special-handling waste disposal. Special handling fees shall be
assessed for the use of personnel, equipment or materials in a manner other
than what would ordinarily be required in normal daily landfill operations.
   (C)   Payment. Each commercial hauler shall pay any charge for disposal
services at the time and as a condition of receiving the disposal services for
which the charge is imposed. Only payments in the form of cash, check or other
immediate payment form approved by the director will be accepted subject to
reasonable identification requirements, unless the hauler has a disposal
service agreement and account in good standing.
(Ord. No. 10539, § 5, 6-3-08, eff. 7-1-08; Ord. No. 10674, § 7, 6-2-09, eff. 7-
1-09; Ord. No. 10796, § 7, 5-25-10, eff. 7-1-10; Ord. No. 10986, § 6, 5-22-12,
eff. 7-1-12; Ord. No. 11178, § 4, 6-3-14, eff. 7-4-14)
Sec. 15-34.4. Unrestrained or uncovered load fee.
In addition to all other charges set forth above, a five dollar ($5.00) per
load fee shall be imposed for any solid waste that, as determined by the
director, is not contained within an enclosed vehicle or is not covered and
secured.
(Ord. No. 10539, § 5, 6-3-08, eff. 7-1-08)
Sec. 15-34.5. Waiver of fee for landfill construction materials.
   The director may accept for no fee materials suitable for construction or
operational purposes where and when the department's cost to acquire needed
materials exceeds the waived fee.
(Ord. No. 10539, § 5, 6-3-08, eff. 7-1-08; Ord. No. 10674, § 7, 6-2-09, eff. 7-
1-09; Ord. No. 10895, § 7, 5-17-11, eff. 7-1-11)
Sec. 15-34.6. Disposal service agreement.
   Customers who wish to pay for disposal service pursuant to a credit system
shall enter into a service agreement with the city. The service agreement shall
be signed by the person responsible for using the disposal services. The
requirements of section
15-31 shall apply unless the director authorizes otherwise within the service
agreement.
(Ord. No. 10539, § 5, 6-3-08, eff. 7-1-08; Ord. No. 10796, § 8, 5-25-10, eff.
7-1-10; Ord. No. 10986, § 6, 5-22-12, eff. 7-1-12)
Sec. 15-34.7. Disposal services fee schedule.
DISPOSAL SERVICES FEES
Service Fees
DISPOSAL SERVICES FEES
Service                                Fees
                                       $15.00 per load for loads 2,000 pounds
Residential self-hauler waste disposal or less. Commercial waste disposal fees
                                       for loads over 2,000 pounds.
Residential self-hauler tire disposal  $2.00 per tire (passenger tires only) in
                                       addition to other applicable fees
Commercial waste disposal              $35.00 per ton with $15.00 minimum per
                                       load
Special-handling waste disposal        $42.00 per ton with $15.00 minimum per
                                       load
Large carcass disposal                 $75.00 per ton with $15.00 minimum per
                                       load
                                       $50.00 to $250.00 per hour of special
Additional special handling            handling activity, depending on needed
                                       equipment and staff, in addition to
                                       other applicable fees
Tire disposal                          $150.00 per ton with $15.00 minimum, no
                                       mixed loads, andno off-road tires
Disposal of appliance designed to use  $5.00 per appliance in addition to other
refrigerant                            applicable fees
Uncovered load                         $5.00 per load in addition to other
                                       applicable fees
Identification tag fee                 $45.00
Household hazardous waste disposal for $10.00 per load
non-city residents
Purchase of recycled paint             Published schedule of fees based on most
                                       recent costs
Disposal of materials under small      Published schedule of fees based on most
business waste acceptance program      recent disposal costs
Special household hazardous waste      Published schedule of fees
collection event fees
 
(Ord. No. 10539, § 5, 6-3-08, eff. 7-1-08; Ord. No. 10674, § 7, 6-2-09, eff. 7-
1-09; Ord. No. 10796, § 8, 5-25-10, eff. 7-1-10; Ord. No. 10895, § 7, 5-17-11,
eff. 7-1-11; Ord. No. 10986, § 6, 5-22-12, eff. 7-1-12; Ord. No. 11087, § 4, 6-
18-13, eff. 7-20-13; Ord. No. 11178, § 4, 6-3-14, eff. 7-4-14; Ord. No. 11272,
§ 6, 6-9-15, eff. 7-1-15; Ord. No. 11377, § 5, 6-21-16, eff. 7-5-16; Ord. No.
11983, § 4, 1-11-23, eff. 2-13-23)
Sec. 15-34.8. Disposal services contract fee schedule.
   The director shall be authorized to enter into multi-year contracts for
guaranteed waste disposal by customers. These contracts shall be for a specific
quantity of waste at a fee that is equal to or greater than the amount
specified in the contract disposal services fee schedule or any adjustments to
the fee schedule supported by the Consumer Price Index (CPI). The disposal fee
for each vehicle load shall be calculated in accordance with section
15-34.3. The customer is required to pay each year the full amount due to the
city at the specified fee and guaranteed annual tonnage, whether or not the
waste is delivered. The contract may be renewed annually if the specified fee
is not changed. The requirements of section
15-31 shall apply unless the director authorizes otherwise within the contract.
Where a disposal services contract is in place, the commercial waste disposal
fee shall not apply.
CONTRACT DISPOSAL FEE SCHEDULE
Guaranteed Annual Tonnage Fee Per Ton
CONTRACT DISPOSAL FEE SCHEDULE
Guaranteed Annual Tonnage Fee Per Ton
140,000.......            $20.00
60,000.......             24.00
24,500.......             23.00
18,000......              27.00
15,000......              28.00
12,500......              29.00
10,000......              29.75
9,000......               30.00
8,000.......              30.50
7,000......               31.00
6,000......               31.25
5,000......               31.75
4,000......               32.00
3,000......               32.50
2,000.......              33.00
1,000.......              34.00
 
(Ord. No. 10654, § 1, 4-21-09, eff. 5-1-09; Ord. No. 10674, § 7, 6-2-09, eff.
7-1-09; Ord. No. 10796, § 8, 5-25-10, eff. 7-1-10; Ord. No. 10986, § 7, 5-22-
12, eff. 5-22-12; Ord. No. 11087, § 4, 6-18-13, eff. 7-20-13; Ord. No. 11272, §
6, 6-9-15, eff. 7-1-15; Ord. No. 11596, § 1, 10-23-18, eff. 11-1-18; Ord. No.
11983, § 4, 1-11-23, eff. 2-13-23)
Sec. 15-34.9. Disposal services fuel surcharge.
A fuel surcharge shall be added to the per-ton fees for disposal services. The
surcharge shall be five cents ($0.05) per ton for each ten cents ($0.10) of
city fuel price above three dollars and thirty cents ($3.30) per gallon. The
surcharge shall be revised every three (3) months based on the updated city
fuel price.
(Ord. No. 10796, § 8, 5-25-10, eff. 7-1-10; Ord. No. 10895, § 7, 5-17-11, eff.
7-1-11)
Sec. 15-35. Exemption of fees for waste residue from nonprofit recycling
establishments.
   (A)   Any nonprofit recycling establishment may apply to the director for an
exemption from payment of fees for city collection or disposal services for
residual solid waste resulting directly from the establishment's recycling
activities. The exemption for each establishment, regardless of the number of
locations, shall be limited to ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) per calendar
year.
   (B)   To qualify as a nonprofit recycling establishment, an organization
shall:
   (1)   Hold tax-exempt status under 206 U.S.C. Sec. 501(c)3:
   (2)   Engage in active and continual operation of a program of acceptance or
collection of goods and materials, that would otherwise be discarded as solid
waste, for recycling, whether through resale or other redistribution by the
organization, which program results in accumulations of non-reusable goods or
materials that must be disposed of at city disposal facilities;
   (3)   Does not have and will not enter into a recycling franchise agreement
or similar arrangement with any non-profit or for-profit organization, the
beneficiaries of which are other than the organization applying for exemption;
   (4)   Does not dispose of residual solid waste resulting from goods or
materials imported from outside Pima County;
   (5)   Does not support religious activities with the recycling activities;
and
   (6)   Clearly separate residual solid waste from solid waste generated by a
process other than the establishment's recycling activities.
   (C)   To obtain the exemption, an organization shall submit an application,
established by the director, to demonstrate and certify compliance with these
requirements. Upon determination by the director that an organization meets the
requirements, the director shall issue a certificate of exemption from fees for
collection and disposal services. The director may require annual renewal
applications and additional evidence of compliance with requirements.
   (D)   The director may at any time give notice in writing to an organization
of intent to revoke its exemption for cause, which shall consist of failure to
adhere to or fulfill the requirements of this section. The organization can
appeal the revocation in writing to the director within ten (10) days, and be
granted an administrative hearing. The director shall render a decision in
writing. The decision of the director is final.
(Ord. No. 10539, § 5, 6-3-08, eff. 7-1-08; Ord. No. 10674, § 7, 6-2-09, eff. 7-
1-09)
DIVISION 5.
SPECIAL FEES
Sec. 15-36. Groundwater protection.
   (A)   The director shall charge a groundwater protection fee to customers
that
   (1)   receive city potable water service, excluding those customers not
connected to the central system, or
   (2)   receive city solid waste collection service and obtain water from a
source other than city service.
   (B)   The fee shall be shown as a separate charge on the utility bill. The
fee shall be charged for each connected meter, and shall be based upon the
meter equivalency factors as determined by the superintendent of water or his
or her successor. For locations lacking city water meters, the fee for the
smallest meter size shall be charged.
   (C)   The fee shall be collected to administer, design, construct, operate
and maintain groundwater remediation and landfill monitoring/compliance systems
for the department, and a portion, based on seven cents ($0.07)/month (five-
eighths [5/8]-inch meter) to customers within the city, shall be used to fund
in part the operating expenses of the city storm water program.
   (D)   No penalty fees pursuant to section 15-31.6 shall be charged on
groundwater protection fees.
   The groundwater protection fee shall be assigned as follows.
 
GROUNDWATER PROTECTION FEE
Meter Size (inches) Fee per Month per Meter Fee per Month per Meter Inside
                    Outside City            City
5/8                 $1.06                   $1.13
¾                  $1.59                   $1.72
1                   $2.65                   $2.88
1-1/2 and larger    $5.30                   $5.83
 
(Ord. No. 10796, § 9, 5-25-10, eff. 7-1-10; Ord. No. 10895, § 8, 5-17-11, eff.
7-1-11; Ord. No. 10986, § 8, 5-22-12, eff. 7-1-12; Ord. No. 11377, § 6, 6-21-
16, eff. 7-5-16)
Secs. 15-37--15-49. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI.
DISPOSAL FACILITY MANAGEMENT – RESERVED*
   *Editor's note – Ord. No. 10796, § 10, adopted May 25, 2010, effective July
1, 2010, repealed this article and § 15-50, which pertained to disposal
facility management and prohibiting disposal at city facilities of solid waste
collected, received or transported from outside Pima County, derived from Ord.
No. 10539, § 6C., adopted June 3, 2008, effective July 1, 2008.
Secs. 15-50--15-59. Reserved.
ARTICLE VII.
PLASTIC BAG RECYCLING
Sec. 15-60. Plastic bag recycling.
   Retail establishments that provide plastic carry-out bags for their
customers shall:
   (1)   Provide a bin(s) for the collection of single use plastic bags and
other film plastic in a visible location that is easily accessible to the
consumer, and clearly marked as available for the purpose of collecting plastic
carryout bags and other film plastic for recycling. These bins will be intended
solely for the use by the public for voluntary donation of these materials for
subsequent recycling. These bins shall meet the Arizona Bag Central Station
standard for collection bins for signage and be located near or at the entrance
(s) of the retail establishment and be well maintained.
   (2)   Recycle returned plastic bags.
   (3)   Provide reusable carryout bags for purchase at retail locations.
   (4)   Incorporate a "reduce, reuse, and recycle" message on all carry-out
plastic bags distributed as part of the retail business.
   (5)   Display informational material on the establishment's plastic bag
recycling program to educate customers. This information shall incorporate
messages on the environmental benefits of recycling plastic bags or using
reusable bags including greenhouse gas reduction, energy savings and litter
reduction.
(6)   Retail establishments shall report to the City of Tucson ES director
through an independent auditor the single use plastic bags per transaction,
total number of single use plastic bags given out and tons of film plastic
collected through the single use plastic bag and film collection program in
accordance with the following schedule:
Report    Report Period      Report Date
Report 1  4/1/13 - 6/30/13   7/31/13
Report 2  7/1/13 - 9/30/13   10/31/13
Report 3  10/1/13 - 12/31/13 1/31/14
Report 4  1/1/14 - 3/31/14   4/30/14
Report 5  4/1/14 - 6/30/14   7/31/14
Report 6  7/1/14 - 9/30/14   10/31/14
Report 71 10/1/14 - 12/31/14 1/31/15
Report 8  1/1/15 - 3/31/15   4/30/15
 
   The information reported to the city shall be a cumulative number for all
retail establishments and not segregated by each store or chain.
   ES staff will calculate the number of single use plastic bags recycled by
applying the single use plastic bag recycling formula.
   The initial report shall include a list of all retail establishments
reporting during the initial reporting period. Subsequent reports shall include
an updated list and shall include the names of any retail establishments that
are new, out of business or failed to report.
   (7)   Retail establishments shall provide training for all checkout and
bagging clerks upon hire. The training shall include information and
instructions to reduce plastic bag consumption. Training shall be reinforced on
an ongoing basis.
   (8)   Retail establishments shall implement a public educational awareness
program for Retail establishment employees and the general public. This program
shall provide education to school age children and the general public on
reducing plastic bag consumption and increasing plastic bag recycling. The
program will include the use of contests, in-store promotions, videos and
social media.
   (9)   District managers representing all retail establishments shall meet
with the ES director or designee on quarterly basis. The meeting agenda shall
include a review of the progress made by retail establishments to reduce the
consumption of plastic bags by consumers and increase the in-store recycling of
single use plastic bags.
(Ord. No. 10642, § 2, 3-24-09, eff. 9-24-09; Ord. No. 11056, § 2, 3-19-13, eff.
7-1-13; Ord. No. 11178, § 5, 6-3-14, eff. 7-4-14; Ord. No. 11272, § 7, 6-9-15,
eff. 7-1-15)
Secs. 15-61 – 15-69. Reserved.
ARTICLE VIII. LITTER FEE
Sec. 15-70. Refuse collection permit.
   The city manager or his or her designee shall administer and enforce a
permit program for all non-exempt commercial haulers as defined in this
section.
   (A)   For purposes of this section, a commercial hauler is anyone who
operates a front load, rear load, side load or roll off collection vehicle
within the City of Tucson at any time.
   (B)   Commercial haulers who own or operate three (3) or fewer total
collection vehicles, as described above, regardless of where they are stored or
operated, are exempt from the permit fee established by this article.
   (C)   Each commercial hauler required to obtain a permit under this section
shall report to the director the weight of refuse and recyclable material,
listed separately, that it collected within the City of Tucson. The report
shall cover the previous calendar year, and shall comply with the requirements
established by the director in administrative rule.
(Ord. No. 10796, § 11, 5-25-10, eff. 7-1-10; Ord. No. 10800, § 1, 6-8-10, eff.
7-1-10; Ord. No. 10986, § 9, 5-22-12, eff. 7-1-12; Ord. No. 11178, § 6, 6-3-14,
eff. 7-4-14)
Sec. 15-70.1. Proceeds from the refuse collection permit.
   Proceeds from the permits shall be used to administer, enforce and collect
litter in the city. Permits for collection of refuse from business or
residential establishments within the city shall be issued by the city under
the following conditions:
   (A)   The commercial hauler must submit an application, on a form provided
by the city, to the city. This permit shall include the requirement of an
annual per-vehicle license fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per vehicle
used in the collection of refuse within the City of Tucson. Any commercial
hauler with a current, valid permit found to be collecting refuse within the
City of Tucson with a nonlicensed vehicle shall forfeit the cash permit surety
and the commercial hauler's permit shall be suspended until such time as the
permit surety is fully reimbursed and fees for each nonpermitted vehicle are
received by the city.
   (B)   The commercial hauler's permit application, as provided by the city,
shall include the name, business addresses and telephone numbers of all owners,
partners, general managers and principal officer, as well as emergency
telephone numbers, business references and such other information as deemed
necessary.
   (C)   Permits issued pursuant to this section shall be nontransferable. The
permits including the requirement to license each vehicle shall be issued for
one (1) year commencing July 1 and ending June 30. Applications for renewal
shall be made at least forty-five (45) days prior to expiration of the current
permit. Applicable fees may be prorated monthly on permits issued during the
fiscal year.
   (D)   Each licensed vehicle operating within the City of Tucson shall
display a decal, provided by the city, affixed permanently and clearly visible
on the driver's side of the vehicle. Commercial haulers in the permit program
will be subject to an annual inspection by the City of Tucson.
(Ord. No. 10986, § 9, 5-22-12, eff. 7-1-12)
Sec. 15-71. Suspension or revocation of permits.
   (A)   In addition to the sanctions provided, the city may suspend or revoke
any permit authorized or required by this chapter, or suspend or revoke any
collection, recycling or disposal services provided by a commercial hauler,
whenever it is found that the holder of such permit, or user of such collection
services, commits a serious or repeated violation of the laws of the state, the
county, this chapter, or any rules and regulations promulgated hereunder, or
fails to fully reimburse the city its costs associated with the remedying of
any violation of any applicable health codes and ordinances of the city,
county, state, and federal government.
   (B)   A commercial hauler whose permit is revoked may not re-apply for a
permit under this chapter for thirty-six (36) months after the effective date
of the revocation.
(Ord. No. 10796, § 11, 5-25-10, eff. 7-1-10)
Secs. 15-72 – 15-79. Reserved.
ARTICLE IX. WASTE DIVERSION REPORTING
Sec. 15-80. Refuse and recyclable material collection permit.
   Companies engaged in the acceptance, purchase, processing, or sorting of
recyclable materials that is the same as collected by the City of Tucson
through their recycling program for the purpose of redistribution, including
but not limited to sale or donation, shall report to the director the amount,
in tons, of the material accepted and redistributed. The amounts reported shall
be limited to recyclable materials collected from within the City of Tucson.
The report shall cover the previous calendar year.
(Ord. No. 11178, § 7, 6-3-14, eff. 7-4-14)
Chapter 16
NEIGHBORHOOD PRESERVATION*
__________
*   Editors Note: Ord. No. 9816, §§ 1--13, adopted Feb. 24, 2003, repealed
various provisions of Chs. 6, 11 and 15. Section 15 of said Ord. No. 9816
enacted provisions designated as a new Ch. 16 to read as herein set out. The
disposition of former Code sections and their respective new designations is as
shown below:
NEIGHBORHOOD PRESERVATION ORDINANCE DISPOSITION TABLE
Showing where the subject matter of former sections of the Tucson City Code is
incorporated in the Neighborhood Preservation Ordinance, effective
_____________, 200__.
Former section(s) Subject matter                     New section(s)
6-66--6-68        Dangerous buildings and slum       16-12; 16-14; 16-20--16-28
                  property
6-71--6-73        Minimum housing requirements       16-11; 16-12
11-46             Public nuisance                    16-34
11-65             Junked motor vehicles              16-15
11-71--11-84      Noise                              16-31
11-130--11-135    Graffiti                           16-30
11-140--11-145    Loud or unruly gatherings          16-32
11-170--11-170.3  Registration of residential rental 16-20,16-21
                  properties
                  Accumulation of refuse and
                  vegetation; illegal dumping and
                  littering; persons liable; duty to
15-7--15-10       remove weeds and refuse from       16-13; 16-33
                  abutting sidewalks, streets and
                  alleys; abatement by city;
                  composting; and burning of refuse
                  Placing rubbish, trash, filth or
15-75             debris upon the property of        16-33
                  another or public property
 
__________
Art. I.   General Provisions, §§ 16-1--16-9
Art. II.   Maintenance Standards, §§ 16-10--16-19
Art. III.   Slum Property, §§ 16-20--16-29
Art. IV.   Unlawful Acts, §§ 16-30--16-39.1
Art. V.   Administration and Enforcement, §§ 16-40--16-59
Art. VI.   Abatement, §§ 16-60--16-69
Art. VII.   Administrative Appeals, §§ 16-70--16-79
Art. VIII.   Liability; Conflicts; Severability; Acknowledgement, §§ 16-80--16-
99
Article I. General Provisions
Sec.
16-1.   Title.
Sec.
16-2.   Purpose and scope; application of other codes.
Sec.
16-3.   Definitions.
Sec.
16-4.   Permits required.
Secs.
16-5--16-9.   Reserved.
Article II. Maintenance Standards
Sec.
16-10.   Scope.
Sec.
16-11.   Building interior.
Sec.
16-12.   Building and structure exteriors.
Sec.
16-13.   Exterior premises and vacant land.
Sec.
16-14.   Dilapidated structures; vacant and unsecured structures; buildings and
structures constituting a nuisance.
Sec.
16-15.   Junked or inoperable vehicles.
Secs.
16-16--16-19.   Reserved.
Article III. Slum Property
Sec.
16-20.   Slum property; definitions.
Sec.
16-21.   Registration of residential rental property.
Sec.
16-22.   Inspection of residential rental property.
Sec.
16-23.   Abatement of slum property.
Sec.
16-24.   Designation of slum property; recordation.
Sec.
16-25.   Notice of designation.
Sec.
16-26.   Appointment of temporary receiver and recovery of costs.
Sec.
16-27.   Recovery of inspection costs.
Sec.
16-28.   Appeal from designation as slum property.
Sec.
16-29.   Licensed property management company; crime free multihousing program;
required training.
Article IV. Unlawful Acts
Sec.
16-30.   Graffiti prevention, prohibition and removal.
Sec.
16-31.   Excessive noise.
Sec.
16-32.   Unruly gatherings.
Sec.
16-33.   Placing refuse upon the property of another or public property;
illegal littering or dumping prohibited; persons responsible.
Sec.
16-34.   Public nuisance.
Sec.
16-35.   Obstructing streets, alleys or sidewalks prohibited.
Sec.
16-36.   Posting of handbills prohibited.
Sec.
16-37.   Group dwelling public nuisance; abatement.
Sec.
16-38.   Transfer of group dwelling public nuisance property after remediation
plan or court order.
Sec.
16-39.   Shopping cart impoundment.
Sec.
16-39.1.   Limitations on yard sales.
Article V. Administration and Enforcement
Sec.
16-40.   Authority to enforce.
Sec.
16-41.   Rules and regulations.
Sec.
16-42.   Authority and inspections; re-inspection fees; appeal.
Sec.
16-43.   Enforcement independent of other provisions.
Sec.
16-44.   Cooperation of other departments.
Sec.
16-45.   Notice of violation.
Sec.
16-46.   Transfer of property after notice.
Sec.
16-47.   Recording a violation.
Sec.
16-48.   Violations and penalties.
Sec.
16-49.   Jurisdiction of court.
Sec.
16-50.   Commencement of civil infraction proceedings.
Sec.
16-51.   Appeal of court decision.
Secs.
16-52--16-59.   Reserved.
Article VI. Abatement
Sec.
16-60.   Court ordered abatement.
Sec.
16-61.   Abatement by the city.
Sec.
16-62.   Temporary abatement.
Sec.
16-63.   Emergency abatement.
Sec.
16-64.   Structures posted as hazardous.
Sec.
16-65.   Abatement by demolition.
Sec.
16-66.   Historic structures.
Sec.
16-67.   Failure to obey abatement order.
Secs.
16-68--16-69.   Reserved.
Article VII. Administrative Appeals
Sec.
16-70.   Availability of administrative appeal.
Sec.
16-71.   Administrative conference.
Sec.
16-72.   Modifications.
Sec.
16-73.   Appeals to the board of appeals.
Sec.
16-74.   Powers, duties and responsibilities of the board.
Secs.
16-75--16-79.   Reserved.
Article VIII. Liability; Conflicts; Severability; Acknowledgement
Sec.
16-80.   Liability.
Sec.
16-81.   Conflict of ordinances.
Sec.
16-82.   Severability.
Sec.
16-83.   Acknowledgement.
Secs.
16-84--16-99.   Reserved.
ARTICLE I.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 16-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Neighborhood Preservation Ordinance of the
City of Tucson," and may be cited as such, and will be referred to hereinafter
as "chapter."
(Ord. No. 9816, § 15, 2-24-03)
Sec. 16-2. Purpose and scope; application of other codes.
   (a)   The purpose of this chapter is to promote and preserve the health,
safety and welfare of the citizens of Tucson, Arizona, and to protect residents
and neighborhoods against hazardous, blighting and deteriorating influences or
conditions that diminish quality of life and contribute to the downgrading of
neighborhood property values. This chapter serves these purposes by
establishing minimum standards for the condition of the interior of residential
buildings; by establishing requirements for maintenance of all residential and
nonresidential buildings, structures of whatever kind, and vacant and improved
land; and by prohibiting acts and conduct that diminish quality of life. Unless
specifically provided otherwise, this chapter shall apply to all buildings,
structures and lands within the city without regard to the use or the date of
construction, improvement or alteration.
   (b)   This chapter shall be applied fairly, sensibly, consistently, and
reasonably to promote the maintenance of all existing buildings and land in the
city. The intent is to ensure that individuals and families do not suffer undue
hardship.
   (c)   This chapter shall not require changes in existing buildings and
utilities when alterations were installed and have been maintained in
accordance with the building code in effect at the time of construction or
alteration of the subject building or utilities. This subsection does not apply
when the building has been determined to be an imminent hazard, unsafe,
unhealthy, or deteriorated, when the building has been moved to another
location, or in connection with the requirements of section
16-11.
   (d)   Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, or changes of
occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of
the building, administrative and technical codes adopted by this jurisdiction
and in effect at the time of such repair, addition or alteration.
   (e)   To the extent that any provision of this chapter conflicts with or is
preempted by any state or federal law, including state and federal laws
concerning the construction and maintenance of manufactured homes and mobile
homes, the provision of this chapter shall not apply.
(Ord. No. 9816, § 15, 2-24-03)
Sec. 16-3. Definitions.
[For the purpose of this chapter, and unless the context plainly requires
otherwise, the following terms, phrases, and words shall have the meaning given
herein:]
   Acceptable evidence of age is limited to the following:
   (1)   An unexpired driver's license issued by any state or Canada, provided
such license includes a picture of the licensee;
   (2)   A nonoperating identification license issued pursuant to A.R.S. Tit.
28;
   (3)   An armed forces identification card; or
   (4)   A valid unexpired passport or border crossing identification card
which is issued by a government or voter card issued by the government of
Mexico and which contains a photograph of the person and the date of birth.
   Addressing official means the official(s) designated and authorized by the
city manager to make determinations regarding the address display requirements
set forth in this chapter; or any authorized representative or designee of that
official.
   Attractive nuisance means a condition that may reasonably be expected to
attract children and that is dangerous to children because of their inability
to appreciate the hazard.
   Broad-tipped indelible marker means any felt-tip marker or similar implement
which contains a fluid which is not water soluble and which has a flat or
angled writing surface one-half (1/2) inch or greater.
   Building means a structure having a roof supported by columns, posts, or
walls and intended for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of any person,
entity, animal, process, equipment, goods, or materials of any kind or nature.
   Building code means the code adopted by this jurisdiction regulating the
design and construction of buildings and structures.
   Building official means an officer or other person designated and authorized
by the city manager to enforce and administer the provisions of this chapter;
or the building official's authorized representative.
   Code official means the official(s) designated and authorized by the city
manager to administer and enforce this chapter, or any duly authorized
representative or designee of that official. Code official includes any peace
officer, fire code official, city code enforcement officer or designated refuse
officer. In the context of violations that are classified exclusively as
criminal offenses in this chapter, the code official is the chief of police or
the chief's designee.
   Commercial property means any property occupied by a business or businesses
which sell, rent, trade or store goods, or which provide a service.
   Contain or contained means to hold, store, bundle, stack or offer for
collection in a manner, receptacle or location authorized by the Tucson Code or
by rules and regulations promulgated under the Code.
   Contiguous means, relating to property or residences, property that shares
or abuts the boundary line or edge of the immediately adjacent property.
   dB(A) means the intensity of a sound expressed in decibels read from a
calibrated sound level meter utilizing the A-level weighing scale, which most
closely approximates the auditory sensitivity of the human ear.
   dB(C) means the intensity of a sound expressed in decibels read from a
calibrated sound level meter utilizing the C-level weighing scale, which is
more sensitive to low frequency sound than the A-level weighing scale.
   Debris means a substance of little or no apparent economic value, including
but not limited to, deteriorated lumber, old newspapers, furniture parts,
appliance parts, discarded sinks, cabinets, discarded household fixtures, car
parts, tires, discarded clothing, abandoned, broken or neglected equipment, or
the scattered remains of items.
   Dilapidated means a condition relating to a structure and consisting of
multiple violations of the Tucson Code such that the structure is in an obvious
and serious state of disrepair.
   Dwelling means the same meaning as "dwelling unit."
   Dwelling unit means any building or a portion thereof that is designed,
occupied, or intended for occupancy as living quarters exclusively for a single
household.
   Etch means to permanently alter a surface by use of an etching solution.
   Etching solution means any product or compound manufactured for the purpose
of permanently altering a glass or other surface.
   Excavation means any well, shaft, basement, pit, tunnel, trench, hole or
other like or similar removal of earth material.
   Garbage means all animal and vegetable and food wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking or consumption of foods, or refuse or
recyclables that have been contaminated by garbage, or other such matter the
accumulation of which may create a nuisance or be deleterious to public health
or offensive to sight or smell.
   Graffiti means initials, slogans, figures, inscriptions, marks, designs or
drawings written, spray-painted, etched, sketched or otherwise applied on a
sidewalk, wall, building, fence, sign, windows or any other structure or
surface without consent of the owner.
   Graffiti abatement official means the city official designated by the city
manager to abate graffiti and otherwise enforce the provisions of section
16-30 of this chapter.
   Greenwaste means wastes consisting solely of vegetative materials, including
but not limited to, tree trimmings, tree limbs, yard clippings, leaves, grass,
weeds, branches, brush, and shrubs. Palm fronds and cactus are not greenwaste.
   Handbill includes any sign, notice, placard, poster, paper, advertising
circular, sticker, card, leaflet, or other similar item calculated to attract
the attention of the public.
   Health hazard means the presence of any conditions or item(s) that adversely
impact or jeopardize the well being or health of an individual. Such conditions
or items include evidence of occupancy without adequate water and sanitation
facilities, or may include the presence of human or animal waste, medical or
biological waste, drug paraphernalia, gaseous or combustible materials,
radioactive waste, dangerous or corrosive chemicals or liquids, flammable or
explosive materials, friable asbestos, offal and decay matter.
   Imminent hazard means a condition that places a person's life, health, or
property in immediate, impending peril, or could cause serious or life-
threatening injury or death at any time.
   Industrial property means any property occupied by land uses whose primary
operation involves manufacturing, assembling, processing or otherwise treating
raw materials, semifinished products, or finished products, for packaging and
distribution to either wholesale or retail markets.
   Infestation means the apparent presence of unpleasant, damaging, or
unhealthful insects, rodents, reptiles or pests.
   Junked or inoperable vehicle means any vehicle, including any motor vehicle
and any other device in, upon or by which a person or property may be
transported or drawn on a street, including but not limited to trailers and
camper shells but excluding devices moved by human power, that exhibits one or
more of the following conditions: wrecked, partially or fully dismantled,
abandoned, stripped, inoperative, inoperable, scrapped, or unable to be safely
operated.
   Litter means to cause a condition of uncontained refuse, debris or trash.
   Manufactured home shall have the same meaning as defined in A.R.S. § 41-2142
(24) or its successor provision.
   Mobile home shall have the same meaning as defined in A.R.S. § 41-2142(26)
or its successor provision.
   Motor vehicle means any self-propelled land vehicle which can be used for
transporting persons or property.
   Outdoor storage means any small machinery, appliances, neatly stored
building material, landscaping materials or equipment, junk motor vehicles
(storage must meet restrictions outlined in section
16-15), motor vehicles that are being stored for more than two (2) years,
personal property including household goods, boxes or furniture which is not
placed for outdoor use and neatly stacked fire wood. Outdoor storage items do
not include garbage, refuse or debris. "Store" shall have the same meaning as
defined in section
16-3.
   Owner means, as applied to a building, structure, or land, any part owner,
joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the
whole or a part of such building, structure or land.
   Person means any natural person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind, but not the federal
government, state, county, city or political subdivision of the state.
   Plainly audible means any sound that a person can detect using his or her
unaided hearing faculties.
   Private property means any real property not owned by the federal
government, state, county, city or political subdivision of the state.
   Property line means the line that represents the boundary of property
(including an apartment, condominium, room or other dwelling unit) owned,
leased or otherwise occupied by a person, business, corporation or institution.
In cases involving sound from an activity on a public street or other public
right-of-way, the property line shall be the nearest boundary of the public
right-of-way.
   Recyclable materials (also recyclables) means those materials that are
listed in the rules, procedures and regulations promulgated by the director of
utility services as having recycle value.
   Refuse means all waste materials, including but not limited to greenwaste,
garbage, waste generated by animals or pets, or recyclables.
   Resident means a person that lives in a residence, or a responsible party.
Unless specifically used in another context, resident assumes the premises
owner, occupant, tenant, lessor, lessee, resident, manager, or licensee to whom
a garbage or recycling container has been assigned.
   Residential property means a property where the dominant use is nontransient
occupancy of residential dwelling units.
   Responsible party means an occupant, lessor, lessee, manager, licensee, or
person having control over a structure or parcel of land; and in any case where
the demolition of a structure is proposed as a means of abatement, any
lienholder whose lien is recorded in the official records of the Pima County
Recorder's Office.
   Sidewalk area means that portion of a street between the curblines, or the
lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, whether identified
on the ground as a pedestrian walkway or not.
   Solidified paint marker means a device that contains paint or other
substance in a solid or semi-solid form and releases the paint or other
substance in a manner capable of marking surfaces.
   Sound amplification system means any device, instrument or system, whether
electrical or mechanical or otherwise, for amplifying sound or for producing or
reproducing sound, including but not limited to any radio, stereo, musical
instrument, compact disc, or sound or musical recorder or player.
   Sound level meter means an instrument used to measure the intensity of sound
that satisfies American National Standards Institute (ANSI) standard S1.4 for
type 1 or type 2 sound level meters, or an instrument that will provide
equivalent data.
   Store means to park, leave, locate, keep, maintain, deposit, allow to remain
or allow to have a physical presence.
   Structure means a physical element that is erected or constructed with a
fixed location on the ground, or is attached to another physical element having
a fixed location at, below, or above grade. The term includes, but is not
limited to, buildings, walls, fences, posts, patios, improvements and other
structures that are constructed or placed on the land.
   Uncontained refuse means any refuse that is not contained according to the
provisions of this chapter or authorized by the rules, procedures and
regulations promulgated by the director of utility services.
   Vacant and unsecured building or structure means any vacant or abandoned
building or structure, regardless of whether or not the building or structure
is surrounded in whole or in part by a fence or wall, that is: (1) a fire or
health hazard because of the accumulation of weeds, debris, or flammable or
combustible waste or refuse; or (2) an attractive nuisance or hazard to the
public because unsecured doorways or window openings or holes in the exterior
of the building or structure permit entry of unauthorized persons.
   Vacant structure means any unoccupied or illegally occupied structure.
   Weeds includes but is not limited to untended or uncultivated plants,
invasive plants, aggressively seeding plants, Russian thistle, ragweed, and
plants generally accepted as having no value and frequently of uncontrolled
growth.
   Yard, front means the area extending the full lot width and situated between
the front property lot line and the face of the principal building which is
parallel to, or most nearly parallel to, the front lot line.
   Yard, rear means the area extending the full lot width and situated between
the rear lot property line and the face of the principal building which is
parallel to, or most nearly parallel to, the rear lot line.
   Yard, side means the area extending between the front yard and rear yard and
situated between the side lot property line and the face of the principal
building which is parallel to, or most nearly parallel to, the side lot line.
   Yard sale means any event, including yard, garage, estate, rummage or moving
sale, where items of personal property owned, utilized or maintained by
occupants of the residential property are offered to the general public on the
same property.
(Ord. No. 9816, § 15, 2-24-03; Ord. No. 10126, § 1, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 10393, §
1, 4-24-07; Ord. No. 10638, § 1, 3-3-09; Ord. No. 10833, § 1, 8-4-10; Ord. No.
11126, § 1, 11-6-13)
Sec. 16-4. Permits required.
Unless otherwise exempt pursuant to section 301 of the Administrative Code, as
adopted by reference per section
6-1 of this Code, or pursuant to any other ordinance or statute, no building,
structure or building service equipment regulated by this chapter or by the
technical codes adopted by the city shall be built, erected, constructed,
enlarged, altered, repaired, moved, improved, removed, converted or demolished
unless a permit first has been obtained from the building official in the
manner provided in the administrative and building codes adopted by the city.
(Ord. No. 9816, § 15, 2-24-03)
Secs. 16-5--16-9. Reserved.
ARTICLE II.
MAINTENANCE STANDARDS
Sec. 16-10. Scope.
In this article, unless otherwise provided, the "building interior" section
applies to the interior, utility service, plumbing and mechanical equipment of
all residential dwellings and dwelling units. The "building and structure
exteriors" section applies to all structures and buildings in the city. The
"exterior premises and vacant land" section applies to all land, vacant or
improved, in the city. The provisions related to dilapidated, vacant, and
nuisance structures apply to all structures and buildings in the city.
(Ord. No. 9816, § 15, 2-24-03)
Sec. 16-11. Building interior.
   (a)   Fire safety.
   (1)   The presence and operations of window openings, size and condition of
exits, bars, grills, grates covering windows and openings shall allow for safe
and rapid egress in emergency situations. At least one (1) window and all doors
in living/sleeping rooms in dwelling units must have an operable release
mechanism that allows safe and rapid egress without the use of separate tools.
   (2)   Every dwelling unit or guest room shall have unobstructed access
directly to the outside, or to a public corridor. Every door, stairway,
passageway or other means of exit shall be of sufficient size, width and
arrangement so as to provide safe and rapid egress in the event of fire. Every
walking surface of any means of exit shall be maintained free of warping,
rotting, or other damage or obstructions so as to provide safe and rapid egress
in the event of fire.
   (3)   Every existing dwelling unit shall be provided with smoke detectors in
good operating condition as required by the Tucson Fire Code of the City of
Tucson.
   (b)   Heating, cooling and ventilation systems.
   (1)   Heating. Every habitable room within a dwelling unit, guest room, and
congregate residence shall be provided with safe heating facilities which are
properly installed and maintained in a sound condition and are capable of
providing adequate heating, appropriate for the climate, to assure a safe
living environment. All heating facilities shall be free from health hazards
associated with ventilation, mounting, electrical and gas connections and other
defects. Unvented fuel-burning heaters must be of a listed and approved type,
and are prohibited as the sole source of heating. Ovens, stoves or ranges, or
other cooking appliances cannot be used for the purpose of heating any portion
of a dwelling. Listed, portable space heaters may only be used as the sole
source of heating on a temporary basis when the permanent heating system is
being repaired or replaced.
   (2)   Cooling. Every dwelling unit, guest room, and congregate residence
shall be provided, in all habitable rooms, with either mechanical cooling or an
alternate cooling method, to assure a safe living environment. Cooling
facilities shall be installed and maintained in a safe condition and in
accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations, and shall comply with the
following:
   a.   Air conditioners shall be capable of producing ambient temperatures at
or below eighty-two (82°) degrees. Measurements shall be taken at a distance of
three (3) feet above the floor in center of the room.
   b.   Evaporative coolers shall be capable of producing ambient temperatures
below eighty-six (86°) degrees. Measurements shall be taken at a distance of
three (3) feet above the floor in center of the room.
   c.   Evaporative cooling shall be maintained to be free of excessive rust,
corrosion or mineral deposits that limit proper operation. Any mounting
apparatus for a cooling facility must be structurally sound.
   d.   Mechanical fans or portable evaporative cooling devices may only be
used on a temporary basis as the sole source of cooling when the permanent
cooling system is being repaired or replaced.
   (3)   Ventilation.
   a.   Habitable rooms within a dwelling unit shall be provided with natural
ventilation by means of openable exterior openings with an area of not less
than five (5) square feet. A mechanical ventilating system may be provided in
lieu of required exterior openings for natural ventilation, so long as such
system is capable of providing thirty-five one-hundredths (0.35) air changes
per hour and so long as the air supply is taken from the outside.
   b.   Bathrooms, laundry rooms, water closet compartments and similar rooms
shall be provided with natural ventilation by means of openable exterior
openings with an area not less than one and one-half (1 1/2) square feet. A
mechanical ventilation system connected directly to the outside may be provided
in lieu of these required exterior openings for natural ventilation in
bathrooms that contain a bathtub, shower or combination thereof; laundry rooms;
and similar rooms. Such a system must be capable of providing five (5) air
changes at the rate of fifty (50) cubic feet per minute if the system operation
is intermittent; or twenty (20) cubic feet per minute if the operation is
constant. The point of discharge of exhaust air shall be at least three (3)
feet from any opening into the building. In bathrooms containing only a water
closet, lavatory or combination thereof; or in similar rooms, ventilation may
be provided with an approved mechanical recirculating fan or a similar device
designed to remove odors from the room.
   (c)   Electrical system.
   (1)   All dwellings and dwelling units shall be provided with electrical
service. Electrical facilities connected to or in any building or structure are
to be maintained hazard-free and in a state of good repair. The electrical
system shall be free from such hazards as bare wiring; overloaded circuits or
services; equipment not properly grounded; over-fused circuits; misuse of
wiring, including the use of extension cords in lieu of permanent wiring; non-
approved wiring; and wiring exposed to moisture or extreme heat. Broken, loose,
frayed, inoperable, defective or missing portions of the electrical service,
lines, switches, outlets, fixtures and fixture coverings shall be repaired or
replaced.
   (2)   All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances shall be installed and
maintained in a safe manner and in accordance with all applicable laws.
   (3)   Every habitable room must have at least two (2) electrical receptacle
outlets, or one (1) outlet and one (1) electric light fixture. Every bathroom,
water closet compartment, and laundry room must have at least one (1) electric
light fixture.
   (d)   Mechanical equipment. All mechanical equipment and appliances shall be
properly installed, maintained in a safe, working, operating condition, and
shall be free of any defect that impairs operability.
   (e)   Plumbing systems.
   (1)   Dwelling units shall be provided with one (1) or more bathrooms
equipped with a water closet, lavatory, and either a bathtub or shower. Hotels
or subdivisions thereof where both sexes are accommodated shall contain at
least two (2) separate toilet facilities that are conspicuously identified for
male or female use, each of which contains at least one (1) water closet.
Additional water closets shall be provided on each floor for each sex at the
rate of one (1) for every additional ten (10) guests or fractional part
thereof, in excess of ten (10). Each sink, bathtub and shower shall have hot
and cold running water as necessary for its normal operation and use.
   (2)   All dwellings or dwelling units shall have a kitchen, which shall
include an indoor cooking area. The cooking area must be provided with a sink
separate and apart from any bathroom sink or lavatory. Each kitchen sink shall
have hot and cold running water necessary for its normal operation and use.
   (3)   All plumbing systems are to be maintained safe and hazard free and in
a state of good repair. Every dwelling or dwelling unit shall have an adequate
potable water supply. Every plumbing fixture, water and waste-pipe, and gas
connection shall be properly installed in accordance with all applicable laws
and maintained in good and sanitary working condition so as to prevent
structural deterioration or health hazards, and are to be free from leaks and
obstructions.
   (4)   All plumbing fixtures shall be connected to a public sewer system or
to an approved private sewage disposal system, with the connections free from
leaks, blockages, or other defects. All plumbing fixtures shall be connected to
an approved system of water supply and provided with hot and cold running water
necessary for its normal operation.
   (5)   When a structure is equipped with a gas supply system, it must be
installed and maintained in a safe, hazard-free condition.
   (f)   Interior surfaces and features.
   (1)   Every wall or vertical support must be sufficient to carry imposed
loads safely, and must not lean, buckle, or split due to defect or lack of
maintenance.
   (2)   Every ceiling, roof, and ceiling and roof support must be sufficient
to carry imposed loads safely, and must not buckle, sag or split due to
defective material or deterioration.
   (3)   Every floor and floor support shall be maintained in a safe and
structurally sound condition, and every existing floor covering shall be
maintained in safe condition that is free of defect or deterioration that
creates an unsafe or unsanitary condition.
   (4)   Every interior door, cabinet, and other feature shall be maintained in
a safe and structurally sound condition.
   (5)   All interior coverings, finishes, surfaces including walls, ceilings
and floors shall be maintained in a good, clean and sanitary condition.
Peeling, chipping, flaking or abraded paint shall be repaired, removed or
covered. All walls, ceilings or floors shall be free from holes, breaks and
loose or rotting materials. Cracked or loose plaster, wallboard, decayed wood
or other defective surface conditions shall be corrected.
   (6)   All repair work shall be done in a workman like manner.
   (g)   Interior sanitation.
   (1)   The interior of every building or structure shall be maintained free
from any unsafe or unsanitary accumulation of refuse.
   (2)   All sanitary facilities shall be installed and maintained in a safe
and sanitary condition.
   (3)   Every dwelling unit must have a kitchen, which shall include a sink.
Sinks, drain boards and countertops adjacent to the kitchen sink shall be made
of non-absorbent materials, or must be covered by a non-absorbent material.
   (h)   Interior insect and rodent control. The interior of all buildings and
structures shall be kept free from infestation of insects, rodents and other
noxious pests where such infestation threatens the health, safety or welfare of
a person or persons.
   (i)   Ceiling heights. Habitable space, kitchens, halls, bathrooms and
toilet compartments must have a ceiling height of not less than seven (7) feet
measured to the lowest projection of the ceiling. If any room has a sloping
ceiling, at least one-half ( 1/2) of the room area must have the prescribed
minimum ceiling height.
   (j)   Access control.
   (1)   Exterior doors, including sliding glass doors, must have an operable
locking mechanism. Double cylinder dead bolt locks or other mechanisms that
prevent rapid egress in case of fire or other emergency are prohibited.
   (2)   All windows must have an operable locking mechanism.
(Ord. No. 9816, § 15, 2-24-03; Ord. No. 10126, § 2, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 10833, §
2, 8-4-10; Ord. No. 11826, § 1, 3-9-21)
Sec. 16-12. Building and structure exteriors.
   (a)   Exterior surfaces
   (1)   Weather protection. All weather-exposed exterior surfaces of every
building, including windows and doors, shall provide weather protection. Every
building shall be weather protected to provide shelter for the occupants
against the elements and to exclude moisture and dampness.
   (2)   Protective treatment. All exterior wood surfaces, except for decay-
resistant woods, must be protected from deterioration and from the elements by
paint or other protective treatment or covering. Any exterior wood surface that
has paint that is peeling, flaking, cracked, blistered or chipped, resulting in
bare, unprotected surfaces, must be repainted. All metal surfaces subject to
corrosion or rust must be treated or coated to inhibit corrosion and rust,
unless corrosion or rust is a design element.
   (3)   Boarded window or door openings.
   a.   No occupied structure may have boarded window or door openings, except
as necessary on a temporary basis to keep the structure secure while under
repair.
   b.   While vacant structures may temporarily be secured by boarding up
window and door openings in accordance with section
16-14(b), having or maintaining boarded window or door openings on a vacant
structure for one hundred eighty (180) days or more in any one (1) year period
is prohibited.
   (4)   Windows, skylights and doors. Every window, skylight, door and all
associated frames, shall be kept in sound condition, repair and weather tight.
All glazing materials shall be maintained free from cracks and holes. Every
window, other than a fixed window, shall be easy to open and capable of being
held in position by window hardware. All window and door hardware shall be
maintained in good condition and shall function properly.
   (5)   Decorative features. All cornices, belt courses, corbels, trim, eaves,
fascia, soffit, wall facings and similar decorative features shall be
maintained in good repair, free of decay, rot or loose material, and have
proper anchorage.
   (b)   Foundations, walls, roofs, and chimneys. Every foundation, wall, roof,
chimney and all exterior surfaces of buildings and structures shall be
maintained in structurally sound condition and shall provide weather
protection. All wood showing evidence of termite damage or decay, where
structural or functional integrity is impaired, shall be replaced.
   (1)   Foundations. All foundations shall be maintained in a safe condition
and shall be capable of supporting the load placed thereon by normal use.
Foundations shall have effective waterproofing.
   (2)   Walls. Exterior walls shall be maintained in a sound condition that is
substantially weathertight and weatherproof, and shall be protected from the
elements by paint or other approved protective covering. Exterior walls must be
free of loose, crumbling or deteriorated plaster or rotted, split or buckled
exterior wall coverings.
   (3)   Roofs. The roof of every building or structure shall be maintained in
a safe condition and shall provide weather protection for that building or
structure. Roof coverings shall not be rotted, broken, split, buckled or
otherwise deteriorated. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent dampness or
deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the structures. Roof drains,
gutters and downspouts shall be maintained in good repair and free from
obstructions.
   (4)    Chimneys. All chimneys must be maintained to be structurally safe and
in sound condition.
   (5)   Structural members. All structural members shall be maintained free
from deterioration and shall be capable of safely supporting the imposed dead
and live loads.
   (c)   Stairways, decks, and porches. All stairways, decks and porches shall
be maintained in a safe condition and shall be capable of supporting the load
and resisting all forces placed thereon by normal use. Every handrail and
guardrail shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed
loads, and shall be maintained in good condition.
   (d)   Coolers. Evaporative coolers, cooler stands, and any cooler mounting
apparatus must be maintained in a safe condition. Cooler stands and any
mounting apparatus must be structurally sound.
   (e)   Accessory structures. All accessory structures, including but not
limited to detached garages, fences and walls, must be structurally sound and
free of disrepair. Examples of disrepair include missing slats, posts or
blocks, or damage, deterioration, or rot. Fences and walls cannot be
constructed or covered with materials not designed or commonly used for that
purpose, such as pallets and tarps. Fences and walls must be properly anchored
so as not to be in danger of failure or collapse.
   (f)   Address display.
   (1)   General requirements:
   a.   All structures, whether new or existing, designed for human occupancy
or use which have an assigned address shall display the address in a manner to
be plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property.
   b.   Upon commencement of construction, the assigned address shall be
displayed at the primary access of the subject lot parcel or structure. The
address display may be temporary signage during construction.
   c.   Permanent address display shall be installed on all buildings, tenant
spaces and entrance signage, or as otherwise required by this section, prior to
building inspection final approval, certificate of occupancy or occupancy of
any building or structure. Display shall be required at all times thereafter,
conforming to this section.
   d.   More than one (1) address or number display may be required for each
building or site.
   e.   The complete address shall be displayed on all corner buildings at a
street intersection, for each side of the building facing any street.
   f.   Addresses shall be displayed and visible from both directions of
approaching vehicular travel.
   g.   Numbers and letters shall be made of durable and clearly visible
material. Paint shall not be considered durable for building addresses.
   h.   Numbers and letters shall be of colors contrasting with the background
of the sign or wall to which they are attached.
   i.   Numbers and letters shall have a minimum proportion ratio of height to
width of six to one (6:1). The formula is w = h/6, where w is width and h is
height in inches.
   j.   Numbers shall not be spelled.
   k.   All height requirements stated in this section are minimum sizes.
   (2)   Residential requirements: The address numbers assigned shall be
conspicuously placed immediately at the appropriate location on each building,
structure entrance or at the property access point.
   a.   For properties containing multiple addresses, addresses shall be placed
near the primary entrance in addition to the structure placement.
   b.   A building or structure set back fifty (50) feet or more from the curb
line or edge of pavement shall permanently display the address a minimum of
thirty-six (36) inches from ground level at the primary access point of the
property. Structure display may also be required by the addressing official.
   c.   Minimum number height shall be three (3) inches.
   (3)   Apartments: The address numbers assigned shall be conspicuously placed
immediately at the property access points, appropriate locations on each
building, and structure entrances.
   a.   Building numbers shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) inches in height.
   b.   Apartment number ranges shall be placed below building numbers or on
signage near the building. Apartment number ranges shall be a minimum of eight
(8) inches in height.
   c.   Individual apartment numbers shall be a minimum of three (3) inches in
height for exterior entrances and a minimum of one (1) inch in height for
interior (hallway) entrances.
   d.   Both exterior signage and interior numbering may be required by the
addressing official on specific development types.
   (4)   Apartment complex with multiple buildings:
   a.   All buildings shall have pedestrian directional signage visible from
both directions of pedestrian travel, with numbers a minimum of two (2) inches
in height.
   b.   All interior accessory buildings, structures and pool areas shall be
identified and have directional signage.
   c.   The apartment complex shall have entrance signage at all access points
addressed.
   d.   For access points that enter the complex from other than the addressed
street, the complete address shall be displayed on entrance signage.
   e.   Site and building addresses shall be visible at all times.
   (5)   Commercial: The address number assigned shall be conspicuously placed
immediately at each property access point, and the appropriate locations on
each building, and each structure entrance.
   a.   Buildings or structures set back no more than fifty (50) feet from the
curb line or edge of pavement shall display a twelve-inch minimum height
number.
   b.   Buildings or structures set back more than fifty (50) feet from the
curb line or edge of pavement shall display a fifteen-inch minimum height
number.
   c.   Individual addresses shall be placed near the primary entrance, a
minimum of three (3) inches in height.
   d.   The low and high number range may be displayed on buildings with
multiple addresses, a minimum of twelve (12) inches in height.
   e.   Site and building addresses shall be visible at all times.
   (6)   RV and mobile home park: The address numbers assigned shall be
conspicuously placed immediately at each property access point, and at the
appropriate locations for each building, structure, and property rental space.
   a.   Number height:
   1.   Space, directional signage and internal street signage numbers shall be
a minimum of three inches; and
   2.   Building numbers shall be a minimum of six (6) inches.
   b.   Park owners shall provide current maps of the park, describing the
locations of structures, buildings and spaces, to the fire code official upon
request.
   (7)   Entrance signage: Where this section requires entrance signage, the
address or address numbers assigned shall be placed at primary access points
immediately and shall be permanently installed prior to first occupancy of any
internal structure or building.
   a.   Numbers or address shall be a minimum of twelve (12) inches in height
on all entrance signage.
   b.   Complete address display shall be required at all street access points
in addition to the primary access street.
(Ord. No. 9816, § 15, 2-24-03; Ord. No. 10126, § 3, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 10833, §
3, 8-4-10; Ord. No. 11126, § 2, 11-6-13)
Sec. 16-13. Exterior premises and vacant land.
   (a)   Accumulation of vegetation prohibited.  Each owner, lessee, tenant,
resident or occupant shall maintain a property so it is free of the
accumulation or untended growth of vegetation. The accumulation or untended
growth of vegetation means the presence of plants on property that create a
fire, safety or health hazard, or that attract vermin either on the property,
on neighboring properties, or on both, and includes but is not limited to:
   (1)   Any lawn grass that exceeds six (6) inches in height.
   (2)   All weeds that exceed six (6) inches in height.
   (3)   Dead trees or dead shrubs.
   (4)   Dead palm fronds within ten (10) feet of the ground, a structure, a
fence or wall, or of any combustible other than the tree from which the fronds
have grown;
   (5)   Any tree, shrub, or other form of vegetation of any kind on the
property or on the adjoining right-of-way, street, or alley that extends over
or under the sidewalk space or roadway in a manner that may interfere with the
reasonable use of the street, sidewalk, or alley for pedestrian or vehicular
traffic of any kind or that may obstruct the view or light distribution of
traffic-control devices or luminaries. Vegetation must be trimmed and
maintained to provide an unobstructed pedestrian path a minimum of forty eight
(48) inches in width and eighty (80) inches in height from grade.
   (b)   Accumulation of refuse and debris prohibited. Each owner, lessee,
tenant, resident or occupant shall maintain a property so it is free of
accumulated refuse and debris. Accumulated refuse and debris means contained or
uncontained refuse and debris that is present on the property in a manner not
authorized by the Tucson Code. Material recycling facilities meeting the
requirements of section 15-24.7 are exempt from this prohibition.
   (c)   Composting permitted on residential property; standards and
procedures; violation. The provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this
section do not prohibit the maintenance of a compost pile on residential
property, so long as the compost pile does not create a hazard and is:
   (1)   Contained;
   (2)   Maintained so as not to produce offensive odors or attract flies or
vermin;
   (3)   Located, insofar as reasonably possible, so that it is not visible
from abutting properties or streets;
   (4)   Maintained in compliance with all rules, regulations and procedures
that may be promulgated by the code official.
A compost pile not in compliance with all the provisions of this section is in
violation of this chapter.
   (d)   Duty to remove weeds, debris and refuse from abutting sidewalks,
streets and alleys upon notice. Upon receipt of notice served pursuant to
section
16-45, the owner, lessee, tenant or occupant of any premises shall remove from
the premises and the abutting portions of contiguous sidewalks, streets and
alleys, all weeds, garbage, debris or other refuse which may endanger the
health, safety or welfare of the persons in the vicinity of such premises. This
duty extends to and includes any abutting sidewalk area and one-half (1/2) the
width of abutting alleys, from the property line to the center line of the
alley.
   (e)   Exterior insect, rodent and animal control. All premises shall be kept
free from infestation of insects, rodents and other noxious pests where such
infestation threatens the health, safety or welfare of a person or persons.
   (f)   Burning of refuse prohibited. Except as specifically permitted by this
or other adopted codes, the open burning or incineration of refuse is
prohibited.
   (g)   Exterior hazard or attractive nuisance. All premises shall be kept
free of any condition that constitutes a health hazard, imminent hazard, or
attractive nuisance. Such prohibited conditions include, but are not limited
to, the following:
   (1)   Abandoned refrigerators.  All premises shall be kept free of iceboxes,
refrigerators or other containers with a capacity of one and one-half (1 1/2)
cubic feet or greater that have an attached door or lid, snaplock or other
locking device that may not be released from the inside and that are abandoned,
discarded or no longer used for refrigeration and are in any place accessible
to children. In addition to any other remedy provided under this chapter, a
code official may immediately and without prior notice remove an attached door,
lid or other locking device or take other similar action to abate the hazard
presented.
   (2)   Hazardous excavations. All premises shall be kept free of abandoned or
unsecured excavations; or any excavation that creates a hazard to public safety
or an attractive nuisance. An excavation made under permit and secured and
maintained in a manner that complies with the applicable permit requirements is
not considered a violation of this section.
   (3)   Hazardous pools. Any swimming pool or other contained body of water
that contains water eighteen (18) inches or more in depth at any point and that
is wider than four (4) feet at any point and is intended for swimming must be
properly secured and maintained so as not to create a hazard to public safety,
a health hazard or attractive nuisance, and shall be entirely enclosed by a
wall, fence or other barrier that is adequate to prevent access by children.
Water shall not be allowed to stagnate or to harbor insect infestation.
   (h)   Outdoor storage. Outdoor storage on residential properties is
prohibited under the following conditions:
   (1)   When stored in the front yard.
   (2)   When stored in the side yard or rear yard and is not screened by a
minimum five (5) foot high solid wall or opaque fence.
   (3)   When exceeds twenty five (25) percent of the total lot area.
   (4)   When stored in an open covered porch that is visible from beyond the
boundaries of the lot.
   (5)   When stored in an open carport that is visible from beyond the
boundaries of the lot where the amount of storage restricts an automobile from
being properly stored within the carport. A double carport will require enough
space to store two (2) automobiles.
   (6)   When storage items include garbage, refuse or debris.
   (i)   Sidewalks, driveways, parking areas. All paved sidewalks, walkways,
stairs, steps, driveways and parking areas shall be kept in a proper state of
repair and maintained free from hazardous conditions.
(Ord. No. 9816, § 15, 2-24-03; Ord. No. 10126, § 4, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 10348, §
5, 11-28-06; Ord. No. 10833, § 4, 8-4-10; Ord. No. 11126, § 3, 11-6-13)
Sec. 16-14. Dilapidated structures; vacant and unsecured structures; buildings
and structures constituting a nuisance.
   (a)   Dilapidated structures. Buildings or structures that are so
deteriorated, damaged, dilapidated, or in need of repair so as to present a
threat to the health, safety and welfare of the community constitute a nuisance
and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation or demolition as provided in
Article VI of this chapter.
   (b)   Vacant and unsecured buildings or structures. Vacant and unsecured
buildings or structures are unlawful and are prohibited by this chapter. The
requirements of this subsection (b) shall apply to all vacant and unsecured
buildings or structures, regardless of whether or not the building or structure
is surrounded in whole or in part by a fence or wall.
   (1)   Duty to clean, secure and prohibit trespass.The owner or responsible
party of a vacant building or structure shall remove any accumulation of weeds,
combustible waste, or refuse from the interior of the building or structure and
the surrounding yards; and shall secure all doors, windows, and other openings
to prevent unauthorized entry. The owner or responsible party also shall post
both the structure and the exterior premises with signs to provide conspicuous
and reasonable notice prohibiting entry (i.e., "No Trespassing" signs).
   (2)   Reinspection of secured buildings and structures.The code official
shall periodically reinspect a building or structure that was cleaned or
secured pursuant to an administrative or judicial order to ensure continued
compliance with the order and this chapter. The code official may assess a
reinspection fee for actual costs of each inspection in those instances where
the building or structure is again found to be vacant and unsecured or in need
of debris or weed removal.
   (3)   Abatement of vacant and unsecured buildings or structures. When
ordered abated, a vacant and unsecured building or structure shall be cleaned
and secured as follows:
   a.   All accumulated refuse that poses a fire or health hazard within or
upon the property or premises shall be removed; and
   b.   All unsecured doorway, windows, or exterior openings shall be
barricaded in accordance with standards established by the code official, which
shall be kept on file with the city clerk, and in accordance with section
16-12(A)(3) of this chapter; and
   c.   Both the structure and the exterior premises shall be posted with signs
that provide reasonable notice prohibiting entry (i.e., "No Trespassing"
signs).
   (c)   Buildings and structures constituting a nuisance. All buildings and
structures are to be maintained so as not to pose a threat to the health and
safety of any person or persons. The condition of a building or structure that
meets any or all of the following is a public nuisance, is a violation of this
chapter, and subjects the building or structure to abatement as provided in
Article VI of this chapter, including demolition as provided in section
16-65:
   (1)   The building or structure lacks safe and adequate means of exit in
case of fire or panic.
   (2)   The stress in any materials, member or portion thereof, due to all
dead and live loads, is more than one and one-half (1 1/2) times the working
stress or stresses allowed in the building code for new buildings of similar
structure, purpose or location.
   (3)   The building, structure or any portion thereof has been damaged by
fire, earthquake, wind, flood or any other cause, to such an extent that the
structural strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was before
the damage and is less than the minimum requirements of the building code for
new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location.
   (4)   The building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind,
earthquake or flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to become:
   a.   An attractive nuisance to children; or
   b.   A harbor for trespassers or persons committing unlawful acts.
   (5)   The building, structure, or any portion or member or appurtenance
thereof is likely to fail, or to become detached or dislodged, or to partially
or completely collapse and thereby injure persons or damage property.
   (6)   Any portion of a building or structure, or any member, appurtenance or
ornamentation on the exterior thereof is not of sufficient strength or
stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be
capable of resisting a wind pressure of one- half ( 1/2) of that specified in
the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location
without exceeding the working stresses permitted in the building code for such
buildings.
   (7)   Any portion of a building or structure that has wracked, warped,
buckled or settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions
have materially less resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in the
case of similar new construction.
   (8)   The walls or other vertical structural members of the building or
structure list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing
through the center of gravity falls outside of the middle third of its base.
   (9)   The building or structure, excluding the foundation, has thirty-three
(33) percent or more damage or deterioration to the supporting member or
members or structural assembly, or fifty (50) percent damage or deterioration
to the nonsupporting members, enclosing or outside walls or coverings.
   (10)   The building or structure is infested by rodents, insects or other
noxious pests, rendering it uninhabitable.
   (11)   The building or structure exhibits conditions that present actual or
imminent hazards or dangers, or is otherwise unsafe for the purpose for which
it is being used.
   (12)   The building or structure, whether or not erected in accordance with
all applicable laws, has in any nonsupporting part, member or portion less than
fifty (50) percent, or in any supporting part, member or portion less than
sixty-six (66) percent of the (a) strength, (b) fire- resisting qualities or
characteristics, or (c) weather-resisting qualities or characteristics required
by law in the case of a newly constructed building of like area, height and
occupancy in the same location.
   (13)   A dwelling is unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a
condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease.
   (14)   The building or structure, because of obsolescence, dilapidated
condition, damage, lack of sufficient fire-resistive construction, faulty
electric wiring, gas connections or heating apparatus, or other cause.
   (15)   The building or structure has been found, upon reinspection, to be
vacant and unsecured, and either:
   a.   The code official has issued at least one (1) previous abatement order
to secure within the preceding twelve (12) months, or more than three (3)
abatement orders to secure over any time frame; or
   b.   The code official has secured the building or structure on at least one
(1) previous occasion within the preceding twelve (12) months, or more than
three (3) times over any time frame.
   (16)   A building or structure or portion thereof remains for any period of
time on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building or
structure; or normal construction of an unfinished or incomplete building or
structure has ceased for a period of more than twelve (12) months.
(Ord. No. 9816, § 15, 2-24-03; Ord. No. 10126, § 5, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 10638, §
2, 3-3-09; Ord. No. 10833, § 5, 8-4-10)
Sec. 16-15. Junked or inoperable vehicles.
   (a)   Prohibited storage.
   (1)   No person owning or having custody of any junked or inoperable vehicle
may store such vehicle on private property, or on any sidewalks, streets or
alleys, within the city, except as otherwise permitted under this section;
   (2)   No person owning, occupying or in control of any private property
within the city may store any junked or inoperable vehicle on the owned or
occupied property, or on any abutting sidewalks, streets or alleys, except as
otherwise permitted under this section;
   (b)   Permitted storage. This section shall not apply to any junked or
inoperable vehicle stored on private property if the vehicle:
   (1)   Is on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place
and manner and licensed by the city under chapter
19 of the Tucson Code, and the storage of the vehicle is necessary to the
operation of the business enterprise; or
   (2)   Is lawfully enclosed within:
   a.   An enclosed garage or other permanent building lawfully constructed of
opaque materials without openings, holes or gaps other than doors and windows;
   b.   A carport, and an opaque car cover designed for that purpose (and not
including tarps, bed sheets, plastic sheeting, or similar materials) completely
covers the body of the vehicle; or
   c.   The rear yard or side yard and screened by any fence, wall or barrier,
not less than five (5) feet in height, constructed of opaque materials which
screens it from view from any adjacent properties and the public right-of-way,
and is equipped with self-latching gates or doors. Such fence, wall or barrier
must comply with section
16-12(e).
   (c)   Persons responsible. Whenever the city finds that any junked or
inoperable vehicle is stored on private property or on any abutting sidewalks,
streets or alleys in violation of this section, the persons responsible for the
violation include the recorded owner, occupant or person in control of the
private property, as well as the registered owner or custodian of the vehicle.
   (d)   Authorization to enter private property for vehicle removal pursuant
to court order. Any code official or persons as may be directed by such code
official may enter private property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle
upon order of the court pursuant to section
16-60.
   (e)   Penalty; violation declared a nuisance.
   (1)   A violation of this section is punishable in accordance with section
16-48 of this chapter.
   (2)   The unlawful storage of any junked or inoperable vehicle within the
city in violation of this section is declared dangerous to the public safety
and a public nuisance.
(Ord. No. 9816, § 15, 2-24-03; Ord. No. 10126, § 6, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 10638, §
3, 3-3-09; Ord. No. 11126, § 4, 11-6-13)
Secs. 16-16--16-19. Reserved.
ARTICLE III.
SLUM PROPERTY
Sec. 16-20. Slum property; definitions.
For the purpose of this article, and unless the context otherwise requires:
   Managing agent means a person, corporation, partnership or limited liability
company that is authorized by the owner to operate and manage the property.
   Residential rental property means property that is used solely as leased or
rented property for residential purposes. If the property is a space rental
mobile home park or a recreational vehicle park, residential rental property
includes the rental space that is leased or rented by the owner of that rental
space but does not include the mobile home or recreational vehicle that serves
as the actual dwelling if the dwelling is owned and occupied by the tenant of
the rental space and not by the owner of the rental space.
   Slum property means residential rental property that has deteriorated or is
in a state of disrepair and that manifests one (1) or more of the following
conditions that are a danger to the health or safety of the public:
   (1)   Structurally unsound exterior surfaces, roof, walls, doors, floors,
stairwells, porches or railings.
   (2)   Lack of potable water, adequate sanitation facilities, adequate water
or waste pipe connections.
   (3)   Hazardous electrical systems or gas connections.
   (4)   Lack of safe, rapid egress.
   (5)   Accumulations of human or animal waste, medical or biological waste,
gaseous or combustible materials, dangerous or corrosive liquids, flammable or
explosive materials or drug paraphernalia.
(Ord. No. 9816, § 15, 2-24-03)
Sec. 16-21. Registration of residential rental property.
   (a)   An owner of residential rental property shall maintain with the
assessor in the county where the property is located information required by
this section in a manner to be determined by the assessor. The owner shall
update any information required by this section within ten (10) days after a
change in the information occurs. The following information shall be
maintained:
   (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the property owner.
   (2)   If the property is owned by a corporation, limited liability company,
partnership, limited partnership, trust or real estate investment trust, the
name, address and telephone number of the statutory agent, if applicable, and
the name, address and telephone number of any of the following:
   a.   For a corporation, a corporate officer.
   b.   For a partnership, a general partner.
   c.   For a limited liability company, the managing or administrative member.
   d.   For a limited partnership, a general partner.
   e.   For a trust, a trustee.
   f.   For real estate investment trust, a general partner or an officer.
   (3)   The street address and parcel number of the property.
   (4)   The year the building was built.
   (b)   An owner of residential rental property who lives outside this state
shall designate and record with the assessor a statutory agent who lives in
this state and who will accept legal service on behalf of the owner. The owner
shall designate the agent in a manner to be determined by the assessor. The
information shall include the name, address and telephone number of the agent.
   (c)   Residential rental property shall not be occupied if the information
required by this section is not on file with the county assessor. This
subsection does not affect any lease existing on August 6, 1999.
   (d)   All records, files and documents that are required by this section are
public records.
   (e)   A person who fails to comply with any provision of this subsection is
responsible for a civil infraction and shall be assessed a civil penalty of one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00), plus an additional one hundred dollars ($100.00)
for each month after the date of the original violation until compliance
occurs. The court shall not suspend any portion of the civil penalty provided
by this subsection.
   (f)   Notwithstanding subsection (e) of this section, if a person complies
within ten (10) days after receiving the complaint that notices the violation,
the court shall dismiss the complaint and shall not impose a civil penalty.
(Ord. No. 9816, § 15, 2-24-03)
Sec. 16-22. Inspection of residential rental property.
The code official is hereby authorized to inspect residential rental property
under the following circumstances.
   (1)   The property owner fails to comply with the provisions of A.R.S. §33-
1902 or successor provision. If the property is occupied, consent of the tenant
shall be requested before entering the interior of the structure. Except as
otherwise provided by law, the right of inspection does not extend to the
interior of the dwelling unit in a space rental mobile home park or
recreational vehicle park if it is not owned by a landlord unless the tenant is
in possession of the dwelling unit, or if the dwelling unit is vacant or
abandoned, the owner consents to the inspection. If a tenant refuses to consent
to entry, inspection may be obtained by any means provided by law.
   (2)   The property has been designated as a slum property, in which case it
may be inspected annually for three (3) consecutive years.
(Ord. No. 9816, § 15, 2-24-03)
Sec. 16-23. Abatement of slum property.
All buildings or portions thereof which are determined after inspection by the
code official to be slum properties as defined in this chapter are hereby
declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation,
demolition or removal in accordance with the procedures specified in this
chapter.
(Ord. No. 9816, § 15, 2-24-03)
Sec. 16-24. Designation of slum property; recordation.
   (a)   A residential rental property may be designated as a slum property if
it meets all of the following:
   (1)   The definition of slum property;
   (2)   Has three (3) or more of the conditions or defects described in
Article II of this chapter at the time of the inspection;
   (3)   The conditions or defects set forth in a notice of violation provided
per section
16-45 of this chapter have not been remedied within the time set forth in the
notice of violation; and
   (4)   No proper and timely appeal of the notice of violation has been filed.
   (b)   Where designation of a property as a slum is appropriate pursuant to
subsection (a), the code official shall designate a slum property by filing in
the office of the county recorder a certificate describing the property and
certifying that the property is a slum property and that the owner has been so
notified. Whenever the corrections ordered thereafter have been completed or
the building demolished so that it no longer exists as a slum property, the
code official shall file a new certificate with the county recorder certifying
that all required corrections have been made and that the property is no longer
a slum property.
(Ord. No. 9816, § 15, 2-24-03)
Sec. 16-25. Notice of designation.
In addition to any notice provided pursuant to section
16-45 of this chapter, a designation of slum property shall contain a warning
stating that any residential rental property designated as a slum property is
subject to the provisions of A.R.S. Tit. 33, Ch. 17 providing for penalties,
the appointment of a temporary receiver, annual inspections, and payment of
costs for inspections.
(Ord. No. 9816, § 15, 2-24-03)
Sec. 16-26. Appointment of temporary receiver and recovery of costs.
In addition to other remedies provided in this Code for the abatement of slum
property, the code official is authorized to seek the appointment of a
temporary receiver and recover costs associated with such appointment including
the filing of liens as provided by law.
(Ord. No. 9816, § 15, 2-24-03)
Sec. 16-27. Recovery of inspection costs.
In addition to any other remedy providing for recovery of costs either by law
or otherwise specified by this Code, the code official is authorized to file
costs as provided by law associated with inspections of slum properties in
accordance with A.R.S. § 33-1904 or its successor sections in the recorder's
office and upon such filing such costs shall be a lien on the property.
(Ord. No. 9816, § 15, 2-24-03)
Sec. 16-28. Appeal from designation as slum property.
A property owner may appeal the designation of the owner's property as a slum
property pursuant to the procedures set forth in Article VII of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 9816, § 15, 2-24-03)
Sec. 16-29. Licensed property management company; crime free multihousing
program; required training.
As provided in section 33-1906 of the Arizona Revised Statutes, the code
official may require a residential rental property owner whose property has
been designated as a slum or exhibits the criteria prescribed in section
16-14(c), relating to violations that materially affect the health and safety
of the occupants of the property, to hire a property management firm that is
regulated pursuant to Arizona Revised Statutes title 32, chapter 20, article
3.1 to manage the property, participate in the city's crime free multihousing
program, and attend city-approved landlord tenant training classes if available
from the city. The code official may also require the property owner to
participate in comparable training provided by a nonprofit corporation that is
designated as a § 501(c)(3), 501(c)(4), 501(c)(5) or 501(c)(6) corporation and
that is certified by the city to provide that training.
(Ord. No. 10512, § 1, 3-25-08)
ARTICLE IV.
UNLAWFUL ACTS
Sec. 16-30. Graffiti prevention, prohibition and removal.
   (a)   Graffiti prohibited, abatement procedures, penalty. No person who owns
or is in control of any real property within the city shall maintain, permit or
allow graffiti to remain on any building, fence, structure or otherwise on such
property where the graffiti is visible from the street or other public or
private property.
   (1)   Notice of violation and abatement. Upon the receipt of notice
requiring abatement from the graffiti abatement official, any person owning or
otherwise being in control of the property shall remove or abate all graffiti
within the time frame specified in such notice. The graffiti abatement official
shall give notice utilizing the procedures set forth in section
16-45 of this chapter, except that the notice need not include a statement
describing the right to an administrative appeal, since none exists. The
graffiti abatement official may cause the removal of graffiti from private
property should the property owner or person in control fail to remove graffiti
after the required notice. The city or its authorized representative is
expressly authorized to enter private property and abate graffiti.
   (2)   Penalty. A violation of this subsection constitutes a civil
infraction.
   (b)   Prohibited conduct, penalties.
   (1)   No person may write, paint, etch, or draw any inscription, figure, or
mark of any type on any public or private building or other real or personal
property unless permission of the owner or operator of the property has been
obtained.
   (2)   No person may possess an aerosol spray paint container, broad-tipped
indelible marker, solidified paint marker, or etching solution on any private
property unless the owner, agent, manager, or other person having control of
the property consented to the presence of the aerosol spray paint container,
broad-tipped indelible marker, solidified paint marker, etching implement or
etching solution.
   (3)   No person under the age of eighteen (18) may possess an aerosol spray
paint container, broad-tipped indelible marker, solidified paint marker, or
etching solution container on any pubic property unless the possession is for a
lawful purpose and the person is accompanied by a parent, guardian, teacher or
other person in a similar relationship over the age of eighteen (18).
   (4)   No person under the age of eighteen (18) may buy any aerosol spray
paint container or etching solution from any person or firm.
   (5)   Penalties. A violation of this subsection shall constitute a class one
(1) misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided below. Except as otherwise
provided in this section, no judge shall suspend the imposition of any of the
mandatory minimum penalties required by this section.
   a.   Together with any other penalties as provided by law, a person
convicted of violating subsection (1) shall be punished by a fine of not less
than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and not less than twenty (20) hours
community service. In addition to any other punishment, the court shall order
restitution to the victim for damage or loss caused directly or indirectly by
the defendant's offense in an amount to be determined by the court. In cases of
financial hardship as determined by the court, additional community service
hours may be imposed in lieu of fines. Persons under the age of eighteen (18)
will be punished as provided for in A.R.S. Tit. 8.
   b.   Together with any other penalties as provided by law, a person
convicted of violating subsection (2) or (3) shall be punished by a fine of not
less than one hundred ($100.00) dollars and not less than twenty (20) hours of
community service. In cases of financial hardship as determined by the court,
additional community service hours may be imposed in lieu of fines. Persons
under the age of eighteen (18) will be punished as provided for in A.R.S. Tit.
8.
      c.   A person convicted of violating subsection (4) shall be punished as
provided for in A.R.S. Tit. 8.
      d.   The court may order the parent or guardian of a minor child who had
knowledge that the minor child intended to engage in or was engaging in an act
of graffiti as described in subsection (1) to assist the minor child in payment
of restitution and/or performance of community service.
   (c)   Sale, storage and display of spray paint containers or etching
solution.
   (1)   No person shall sell, deliver, transfer or give spray paint containers
or etching solution to persons under age eighteen (18). Evidence that a person
examined acceptable evidence of age and acted upon such evidence in a
transaction or sale shall be a defense to any prosecution under this
subsection. This subsection does not apply to the transfer of an aerosol spray
paint container or etching solution from a parent to child, guardian to ward,
employer to employee, teacher to student or in any other similar relationship
when such transfer is for a lawful purpose.
   (2)   Spray paint containers or etching solutions sold at retail
establishments shall be stored or displayed either (a) in an area that is
inaccessible to the public without employee assistance in the regular course of
business or (b) within fifteen (15) feet of a cash register and within the line
of sight of a cashier at all times.
   (3)   Identification shall be required of purchasers of spray paint
containers or etching solution appearing to be under the age of twenty-six
(26). A retailer shall not be found responsible for violation of this
subsection unless the failure to require identification resulted in a sale of
spray paint or etching solution to a person under age eighteen (18).
   (4)   No person shall sell, deliver, transfer or display spray paint
containers or etching solution at swap meets, yard sales, garage sales, or
other like events.
   (5)   A retailer shall be responsible for the violation of any provision of
this section by its employees.
   (6)   Penalty. A violation of any provision of this subsection constitutes a
civil infraction. A person found responsible for a violation of any provision
of this subsection shall be fined not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00).
The fine amount of each subsequent violation of any provision of this
subsection within a consecutive 365-day period shall increase by increments of
three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each violation. No magistrate, special
magistrate or limited special magistrate may suspend the imposition of the
minimum fines prescribed herein.
(Ord. No. 9816, § 15, 2-24-03; Ord. No. 10126, § 7, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 10393, §§
2, 3, 4-24-07; Ord. No. 10833, § 6, 8-4-10; Ord. No. 10865, § 1, 12-21-10)
Sec. 16-31. Excessive noise.
   (a)   Maximum permissible sound levels. No person shall conduct or permit
any activity that produces a dB(A) beyond that person's property line exceeding
the levels specified in Table I. Where property is used for both residential
and commercial purposes, the residential sound levels shall be used only for
measurements made on the portion of the property used solely for residential
purposes.
 
TABLE I
Use of Property Receiving the Sound
           7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
Residential 70                      62
Commercial  72                      65
Industrial  85                      70
 
   All limits expressed in dB(A)
   (b)   Other noises prohibited; standards for excessive noise. Some sounds
may be such that they are not measurable by the sound level meter or may not
exceed the limits set forth in subsection (a) of this section, but nonetheless
may be excessive and may disturb the peace and quiet of a neighborhood or
person. Noises prohibited by this subsection are in violation of this chapter
notwithstanding the fact that there is no apparent violation of subsection (a)
of this section. The following activities are prohibited if they produce
plainly audible sound beyond the property line of the property on which they
are conducted and they disturb the peace and quiet of a neighborhood or person:
   (1)   Allowing or causing any continuous or intermittent noise that persists
for a period of at least fifteen (15) minutes and which is caused by using,
operating or permitting to be played any radio, television, tape deck, record
player, amplifier, musical instrument, or instrument, machine or device used
for the production, reproduction or emission of sound;
   (2)   Creating or allowing a loud, disturbing noise in connection with the
loading or unloading of any vehicle;
   (3)   Owning, possessing, harboring or permitting any animal or bird which
frequently or for continuous duration howls, barks, meows, squawks or makes
other sounds. Any peace officer or any county animal control officer is hereby
authorized to issue citations to owners for any violation of this subsection;
   (4)   Allowing or causing any shouting, yelling, screaming or any other form
of raucous vocalization by a person or group of people.
   (5)   Any noise created by construction activities including, but not
limited to, repair, remodeling, demolition, drilling, wood cutting or
excavation work conducted from 8:00 p.m. through sunrise Mondays through
Saturdays, and at any time on Sundays and legal holidays; except that a person
may engage in the above listed activities at that person's own residence from
sunrise through 8:00 p.m. Mondays through Saturdays, and between 9:00 a.m. and
6:00 p.m. on Sundays or legal holidays.
   (c)   General exemptions. The following activities are exempted from the
provisions of subsections (a) and (b):
   (1)   Emergency work necessary to restore property to a safe condition
following a fire, accident or natural disaster; to restore public utilities; or
to protect persons or property from an imminent danger;
   (2)   Sound made to alert persons to the existence of an emergency, danger
or attempted crime;
   (3)   Activities or operations of governmental units or agencies;
   (4)   Parades, concerts, festivals, fairs or similar activities that remain
within any sound limits approved by the city;
   (5)   Athletic, musical or cultural activities or events (including
practices and rehearsals) conducted by or under the auspices of public or
private schools, and public or private colleges or universities;
   (d)   Temporary exemptions. The city manager is authorized to grant a
temporary exemption from the maximum permissible sound levels established by
this article if such temporary exemption would be in the public interest and
there is no feasible and prudent alternative to the activity, or the method of
conducting the activity, for which the temporary exemption is sought. A
temporary exemption must be in writing and signed by the city manager and must
set forth the name of the party granted the exemption, the location of the
property for which it is authorized, the date(s) and time(s) for which it is
effective and the dB(A) level(s) authorized. A temporary exemption may be
granted only for the period of time that is reasonably necessary to conduct the
activity, which in no case may exceed thirty (30) days. The following factors
shall be considered by the city manager in determining whether to grant a
temporary exemption:
   (1)   The balancing of the hardship to the applicant, the community and
other persons in not granting the variance against the adverse impact on the
health, safety and welfare of persons adversely affected and any other adverse
effects of the granting of the variance;
   (2)   The nearness of any residence or residences, or any other use which
would be adversely affected by sound in excess of the limits prescribed by this
article;
   (3)   The level of the sound to be generated by the event or activity;
   (4)   Whether the type of sound to be produced by the event or activity is
usual or unusual for the location or area for which the variance is requested;
   (5)   The density of population of the area in which the event or activity
is to take place;
   (6)   The time of day or night which the activity or event will take place;
   (7)   The nature of the sound to be produced, including but not limited to
whether the sound will be steady, intermittent, impulsive or repetitive.
   (e)   Variances. Persons wishing to continue activities which commenced
prior to this article and which create noise in excess of the permitted levels
may seek a variance from the board of adjustment. Such a variance may be
granted if the board finds that strict application of this chapter would cause
a hardship and that there is no reasonable and prudent alternative method of
engaging in the activity.
   (f)   Noisy vehicles, motors prohibited. No person may use any automobile,
motorcycle or other vehicle, engine or motor of whatever size, stationary or
moving, instrument, device or thing, in such a manner as to create loud and
unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise.
   (g)   Mufflers required on mechanical devices; cutouts prohibited. No person
may operate any mechanical device operated by gasoline, or otherwise, without
having a muffler, in good working order and in constant operation, to prevent
excessive or unusual noise and smoke; and no person shall use a muffler cutout,
bypass or similar device.
   (h)   Hours for operation of engines other than on public highways. No
person may operate or use any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle, engine
or motor of whatever size, stationary or moving, on race tracks, race courses,
or other similar tracks or courses at places of amusement, not being public
highways, between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Sundays through
Thursdays, or between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 8:00 a.m. on Fridays and
Saturdays. The above hours of use may be extended to 12:00 midnight, provided
any sound emission is not in excess of seventy (70) dB(C), measured at a
distance of one hundred (100) feet from the automobile, motorcycle or other
vehicle, engine or motor.
   (i)   Noise by street vendors, advertisers. No person may produce any sound
in connection with the sale, advertising or display of merchandise from a
pushcart, bicycle or vehicle:
   (1)   In excess of seventy (70) dB(A), measured at a distance of fifty (50)
feet from the pushcart, vehicle or bicycle;
   (2)   While such pushcart, bicycle or vehicle is not in motion; or
   (3)   Between the hours of 1:00 p.m. and 3:00 p.m. and between the hours of
9:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.
   (j)   Persons responsible for noise violations. If the person responsible
for an activity that violates this section cannot be determined, the owner,
lessee or occupant of the property on which the activity is located shall be
deemed responsible for the violation.
   (k)   Sound amplification systems in vehicles. Noise from sound
amplification systems in vehicles cannot be practically regulated by imposing
decibel limits as decibel measurements are difficult to obtain from moving
vehicles. Noises prohibited by this subsection are in violation of this article
notwithstanding the fact that there is no apparent violation of subsection (a)
of this section.
   (1)   Except as authorized by law, no person shall operate or permit the
operation of any sound amplification system in or on a vehicle in such a manner
or with such volume as to annoy or disturb the peace and quiet of any person or
neighborhood in the vicinity.
   (2)   Except as authorized by law, no person shall operate or permit the
operation of any sound amplification system in or on a vehicle in such a manner
that the sound is plainly audible at a distance of fifty (50) feet, or in such
a manner that it causes a person to be aware of vibration accompanying the
sound at a distance of fifty (50) feet.
   (3)   Exemptions. This subsection shall not apply to:
   a.   Amplification systems being operated to request assistance of an
emergency nature or to warn of a hazardous situation;
   b.   Authorized emergency vehicles;
   c.   Vehicles operated by utility companies;
   d.   Vehicles used in parades, concerts, festivals, fairs or similar
activities that remain within any sound limits approved by the city; or
   e.   Amplification systems in vehicles which are operated on private
property with the permission of the owner and which are not plainly audible
beyond the property line.
   (l)   Penalty. Any person found responsible under this section for a
violation of this article shall be guilty of a civil infraction and punished in
accordance with minor section
1-8(2) and under the procedures outlined in Chapter
8 of this City Code. The court shall also enter an order of abatement against a
party found responsible for a violation of this article pursuant to Chapter
8 of this City Code.
   (m)   Enforcement. The police department and city attorney are authorized to
enforce the provisions of this section. A complaining member of the public
shall not necessarily be required to appear in court before a violator may be
found responsible for a violation of this section.
(Ord. No. 9816, § 15, 2-24-03; Ord. No. 10126, § 8, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 11024, §
1, 10-9-12, eff. 11-1-12)
Sec. 16-32. Unruly gatherings.
   (a)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, unless the context
otherwise requires, the following terms or phrases are defined as:
   Owner means any owner, as well as any agent of an owner acting on behalf of
the owner to control or otherwise regulate the occupancy or use of the
property.
   Premises means the property that is the site of an unruly gathering. For
residential properties, premises means the dwelling unit or units where the
unruly gathering occurs.
   Unruly gathering means a gathering of five (5) or more persons on any
private property, including property used to conduct business, in a manner
which causes a disturbance of the quiet enjoyment of private or public property
by any person or persons. Such disturbances include, but are not limited to,
excessive noise or traffic, obstruction of public streets by crowds or
vehicles, drinking in public, the service of alcohol to minors or consumption
of alcohol by minors, fighting, disturbing the peace, and littering.
   (b)   Abatement of unruly gathering. A peace officer may abate an unruly
gathering by reasonable means including, but not limited to, citation or arrest
of violators under applicable ordinances or state statutes, and dispersal of
the persons attending the gathering.
   (c)   Notice of unruly gathering; posting; removal of notice prohibited;
right to contest posting.
   (1)   Contents of notice. The premises at which the unruly gathering occurs
shall be posted with a notice stating:
   a.   That an unruly gathering has occurred at the premises;
   b.   The date of the unruly gathering;
   c.   That any subsequent unruly gathering on the same premises within a one
hundred eighty (180) day period shall result in liability for the penalties
provided in this section. Parties liable include any persons in attendance
causing the gathering to be unruly, or any owner, occupant or tenant of the
premises at which the unruly gathering occurred, or any sponsor of the event
constituting the unruly gathering; and
   d.   The right to contest the posting as provided in subsection (c)(4) of
this section.
   (2)   Posting requirements. Premises shall be posted with a notice as
provided in this section each time an unruly gathering occurs. The owner,
occupant or tenant of the premises or sponsor of the event constituting the
unruly gathering, if present, shall be consulted as to the location in which
such notice is posted in order to achieve both the security of the notice and
its prominent display.
   In the event that a premises is already posted at the time of a subsequent
posting, the one hundred eighty (180) day period from the date of the existing
posting shall be extended to one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of the
subsequent posting. Once a premises is initially posted as a result of an
unruly gathering and the conduct causing the gathering to be unruly has ceased,
a resumption of unruly behavior on the premises resulting in another police
response shall constitute a new and separate unruly gathering for purposes of
this section.
   (3)   Removal of notice prohibited. The owner, occupant, or tenant of the
posted premises shall be responsible for ensuring that the notice is not
removed, defaced, or concealed. The removal, defacement, or concealment of a
posted notice is a civil infraction carrying a penalty of a minimum, mandatory
one hundred dollar ($100.00) fine, in addition to any other penalties which may
be imposed under this section.
   (4)   Right to contest posting.
   a.   An owner, occupant, or tenant of the posted premises may contest the
posting of the notice by filing a written petition for review with the civil
infractions division of the city court requesting that the court determine
whether justification existed for posting of the notice under the provisions of
this section. The petition must be filed within ten (10) days after the posting
of the notice or, if the notice is given by mail, within fifteen (15) days
after the date of the mailing of the notice, and not thereafter. The court
shall set a time and date for a hearing to be held no later than fifteen (15)
days after receipt of the written petition and shall notify both the petitioner
and the criminal division of the city attorney's office of the hearing date. In
order to avoid the possibility of conflicting rulings, if more than one (1)
petition is filed under this subsection relating to a single posting, for
example by multiple lawful occupants of the posted premises, the court shall
set only one (1) hearing and shall consolidate the petitions and notify all
petitioners of the hearing date and time. At the hearing, the city has the
burden of proving by a preponderance of evidence that the posting of the notice
was justified pursuant to the provisions of this section.
   b.   An owner of a posted premises, at any time after the posting or the
mailing of the notice, may petition the court for an order directing the
removal of the notice on the grounds that the owner has taken reasonable and
necessary actions, such as evicting a tenant responsible for the violation, to
prevent the occurrence of a subsequent unruly gathering at the posted location.
The court shall set a time and date for a hearing to be held no later than
fifteen (15) days after receipt of the petition and shall notify both the
petitioner and the criminal division of the city attorney's office of the
hearing date. At the hearing, the petitioner has the burden of proving by a
preponderance of evidence that the petitioner has taken reasonable and
necessary actions to prevent the occurrence of a subsequent unruly gathering.
This petition process is not available to an owner who was present at the
unruly gathering and engaged in conduct causing the gathering to be unruly.
   (d)   Notification of property owner.
   (1)   Notification of the posting of the notice of unruly gathering shall be
mailed to any property owner at the address shown on the Pima County Property
Tax Assessment Records. The notification shall advise the property owner that
any subsequent unruly gathering within one hundred eighty (180) days on the
same premises shall result in liability of the property owner for all
applicable penalties as provided in this article. Notification shall be made by
certified mail. The return receipt shall be prima facie evidence of service.
   (2)   Additionally, notice shall be provided to an agent of the owner who
controls or regulates the use of the premises, if known. Notice to the owner's
agent may be provided by hand delivery or by certified or regular mail sent to
the agent's last known address.
   (3)   The failure to serve notice to any person described in this subsection
shall not invalidate any citation or other proceedings as to any other person
duly served, or relieve any such person from any duty imposed by this section.
   (e)   Unruly gathering a civil infraction; parties responsible. An unruly
gathering is unlawful and constitutes a civil infraction. The following
parties, if found responsible for such an infraction, are liable for the
penalties provided in subsection (g)(1):
   (1)   The person or persons who organized or sponsored the event
constituting the unruly gathering, including any owner or occupant in
attendance at the unruly gathering.
   (2)   Any person in attendance at the unruly gathering who engaged in any
conduct causing the gathering to be unruly.
   (f)   Subsequent unruly gathering a civil infraction; parties responsible.
The occurrence of an unruly gathering on the same premises more than once in
any one hundred eighty (180) day period is a civil infraction. The following
parties, if found responsible for such an infraction, are liable for the
penalties provided in subsection (g)(2):
   (1)   The owner of the property where the subsequent unruly gathering
occurred, if either:
   a.   The owner was present when the property was posted, or
   b.   Notification of posting was mailed or delivered to the owner of the
property per subsection (d), and the subsequent unruly gathering occurred not
less than two (2) weeks after the mailing of such notification.
   (2)   The occupant or tenant of the property where the subsequent unruly
gathering occurred.
   (3)   The person or persons who organized or sponsored the event
constituting the subsequent unruly gathering.
   (4)   Any person in attendance at the subsequent unruly gathering who
engaged in any conduct causing the gathering to be unruly.
   Nothing in this section shall be construed to impose liability on the owner,
occupant, or tenant of the premises or sponsor of the event constituting the
unruly gathering, for the conduct of persons who are in attendance without the
express or implied consent of the owner, occupant, tenant, or sponsor, as long
as the owner, occupant, tenant or sponsor has taken steps reasonably necessary
to prevent a subsequent unruly gathering or to exclude the uninvited persons
from the premises, including owners who are actively attempting to evict a
tenant from the premises. Where an invited person engages in unlawful conduct
which the owner, occupant, tenant or sponsor could not reasonably foresee and
could not reasonably control without the intervention of the police, the
unlawful conduct of the person shall not be attributable to the owner,
occupant, tenant or sponsor for the purposes of determining liability under
this section.
   (g)   Penalties.
   (1)   Unruly gathering. The penalty for a party found responsible for an
unruly gathering, as provided in subsection (e), shall be a minimum mandatory
fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00). Additionally, if the party found
responsible for an unruly gathering has previously been found responsible for
an unruly gathering, regardless of the location of the prior violation, the
penalty shall be a minimum mandatory fine of seven hundred and fifty dollars
($750.00).
   (2)   Subsequent unruly gathering. The penalty for a party found responsible
for the occurrence of a subsequent unruly gathering, as provided in subsection
(f), shall be a minimum mandatory fine of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00)
for a first violation, a minimum mandatory fine of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for a second violation, and minimum mandatory fines of one thousand
five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for each third or subsequent violation.
Additionally, any party found responsible for the occurrence of a subsequent
unruly gathering is responsible for the reasonable costs of response by law
enforcement to that occurrence. Reasonable costs of law enforcement response
include the salaries of the responding law enforcement officers, at the salary
then in effect for each classification of each responding officers, for the
amount of time actually spent in responding to and remaining at the unruly
gathering, together with associated overhead costs; and any actual costs of any
medical treatment to injured officers and/or the costs of repairing any damaged
city equipment or property. In no event shall the response costs imposed under
this subsection exceed $1,000.
   (3)   Abatement. The civil fines provided herein shall be in addition to any
other penalties imposed by law for particular violations of law committed
during the course of an unruly gathering. The court shall also enter an order
of abatement against a party found responsible for a violation of this section
pursuant to
Chapter 8 of the Tucson Code.
   (h)   Enforcement. The police department is authorized to enforce the
provisions of this section provided that enforcement is initiated by a
complaint from a member of the public. The complaining member of the public
shall not necessarily be required to appear in court before a violator may be
found responsible. Peace officers shall enforce the provisions of this section
using their sound discretion and the consideration of the totality of the
circumstances, including but not limited to the use of the premises (e.g.
residential, commercial, etc.).
(Ord. No. 9816, § 15, 2-24-03; Ord. No. 10126, § 9, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 11014, §
1, 8-7-12; Ord. No. 11445, § 1, 3-21-17)
Sec. 16-33. Placing refuse upon the property of another or public property;
illegal littering or dumping prohibited; persons responsible.
   (a)   No person shall place any refuse upon any private or public property
not owned or under the control of that person. In addition to any penalty that
may be imposed by this chapter or the Tucson Code, such person shall be liable
for all costs for the removal, abatement or enjoining of the refuse.
   (b)   No person shall litter, discard refuse, or allow refuse to be
discarded except at the places and in the manner authorized in Chapter
15 of this Code.
   (c)   The following persons are jointly and individually liable for a
violation of subsection (b):
   (1)   The resident of the property upon which the debris has been discarded;
   (2)   The person who discarded or allowed the debris to be discarded;
   (3)   The person who owns or maintains a refuse container in which refuse is
improperly placed or discarded; and
   (4)   The person who generated the refuse. When an item contained in refuse
discarded in violation of this section identifies a person, the item creates a
rebuttable presumption that the person so identified generated the refuse.
(Ord. No. 9816, § 15, 2-24-03)
Sec. 16-34. Public nuisance.
   (a)   Anything that is injurious to health, or is indecent or offensive to
the senses, or is an obstruction to the free use of property, so as to
interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property by an entire
community or neighborhood, or by any considerable number of persons, is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance. Any act or thing that affects an entire
community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, as herein
described, is not less a nuisance because the extent of the annoyance or damage
inflicted upon individuals is unequal.
   (b)   Any person who knowingly maintains or commits a public nuisance, or
who knowingly fails or refuses to perform any legal duty relating to the
removal of a public nuisance, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 9816, § 15, 2-24-03)
Sec. 16-35. Obstructing streets, alleys or sidewalks prohibited.
   No person shall obstruct any public sidewalk, street or alley in the city,
or any portion of any public sidewalk, street or alley in the city, by placing,
maintaining or allowing to remain thereon any item or object that prevents
full, free and unobstructed public use in any manner, except as otherwise
specifically permitted by law. Under this section, an item or thing that is
placed on a sidewalk shall not be in violation if all of the conditions
established in subsection
25-51(b) are satisfied.
(Ord. No. 10126, § 10, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 11331, § 3, 12-8-15)
Sec. 16-36. Posting of handbills prohibited.
   (a)   Posting prohibited. No person shall post, affix, display, paint or
attach; or direct, permit, or cause any other person to attach any handbill
upon any street lamp post, street sign, traffic sign or signal, traffic control
device, curb, sidewalk, hydrant, tree, shrub, utility pole or any other public
building, structure or object except as may otherwise be required or authorized
by law; or upon any private structure or building, without the consent of the
owner or person in control thereof.
   (b)   Presumption. For purposes of this section, there shall be a rebuttable
presumption that any person or entity whose name, address, telephone number, e-
mail address or other identifying information is indicated on the handbill, and
any owner, manager, or responsible party of any business, product or service
which is the subject of the handbill, has directed or caused the posting or
attaching of the handbill in violation of subsection (a).
   (c)   Penalty. A violation of this section is a civil infraction. In
addition to any other penalties prescribed by law, any person found responsible
for violating this section shall be fined not less than two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00). Each handbill illegally posted shall constitute a separate
violation, and shall be subject to a separate fine. In addition to the minimum
fine(s), upon finding any person responsible for violating this section, the
court shall order that person to reimburse the city for its costs in the
removal of the illegal handbill(s) pursuant to subsection (d), as documented by
a statement of costs presented to the court by the city.
   (d)   Enforcement and abatement by code official. The code official is
authorized to enforce the provisions of this section. The code official may,
but is not required to, initiate enforcement by issuing a notice of violation
pursuant to section
16-45 to the person(s) responsible for a violation of this section, and therein
direct and order the responsible person(s) to remove of the unlawful handbill
(s). The code official is further authorized to remove or cause the removal of
any handbills posted in violation of this section, with or without giving prior
notice to the person(s) responsible for the violation.
(Ord. No. 10126, § 11, 3-1-05)
Sec. 16-37. Group dwelling public nuisance; abatement.
   (a)   Definition of a group dwelling public nuisance. A dwelling unit may be
designated by the code official as a group dwelling public nuisance if all of
the following apply:
   (1)   The dwelling unit is treated as a lawful nonconforming group dwelling
under LUC Section 3.5.7.1.I; and
   (2)   The dwelling unit is the location of a documented pattern of nuisance
activity which shall consist of at least three (3) incidents on separate dates
within a two (2) year period resulting in criminal charges, or in civil
infraction citations involving nuisance conduct; and
   (3)   At least one (1) of the violations is a criminal offense or a
violation of section
16-31 (excessive noise) or section
16-32 (unruly gatherings) of this code.
   (b)   Maintaining a group dwelling public nuisance unlawful. It is unlawful
for a property owner to maintain a dwelling unit as a group dwelling public
nuisance; and a group dwelling public nuisance shall be abated as provided in
this section.
   (c)   Property owner notification. The code official shall first notify the
property owner and an occupant that the dwelling unit may be designated as a
group dwelling public nuisance. Such notice shall include the identification of
the dwelling unit in violation; a description of the charges or citations upon
which the designation is based; the address and phone number of a city
representative to contact; and a description of the appeal rights that apply.
The notice shall be delivered in the same manner as provided under section
16-45(e) for notices of violation. The notice shall provide the property owner
ten (10) working days to respond to the proposed designation or to submit to
the code official a remediation plan that will voluntarily abate the alleged
violation(s). Within ten (10) working days of the date of property owner
responds to the notice, or in the absence of a response within ten (10) working
days of the expiration of the response period, the code official shall notify
the property owner of the decision as to whether the dwelling unit is a group
dwelling public nuisance. A property owner may appeal a designation of a group
dwelling as a public nuisance under this paragraph within thirty (30) days of
the designation by filing an appeal in accordance with section
16-73.
   (d)   Abatement by remediation plan; appeal. Where the code official has
designated a dwelling unit as a public nuisance as provided above, the nuisance
shall be abated as follows:
   (1)   The code official shall first attempt to consult with the property
owner in which the dwelling unit is located to determine appropriate steps to
abate the group dwelling public nuisance through a remediation plan. Within
fifteen (15) working days, the code official shall determine the appropriate
remediation plan to abate the group dwelling public nuisance. The code official
may extend the time for completing the remediation plan by up to fifteen (15)
days. By the same date, the remediation plan shall be delivered to the property
owner, and shall be effective for one (1) year. Within five (5) days of
delivery to the property owner, the designation as a group dwelling public
nuisance and the remediation plan shall also be delivered to property owners
within fifty (50) feet of the subject site and mailed to any registered
neighborhood association that includes the subject site. Failure to deliver the
designation and/or remediation plan to these nearby property owners shall not
affect the validity of the designation or remediation plan. The code official
shall keep and maintain any nuisance designation or remediation plan issued
under this section as a public record, and shall make such documents available
to any person upon request.
   (2)   A property owner may file an administrative appeal to appeal the
requirements of the remediation plan in accordance with section
16-70 of this chapter.
   (e)   Subsequent violations a civil infraction; abatement by court order.
If, within twenty-four (24) months of the designation of a dwelling unit as a
group dwelling public nuisance and the issuance of a remediation plan, the
dwelling unit is the location of an additional violation or violations of the
City Code or of any criminal laws or statutes, the property owner is
responsible for a civil infraction. Upon finding a property owner responsible
for a violation under this subsection, the court shall order such person to
correct and abate the violations. Such order may include an order to reduce or
limit the number of unrelated tenants in the dwelling unit to not more than
four (4), except that any order limiting occupancy in this manner can only
apply for a time period not to exceed six (6) months. A reduction of the number
of tenants as a result of a court order issued pursuant to this paragraph shall
not terminate or discontinue the nonconforming use of the dwelling unit.
   (f)   Subsequent violations following court ordered abatement. If, within
twenty-four (24) months of court order issued pursuant to subsection (e) above,
the dwelling unit is the location of an additional violation or violations of
the City Code or of any criminal laws or statutes, the property owner is
responsible for a civil infraction. Upon finding a property owner responsible
for a violation under this subsection, the court shall order such person to
correct and abate the violations. Such order may include an order to reduce or
limit the number of unrelated tenants in the dwelling unit to not more than
four (4) and such order may be effective for up to one (1) year. A reduction of
the number of tenants for six (6) months or more pursuant to a court order
issued under this subsection shall terminate and discontinue the nonconforming
use of the group dwelling unit if the order exceeds six (6) months.
   (g)   Voluntary abatement. Where a property owner voluntarily reduces the
number of occupants to whom a dwelling unit is leased and occupied to less than
five (5) unrelated persons for a period of not less than one (1) year, the
designation of the property as a group dwelling public nuisance shall be deemed
abated. A subsequent determination that the dwelling unit is a group dwelling
public nuisance after the period of voluntary abatement shall be based upon
violations occurring after the voluntary abatement period. To qualify for the
voluntary abatement in this subsection, the property owner shall provide
written notice of the abatement and applicable lease period to the code
official, property owners within fifty (50) feet of the property to be abated,
and the registered neighborhood association.
(Ord. No. 10965, § 6, 2-15-12)
Sec. 16-38. Transfer of group dwelling public nuisance property after
remediation plan or court order.
   Fraudulent transfer as a misdemeanor. Any person who has been served with a
remediation plan or court order and who then transfers an ownership interest in
the real property against which the notice has been served is guilty of a
misdemeanor if the transfer is made without first obtaining a written
acceptance of responsibility from the new owner for the items listed in the
remediation plan or court order.
(Ord. No. 10965, § 6, 2-15-12)
Sec. 16-39. Shopping cart impoundment.
   (a)   Definitions.
   1.   "Abandoned shopping cart" means a shopping cart, whether marked or
unmarked, located outside the premises or parking area of a retail
establishment, which parking area shall include parking areas of common usage
in multi-store complexes and shopping centers.
   2.   "Unmarked" means lacking attached identification compliant with A.R.S.
§ 44-1799.32(b).
   3.   "Marked" means compliant with A.R.S. § 44-1799.32(b).
   (b)   Unmarked abandoned shopping carts are declared a nuisance and the city
may impound and/or immediately sell, discard, or otherwise dispose of such
carts at the city's discretion without notice.
   (c)   The city may immediately impound any abandoned shopping cart located
in such a manner as to impede emergency services; obstruct vehicle traffic,
bicycle traffic, or pedestrian sidewalk traffic; or create a safety hazard to
the public on a public right-of-way.
   (d)   The city may impound a marked abandoned shopping cart if the shopping
cart is not retrieved from its place of abandonment within three (3) business
days after the date the owner of the shopping cart, or the owner's agent,
receives actual notice from the city of the shopping cart's discovery and
location.
   (e)   The owner or retailer identified on marked abandoned shopping carts
impounded pursuant to subsections (c) or (d) above will be given notice of the
fact of impoundment and the location and hours of operation of the impound lot.
   (f)   If an impounded abandoned shopping cart has not been retrieved from
impound by the owner within thirty (30) days of notice pursuant to subsection
(e) above, the city may sell, discard, or otherwise dispose of such cart at the
city's discretion.
   (g)   The owner of any abandoned shopping cart impounded in accordance with
subsections (c) or (d) above shall pay the City a retrieval fee of thirty
dollars ($30.00) per cart. The payment shall be made at the time of retrieval
from impound. If the owner does not retrieve the cart from impound within
thirty (30) days after notice, the fee shall be applied to the owner's next
water service bill. Provisions for discontinuance of water service for non-
payment and for customer right to dispute the bill shall apply as provided in
section
27-50 of this code.
(Ord. No. 11118, § 1, 10-8-13, eff. 11-11-13)
Sec. 16-39.1. Limitations on yard sales.
   (a)   An owner or responsible party of residential property shall not
operate, conduct, manage, or allow more than four (4) yard sales within a
single calendar year at the residential property.
   (b) An owner or responsible party of residential property shall not operate,
conduct, manage, or allow any yard sale event that exceeds three (3)
consecutive days.
   (c)   A violation of this Section shall be a civil infraction, with a
sanction as provided in Section
16-48(2) of this Chapter.
(Ord. No. 11126, § 5, 11-6-13)
ARTICLE V.
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 16-40. Authority to enforce.
   (a)   The code official shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. In
addition, the code official is authorized to make safe any structure, in whole
or part, which in the opinion of the code official, is an imminent hazard to
the health or safety of any person or persons due to the conditions of such
structure.
   (b)   No person shall obstruct, impede or interfere with any officer,
employee, contractor or authorized representative of the city who is lawfully
engaged in the enforcement or execution of the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 9816, § 15, 2-24-03)
Sec. 16-41. Rules and regulations.
The code official is authorized to make reasonable and necessary rules and
regulations to carry out the provisions of this chapter. When approved by the
mayor and council, such rules and regulations shall be binding upon and obeyed
by all persons affected by this chapter after three (3) copies of any such
rules and regulations shall have been filed in the office of the city clerk as
a public record and there kept for use or inspection by any member of the
public at any time during the regular office hours of that office. A printed
copy of such rules and regulations shall be furnished any member of the public
upon request and payment of a reasonable charge therefor as set forth in such
printed copy.
(Ord. No. 9816, § 15, 2-24-03)
Sec. 16-42. Authority and inspections; re-inspection fees; appeal.
   (a)   The code official is authorized to make inspections of property to
determine compliance with this chapter. Interior inspections will be done with
approval of the owner, occupant or responsible party, or by a court order or as
otherwise authorized by law.
   (b)   Except as expressly provided in section
16-27 or elsewhere in the Tucson Code, no fee shall be charged for an initial
inspection to determine the existence of a violation of this chapter. Any
person who neglects, fails or refuses to correct the violations contained
within a notice of violation issued pursuant to section
16-45 may be assessed a re-inspection fee for inspections that occur after the
compliance date specified in the Notice, where such re-inspection demonstrates
the failure to comply. The fee for these re-inspections shall be set by
resolution or ordinance adopted by mayor and council. Failure to pay re-
inspection fees within fourteen (14) days of assessment is a violation of this
section. Re-inspection fees may be collected in any manner as provided by law,
including as a lien against the real property where the violation occurred.
   (c)   A person may appeal the imposition of a re-inspection fee to the code
official through an administrative conference in the manner provided in section
16-71. The administrative conference shall be the only administrative appeal of
a re-inspection fee, and no appeal may be made to the board of appeals.
(Ord. No. 9816, § 15, 2-24-03; Ord. No. 10687, §§ 1, 2, 6-23-09, eff. 7-1-09)
Sec. 16-43. Enforcement independent of other provisions.
The authority of the code official to enforce the provisions of this chapter is
independent of and in addition to the authority of city officials to enforce
the provisions of any other chapter of the city code or other laws, ordinances,
or statutes.
(Ord. No. 9816, § 15, 2-24-03)
Sec. 16-44. Cooperation of other departments.
The police department and any other department of the city has authority to
assist and cooperate with the code official in the performance of duties under
this chapter. This cooperation may include assistance in enforcement or
abatement actions. This section is not intended to create or expand the
authority of any department to perform acts that are otherwise prohibited by
law.
(Ord. No. 9816, § 15, 2-24-03)
Sec. 16-45. Notice of violation.
   (a)   If the code official finds a violation of sections
16-4,
16-11,
16-12,
16-13,
16-14,
16-15,
16-30(a),
16-35 or
16-36 of this chapter, the code official may notify the owner or responsible
party through the issuance of a notice of violation.
   (b)   A notice of violation issued pursuant to this section shall include:
   (1)   The identification of the property in violation; a street address or
legal description of the property is sufficient identification of the property;
   (2)   A statement of the violations in sufficient detail to allow an owner
or responsible party to identify and correct the problem;
   (3)   A statement of the actions required to correct and abate the
violations. The statement of required action shall direct the owner or
responsible party to perform whatever action is reasonably necessary to correct
the violations, including clean-up, extermination, repair, rehabilitation,
vacation of the building or structure, compliance with section
16-29, and/or demolition:
   a.   If the action required is a repair, the notice shall direct that all
required permits be secured for the repair, and that the repair work shall be
commenced and completed within such time, not to exceed sixty (60) days, as the
code official determines is reasonable under the circumstances.
   b.   If the action required includes the vacation of a building or
structure, the notice shall direct that the building or structure be vacated
within a time certain as the code official determines is reasonable under the
circumstances.
   c.   If the action required includes demolition and removal of a building or
structure, the notice shall direct that the building or structure be vacated
within a time certain as the code official determines is reasonable under the
circumstances; that all permits required for the demolition be secured within
sixty (60) days from the date of the notice; and that the demolition and
removal be completed within a time certain as the code official determines is
reasonable under the circumstances.
   d.   If the action required is the abatement of a hazardous excavation, the
notice shall direct any or all of the following actions be completed within a
time certain as determined to be reasonable by the code official:
   1.   Securing the excavation by completely surrounding either the excavation
or the property with a fence or other enclosure that is at least five (5) feet
in height at all points;
   2.   Securing the excavation by completely covering the excavation in a
manner that prevents any access to the excavation and eliminates any hazard or
attractive nuisance;
   3.   Completely filling the excavation with clean fill.
   (4)   The address and phone number of a city representative to contact;
   (5)   A statement describing the city's authority to abate should the owner
or responsible party not correct the violation within the time specified in the
notice, and to assess a lien against the property for the costs of abatement;
   (6)   A statement advising that any person having any legal interest in the
property may appeal from the notice in the manner specified in this chapter,
and that failure to appeal will constitute a waiver of all rights to an
administrative determination and hearing of the matter.
   (c)   In order for the city to assess the property for the costs of
abatement as provided in section
16-61, the notice shall be given not less than thirty (30) days before the day
set for compliance and shall include the estimated cost of such abatement to
the city if the owner or responsible party does not comply.
   (d)   The notice shall be served upon the record owner and/or the
responsible party in the manner described in subsection (e) of this section. In
addition, the notice shall be served on the holder of any legal interest in the
property, if known to the code official, and in cases involving an order to
vacate, upon any lawful tenant. Any failure to serve any person holding legal
interest in the property shall not invalidate any proceedings as to any other
person duly served, and shall not relieve any such person from any obligation
imposed by this chapter.
   (e)   Any notice given for any purpose under this chapter, except any notice
that includes an order to vacate or an order to abate by demolition, shall be
deemed effective on the date when written notice is hand delivered; or on the
date when written notice is mailed by first class mail, addressed to the
property owner or responsible party. Any notice given under this chapter that
includes an order to vacate or an order to abate by demolition shall be deemed
effective on the date when written notice is hand delivered or mailed by
certified mail return receipt requested, addressed to the property owner or
responsible party. Any notice served by first class mail shall be mailed to the
last known address of the owner, the owner's authorized agent or the owner's
statutory agent and to the address to which the tax bill for the property was
last mailed. For any notice given under this chapter for any purpose, including
any notice that includes an order to vacate or an order to abate by demolition,
if personal service or mailed service is not practicable, service of notice
shall also be deemed effective upon notification through one time public notice
published in a newspaper of general circulation and by posting the property for
a period of thirty (30) days. Nothing herein shall preclude the city from
giving additional verbal, written, or posted notice at its discretion. If the
city does elect to give any additional notice in any instance, it shall not
thereby become obligated to give such additional notice thereafter in the same
or other situations.
   (f)   Unless otherwise specifically provided, nothing in this section shall
require the issuance of a notice of violation prior to the commencement of
civil or criminal violation proceedings.
   (g)   Any person who fails to comply with a notice of violation issued
pursuant to this section shall be subject to the penalties set forth in section
16-48 of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 9816, § 15, 2-24-03; Ord. No. 10126, § 12, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 10512, §
2, 3-25-08; Ord. No. 10638, § 4, 3-3-09)
Sec. 16-46. Transfer of property after notice.
   (a)    Responsibility upon transfer of property. The transfer of any and all
property interests in any manner of any real property against which a notice of
violation has been issued shall not relieve the party(s) served with a notice
unless the legal entity assuming an ownership interest in such property, in
writing, assumes responsibility for compliance with the notice of violation and
a copy of such writing is presented to the code official.
   (b)   Fraudulent transfer as a misdemeanor. Any person who has been served
with a notice of violation and who then transfers an ownership interest in the
real property against which the notice has been served is guilty of a
misdemeanor if the transfer is made without first obtaining a written
acceptance of liability from the new owner for the items listed in the notice.
(Ord. No. 9816, § 15, 2-24-03)
Sec. 16-47. Recording a violation.
If there is not compliance with a notice of violation within the time specified
in the notice, and no appeal has been properly and timely filed, the code
official may record a notice of violation with the county recorder. A recorded
notice of violation shall describe the property and the violations and shall
certify that the owner has been notified. Whenever the corrections ordered
thereafter have been completed or the building demolished so that the
violations described in the notice have been abated, the code official shall
file a new certificate with the county recorder certifying that all required
corrections have been made and that the property is no longer in violation of
this chapter. Failure to record a notice of violation shall not affect the
validity of the notice as to persons who receive the notice.
(Ord. No. 9816, § 15, 2-24-03)
Sec. 16-48. Violations and penalties.
Unless a penalty, remedy or sanction is otherwise specified in this chapter,
the penalty for a violation of this chapter shall be as follows:
   (1)   The remedies herein are cumulative and the city may proceed under one
(1) or more such remedies.
   (2)   Any owner or responsible party who commits, causes, permits,
facilitates or aids or abets any violation of any provision of this chapter or
who fails to perform any act or duty required by this chapter is responsible
for a civil infraction and is subject to a civil sanction of not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00).
   (3)   Any owner or responsible party who commits, causes, permits,
facilitates or aids or abets any violation of any provision of this chapter or
who fails to perform any act or duty required by this chapter is guilty of a
class one (1) misdemeanor.
   (4)   Each day any violation of any provision of this chapter or the failure
to perform any act or duty required by this chapter exists shall constitute a
separate violation or offense.
(Ord. No. 9816, § 15, 2-24-03)
Sec. 16-49. Jurisdiction of court.
   (a)   Jurisdiction of all proceedings to enforce the provisions of this
chapter shall be in the City Court of the City of Tucson.
   (b)   Civil infraction proceedings to enforce this chapter may be
adjudicated by a magistrate or a special limited magistrate.
   (c)   The City Court of the City of Tucson shall have jurisdiction to issue
orders pursuant to this chapter permitting the city to abate conditions that
constitute a violation of the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 9816, § 15, 2-24-03)
Sec. 16-50. Commencement of civil infraction proceedings.
Any civil infraction proceedings to enforce the provisions of this chapter
shall be commenced, and summons shall be issued in accordance with the
procedures set forth in Arizona Revised Statutes, city ordinance or as provided
in the Local Rules of Practice and Procedure-City Court-City of Tucson. If the
city is unable to personally serve the complaint, the complaint may be served
in the same manner prescribed for alternative methods of service by the Arizona
Rules of Civil Procedure or by certified or registered mail, return receipt
requested.
(Ord. No. 9816, § 15, 2-24-03)
Sec. 16-51. Appeal of court decision.
Any party may appeal the judgment of the court to the Superior Court. Appeals
from civil infraction proceedings shall be in accordance with the Superior
Court Rules of Appellate Procedure-Civil. Appeals from criminal proceedings
shall be in accordance with the Superior Court Rules of Appellate Procedure-
Criminal.
(Ord. No. 9816, § 15, 2-24-03)
Secs. 16-52--16-59. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI.
ABATEMENT
Sec. 16-60. Court ordered abatement.
   (a)   Upon finding a person guilty or responsible for a violation of any
provision of this chapter, the court shall order such person to perform
whatever action is reasonably necessary to correct and abate the violations,
including clean-up, board-up, extermination, repair, rehabilitation, vacation
of the building or structure, permanently securing or filling the excavation,
compliance with section
16-29, and/or demolition. An abatement order shall be effective for one (1)
year unless stayed on appeal. If stayed on appeal, the order shall be effective
for one (1) year from the end of the appeal if the judgement and sentence are
upheld. If more than one (1) person is guilty or responsible for a violation,
such persons shall be jointly and severally responsible for completing the
abatement.
   (b)   For violations of section
16-15 of this chapter, upon a finding of responsibility, the court shall order
the abatement of the offending vehicle within thirty (30) days of judgment,
unless additional time is requested by the defendant and granted by the court.
Upon expiration of the time for abatement, and upon request by the city, the
court shall order the city to abate a violation of section
16-15 by towing and impounding the vehicle; and the city shall dispose of the
vehicle pursuant to the procedures for such disposal as set forth in sections
20-13 and
20-14 of the Code.
   (c)   When the court orders abatement pursuant to this section, the court
shall advise a violator that additional fines will be imposed for failure to
abate a violation, and that the city may bring criminal charges for failure to
obey an order to abate a violation.
(Ord. No. 9816, § 15, 2-24-03; Ord. No. 10126, § 13, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 10512, §
3, 3-25-08)
Sec. 16-61. Abatement by the city.
   (a)   In addition to ordering abatement of a violation as provided in
section
16-60, upon finding a person guilty or responsible for a violation of any
provision of this chapter, the court may issue an order authorizing the city to
perform whatever action is reasonably necessary to correct and abate the
violation, including clean-up, board-up, extermination, repair, rehabilitation,
vacation of the building or structure, disconnection of utilities, permanently
securing or filling the excavation, and/or demolition.
   (b)   The reasonable costs of any such abatement shall be the responsibility
of the person found guilty or responsible of the violation. If more than one
(1) person is guilty or responsible for a violation, such persons shall be
jointly and severally responsible for the costs of the abatement. The city
shall pay the cost and expense of such abatement from any appropriation made
available for that purpose and shall certify a statement of account to the
finance director who shall collect the amount due, together with interest at
the rate established by law.
   (c)   Any and all charges and costs arising from the city taking action to
abate a violation pursuant to a court order shall be a lien filed against the
real property that is the subject of the violation.
   (d)   The city may make the costs of an abatement an assessment on the
property that is the subject of the violation where all of the following are
true:
   (1)   The case was initiated by the service of a notice of violation
pursuant to section
16-45 of this chapter;
   (2)   The owner or responsible party failed to comply with such notice
within thirty (30) days; and
   (3)   The notice included the estimated cost of such abatement to the city
if the owner or responsible party did not comply.
Upon commencement of action on the property or after mailing the statement of
account to the owner or responsible party, the city shall assess the property
for the cost of work performed, including actual costs of any additional
inspection and other incidental connected costs, and for associated legal costs
for abatement or injunction, and may pursue any or all means for recovery of
cost if the assessment is not paid. If the assessment is paid, the city shall
remove the assessment. In the event it is necessary to enforce the assessment
by sale, the sale shall be made from a judgment of foreclosure and order of
sale. The city shall have the right to enforce the assessment in the Superior
Court of Pima County, at any time after recording, but failure to enforce the
assessment shall not affect its validity. The recorded assessment shall be
prima facie evidence of the truth of all matters recited therein, and of the
regularity of all proceedings prior to the recording. Prior assessment or
assessments for the purposes provided for in this chapter shall not be a bar to
a subsequent assessment or assessments and any number of liens or assessments
on the same parcel may be enforced in the same action.
   (e)   An assessment made pursuant to this section is prior and superior to
all other liens, obligations, mortgages or other encumbrances, except liens for
general taxes.
   (f)   Any liens or assessments filed with the county recorder pursuant to
previous provisions of this chapter or any similar chapter shall remain in
effect under the same terms and conditions that existed at the time of
recording.
   (g)   If the code official observes a violation of sections
16-13(a), (b), (c), (d), (e) or
16-33 and serves a written notice of violation pursuant to section
16-45 and the violation has not been completely abated within thirty (30) days,
then the violation is presumed to constitute a health or fire hazard. The code
official may then go upon the property and abate the violation at the expense
of the owner or responsible party. Any and all costs arising from the city's
action to abate the violation shall be a lien filed against the real property
that is the subject of the violation. A verified statement of the costs or
expenses shall be prepared and charged pursuant to rules, procedures and
regulations promulgated by the appropriate code official to the last known
address of the responsible person. In determining costs, the city may charge
twice the rate established by mayor and council resolution for the collection
of trash and refuse. If the charged person has a utility services account with
the city, the costs may be charged to that account. If more than one (1) person
is responsible for the violation, such persons shall be jointly and severally
responsible for the payment of costs or expenses of the abatement. The payment
may be in addition to any civil or criminal penalty imposed pursuant to this
Code.
   (h)   The purpose of charging costs to a utility services account per
subsection (g) is to provide a means of billing and collecting costs, rather
than to create a means of discontinuing utility services.
(Ord. No. 9816, § 15, 2-24-03; Ord. No. 10126, § 14, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 10348, §
6, 11-28-06; Ord. No. 10833, § 7, 8-4-10)
Sec. 16-62. Temporary abatement.
If it is determined that a nuisance as provided in section
16-14 is a hazard to the public safety and health, the code official may
declare such structure a hazard. After notice is communicated to any owner of
record to secure the structure and the owner does not secure the structure to
city specifications, the hazard may be summarily abated by the city through
boarding. The city may also post both the structure and the exterior premises
with signs to provide reasonable notice prohibiting entry (i.e., "No
Trespassing" signs). Any and all charges and costs arising from the city taking
action to secure the structure shall be a lien filed against the real property
containing such a structure.
(Ord. No. 9816, § 15, 2-24-03; Ord. No. 10126, § 15, 3-1-05)
Sec. 16-63. Emergency abatement.
   (a)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter if, in the opinion
of the code official, the conditions at a property constitute an imminent
hazard, the code official may order immediate abatement of the hazard without
notice. Such abatement of an imminent hazard shall be limited to the minimum
work necessary to remove the hazard, and may include disconnection of
utilities.
   (b)   The city shall pay the cost and expense of such abatement from any
appropriation made available for that purpose.
   (c)   A lien shall be recorded with the Pima County Recorder's Office and
shall address the same costs and procedures identified in section
16-61, entitled abatement by the city.
   (d)   Whenever the code official finds that any structure contains an
imminent hazard or health hazard, the code official may declare such structure
unfit for human occupancy and order it to be vacated or to remain vacant. A
structure declared unfit for occupancy and ordered vacated or to remain vacant
under the provisions of this section shall not be leased, rented or occupied,
and the utilities cannot be reconnected, until it has been inspected and deemed
fit for occupancy by the city. The city shall reinspect, for the purpose of
reoccupancy, within three (3) business days of the receipt of a written request
by the owner.
   (e)   Fire department suppression forces are responsible for emergency
operations related to fire conditions. In any case involving fire conditions at
a building or structure, fire suppression forces shall be responsible for fire
suppression and structure control until such time as the fire is fully
extinguished. After fire conditions are fully extinguished, and after any
necessary fire cause investigation, fire suppression forces shall transfer
control and responsibility for the building or structure to the building
official or other appropriate code official. After this transfer, all
subsequent enforcement actions, such as securing the structure, restoring
utilities, or ordering demolition, as well as all follow up actions such as
cost recovery, shall be the responsibility of the building official or code
official. After the transfer of responsibility, fire cause investigators shall
retain authority over and responsibility for investigation of fire causation.
(Ord. No. 9816, § 15, 2-24-03)
Sec. 16-64. Structures posted as hazardous.
   (a)   Whenever the code official has determined that a structure is unfit
for occupancy and orders the structure to be vacated, the code official shall
post a written notice at or upon each exit of the structure. The notice shall
be in substantially the following form:
DO NOT ENTER
UNSAFE TO OCCUPY
It is unlawful to occupy this structure, or to remove or deface this notice.
   (b)   No person shall remain in or enter any structure that has been so
posted, except to make repairs, demolish or remove such structure under permit.
No person shall remove or deface such notice after it is posted until the
required repairs, demolition or removal of the structure is completed and the
property is reinspected and found to be in compliance.
   (c)   Whenever a notice is posted pursuant to subsection (b) of this
section, the code official shall provide notice of such posting to the property
owner using the procedures and provisions set forth in section
16-45 of this chapter. This notice shall recite the emergency and describe the
hazardous condition(s) that necessitate the posting.
(Ord. No. 9816, § 15, 2-24-03)
Sec. 16-65. Abatement by demolition.
Abatement by demolition shall be ordered only where repair of the structure is
unreasonable or impracticable, and demolition and removal of a structure or
building is necessary to correct and abate a violation. Any action involving
the demolition of a building or structure shall be commenced by issuing a
notice of violation to the owner and any responsible parties in accordance with
the provisions of section
16-45.
(Ord. No. 9816, § 15, 2-24-03)
Sec. 16-66. Historic structures.
   (a)    Purpose. In order to promote the preservation and rehabilitation of
significant historic structures that may have become structurally unsound, the
following demolition procedures have been established to provide for adequate
notification, analysis, stabilization, or demolition and documentation of such
structures without jeopardizing the safety and welfare of the public.
   (b)   Applicability. These provisions apply to all historic structures
within a City of Tucson Historic District or to designated national, state, or
City of Tucson historic landmarks.
   (c)   Definitions. For the purpose of these procedures, an historic
structure shall be defined as any structure more than fifty (50) years old.
   (d)   Organization. The appropriate historic district advisory board shall
be responsible for providing a list of architects familiar with the types of
construction in its district to the Tucson-Pima County Historical Commission.
At least one (1) architect from the list should be available to advise the
structural engineer and/or building official when an emergency situation
exists. The Tucson-Pima County Historical Commission shall file a list each
January 30th with the planning department of five (5) qualified architects who
are not city employees.
   (e)   Notification. When, either during or after business hours, the
building official is informed that a structure is in imminent danger of
collapse so as to endanger its occupants, other person, or neighboring
structures, the building official shall at all times immediately notify the
designated member of the planning department and the owner of the property in
question and request the owner or the owner's agent to meet with the building
official at the premises or other appropriate place concerning the course of
action to be taken with regard to the subject structure. Planning department
staff shall immediately notify the:
   (1)   Advisory board chairperson of the historic district in which the site
is located;
   (2)   Tucson-Pima County Historical Commission Chairperson;
   (3)   State historic preservation officer if the structure is listed in the
national historic register as being historically significant;
   (4)   An architect from the list provided by the Tucson-Pima County
Historical Commission.
   (f)   Evaluation.
   (1)   The building official shall immediately thereafter evaluate the
demolition option with representatives of the planning and fire department
staffs, and a licensed structural engineer who has experience in working with
local historic structures.
   (2)   An architect from the list of architects familiar with adobe
construction should be at the scene of the proposed demolition within two (2)
hours of being notified to provide advice to the building official and a
structural engineer concerning the proposed demolition.
   (g)   Abatement: emergency stabilization or demolition. When an historic
building is damaged beyond the point of safety as determined by this review
process, the feasibility of stabilizing the building shall first be considered
by the building official after consultation with a structural engineer and an
architect, if available. If the building cannot feasibly be brought to the
point of safety by stabilization, partial demolition should be undertaken to
the point of stability, again as determined by the building official after
consultation with the structural engineer and architect, if available. Partial
demolition should be done in such a manner that the future rehabilitation of
the structure will not be impeded.
   (h)   Fire department operations. The role of the fire department
suppression forces shall be limited to emergency operations and the abatement
of imminent hazards to life. Only as a last resort and under the most extreme
circumstances will the fire department suppression forces consider demolition
of an historic structure as a means of hazard abatement. The fire department
suppression forces will make every reasonable effort to salvage and preserve as
much of the historic structure as possible when involved in fire.
   (i)   Report. A written report documenting the necessity of demolishing an
historic structure should be prepared within five (5) working days of the
decision to demolish a structure. This report must include the analysis of the
structural engineer and the recommendations of the architect consulted.
   (j)   Salvage and documentation. A two (2) day delay shall be imposed in all
but the most extreme cases to allow for salvage of important architectural
features or photographic documentation. Access for these purposes will be
permitted only with the permission of the building official and the property
owner (following a securing of the property by fencing or other means as
determined by the building official).
(Ord. No. 9816, § 15, 2-24-03)
Sec. 16-67. Failure to obey abatement order.
Any person who fails to obey an order issued by a magistrate, special
magistrate, or special limited magistrate directing abatement of a violation of
this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. A violation of this section is
punishable by a minimum mandatory twenty-four (24) hours in jail, up to a
maximum six (6) months in jail; by a minimum mandatory fine of two hundred and
fifty dollars ($250.00), up to a maximum two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00); and by probation up to three (3) years. Minimum jail and minimum
fines can not be suspended.
(Ord. No. 9816, § 15, 2-24-03)
Secs. 16-68--16-69. Reserved.
ARTICLE VII.
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS
Sec. 16-70. Availability of administrative appeal.
   The provisions of this article, which permit administrative review of a
notice of violation, only apply to:
   (1)   Violations of sections
16-4,
16-11,
16-12 and
16-14 of this chapter;
   (2)   Designations of slum properties pursuant to section
16-24 of this chapter;
   (3)   Violations of this chapter wherein the city seeks the recovery of
costs through the imposition of an assessment as provided in sections
16-61(d), (e); and
   (4)   Abatement of a group dwelling public nuisance pursuant to section
16-37.
   No administrative appeal is available in a case involving a pending or
adjudicated court proceeding.
(Ord. No. 9816, § 15, 2-24-03; Ord. No. 10965, § 7, 2-15-12)
Sec. 16-71. Administrative conference.
   (a)   Any notice of violation or slum designation described in section
16-70 can be appealed to the code official for an administrative conference for
review. An appeal shall be made to the code official in the following manner:
   (1)   The applicant shall file a written appeal on the forms provided by the
code official and accompanied by a non-refundable fee, as determined by
separate ordinance, within ten (10) days after the date of service of the
notice.
   (2)   The appeal will be heard by the code official within ten (10) days at
a regular, specified time.
   (3)   The code official may use a hearing committee consisting of such staff
as the code official deems appropriate or other technical persons to advise the
code official on a particular appeal.
   (4)   The applicant shall provide adequate information to fully describe the
conditions in question.
   (5)   The applicant may, but is not required to, meet personally with the
code official.
   (b)   If the code official denies an appeal made under this section, the
applicant must comply with the decision of the code official or may appeal to
the board of appeals pursuant to section
16-73 of this chapter.
   (c)   Failure to file an appeal in accordance with the provisions of this
section constitutes a waiver of the right to an administrative conference.
Additionally, any person who appeals directly to the board of appeals pursuant
to section
16-73 waives the right to an administrative conference.
(Ord. No. 9816, § 15, 2-24-03; Ord. No. 10126, § 16, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 10687, §
3, 6-23-09, eff. 7-1-09)
Sec. 16-72. Modifications.
The code official may grant a minor variance to the provisions specified in
section
16-70 of this chapter when there exists an unusual or unreasonable hardship
resulting from a literal interpretation of this chapter. The code official
shall first find that a special individual hardship makes the strict
application of this chapter impractical, and the variance is in conformity with
the intent and purpose of this chapter, and that the variance does not lessen
health, life safety and fire safety requirements or any degree of structural
integrity. The details of actions granting variances shall be recorded and
maintained by the code official.
(Ord. No. 9816, § 15, 2-24-03)
Sec. 16-73. Appeals to the board of appeals.
   (a)   An owner or responsible party who is not or was not a party to a
pending or adjudicated court proceeding involving a request for court ordered
abatement of the violation (hereinafter, the appellant) may appeal a notice of
violation, slum designation described in section
16-70 or group dwelling public nuisance designation described in section
16-37 to the board of appeals (hereafter board) established in Tucson Code
section
6-12 and section 204 of the Administrative Code, when it is claimed that:
   (1)   Substantive errors exist in the notice of violation, the slum
designation or group dwelling public nuisance designation.
   (2)   The method or schedule for correcting the violation as set forth in
the notice of violation, the slum designation or group dwelling public nuisance
designation is unreasonable or arbitrary.
   (b)   An owner or responsible party whose relationship with the property
existed at the time of the recording of an assessment, and who is not or was
not a party to a court proceeding which has established or may establish the
amount of an assessment, may appeal the amount of the assessment for abatement
to the board.
   (c)   In cases involving an order to vacate or suspend occupancy of a group
dwelling public nuisance, any the property owner or a lawful tenant of the
property that is the subject of the order to vacate may appeal that order to
the board on the grounds that the order to vacate is unreasonable or arbitrary.
   (d)   The appellant shall prepare the appeal in a written application as
follows:
   (1)   The appellant shall file a written appeal on the forms provided by the
code official and accompanied by a non-refundable fee, as determined by
separate ordinance;
   (2)   The appellant shall provide adequate information to fully describe the
conditions in question;
   (3)   The application for appeal shall contain each appellant's signature
and mailing address to which the decision of the board may be mailed;
   (4)   The appellant shall provide a brief statement describing the legal
interest of each of the appellants in the property involved in the proceeding;
   (5)   The appellant shall verify by declaration under penalty of perjury the
truth of the matters stated in the application;
   (6)   The appeal shall be filed within thirty (30) days from the date of the
service of the notice of violation or notice of designation as a slum property;
provided, however, that if the building or structure is in such condition as to
make it an imminent hazard and is posted and vacated in accordance with
sections
16-63 and
16-64 of this chapter, an appeal shall be filed within ten (10) days from the
date of the service of such notice.
   (e)   Except for vacation orders made pursuant to sections
16-63 and
16-64, the timely filing of an appeal shall act as an automatic stay of
enforcement of the notice of violation until the appeal is finally determined
by the board. The filing of an appeal does not stay enforcement of any notice
or order, or any provision thereof, where the notice or order includes an order
to vacate.
   (f)   As soon as practicable after receiving the written appeal, the board
shall fix a date, time and place for the hearing of the appeal. Such date shall
not be less than ten (10) days nor more than sixty (60) days from the date the
appeal was filed. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be
given at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing to each appellant
by the secretary of the board, either by causing a copy of the notice to be
delivered personally or by mailing a copy thereof, postage prepaid, addressed
to the appellant at the address shown on the appeal.
   (g)   Failure of any person to file an appeal in accordance with the
provisions of this section shall constitute a waiver of the right to a
administrative hearing of the appeal and adjudication of the notice of
violation or notice of designation as a slum, and such person shall be stopped
to deny the validity of any order or action of the city which could have been
timely appealed.
   (h)   The board shall decide any appeal immediately after the hearing, or
within a reasonable time thereafter, but in no event shall the board keep an
appeal under consideration for more than five (5) days after the hearing. The
board shall render its decision in writing, and the decision of the board shall
be filed with the secretary of the board, with a copy to the appellant or
applicant. The decision of the board is final. No further appeal is available
to city or county boards or officials. In cases involving the designation of a
property as a slum, persons aggrieved by decisions of the board may appeal the
decision pursuant to A.R.S. Tit. 12, Ch. 7, Art. 6, or pursuant to successor
provisions relating to judicial review of administrative decisions. In all
other cases, persons aggrieved by decisions of the board may apply to superior
court for relief in accordance with the Arizona Rules of Procedure for Special
Actions. In the absence of a court order, the filing of an appeal or special
action will not stay enforcement.
(Ord. No. 9816, § 15, 2-24-03; Ord. No. 10126, § 17, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 10687, §
3, 6-23-09, eff. 7-1-09; Ord. No. 10965, § 7, 2-15-12)
Sec. 16-74. Powers, duties and responsibilities of the board.
   (a)   Appeals.
   (1)   On an appeal, the board may affirm, reverse, or modify the notice of
violation or notice of designation as a slum. In the event that the board
modifies the notice, the following limitations and procedures shall apply:
   a.   If the appeal is taken on the grounds that the amount of time for
correction of the violation given in the notice of violation is unreasonable,
upon a showing by the appellant that the time is unreasonable, and upon a
satisfactory showing by the appellant that there is a reasonable probability
that the appellant will be able to correct the violation by the granting of
additional time, the board may grant up to an additional ninety (90) days to
correct the violation. The board may permit city staff to grant additional time
of up to ninety (90) days if during the initial time extension the appellant
has substantially complied with any plan or timetable approved by the board.
   b.   If the appeal is taken on the grounds that the method to correct the
violation as specified in the notice of violation is unreasonable, the board
may approve an alternate method of correction as long as the purposes of this
chapter are fulfilled.
   c.   In the event that the appeal is taken on the grounds that the cost of
the abatement is unreasonable, the board may affirm, modify or reverse the lien
or assessment amounts resulting from the abatement for good cause shown.
   d.   If the appeal is taken on the grounds that an order to vacate is
unreasonable or arbitrary, the board may affirm, reverse, or modify the order
to vacate.
   (2)   In order to assist it in making the determinations set forth above,
the board may take evidence from the appellant, city staff, and any other
person. Any relevant evidence is admissible, including hearsay evidence, if it
would assist the board in making its decision.
   (b)   Adoption of rules. The board may adopt rules necessary to carry out
the duties and responsibilities imposed upon it by this section. Such rules
shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter, or the Charter
or Code of the City of Tucson.
(Ord. No. 9816, § 15, 2-24-03; Ord. No. 10126, § 18, 3-1-05)
Secs. 16-75--16-79. Reserved.
ARTICLE VIII.
LIABILITY; CONFLICTS; SEVERABILITY; ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Sec. 16-80. Liability.
   (a)   The board, manager, code official, or any employee charged with the
enforcement of this chapter, acting in good faith and without malice for the
city in the discharge of the duties required by this chapter or other pertinent
law or ordinance, shall not be personally liable for damages that may accrue to
persons or property as a result of an act or by reason of an act or omission in
the discharge of such duties. A suit brought against said board, manager, code
official or employee because of such act or omission performed in the
enforcement of any provisions of this chapter or other pertinent laws or
ordinances shall be defended by the city until the final termination of the
proceedings, and any judgment resulting therefrom shall be assumed by the city.
   (b)   This chapter does not relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any
person owning, operating or controlling any building or structure for any
damages to persons or property caused by defects, nor shall the city be held as
assuming any such liability by reason of the inspections authorized by this
chapter.
(Ord. No. 9816, § 15, 2-24-03)
Sec. 16-81. Conflict of ordinances.
   (a)   In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in
conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, housing, fire, safety or
health ordinance or code of the city existing on the effective date of this
chapter, the provision which establishes the higher standard for the protection
and preservation of public health and safety shall control.
   (b)   In cases where two (2) or more provisions of this chapter disagree,
the most stringent or restrictive shall prevail.
   (c)   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way
impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or ordinances,
except those specifically repealed by this chapter.
(Ord. No. 9816, § 15, 2-24-03)
Sec. 16-82. Severability.
If a provision of this chapter or its application to any person or circumstance
is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions or
applications of this chapter that can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are
severable.
(Ord. No. 9816, § 15, 2-24-03)
Sec. 16-83. Acknowledgement.
Certain provisions of this chapter have been included with the permission of
the International Conference of Building Officials, 5360 S. Workman Mill Road,
Whittier CA 90601, publishers of copyrighted codes such as the Uniform Housing
Code and Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings.
(Ord. No. 9816, § 15, 2-24-03)
Secs. 16-84--16-99. Reserved.
Chapter 17
HUMAN RELATIONS*
__________
*   Editors Note: Ord. No. 4169, §§ 1, and 2, adopted Apr. 15, 1974, amended
this Code by repealing former ch. 17, §§ 17-1--17-6, 17-11--17-16 and 17-20--
17-23, and enacting in lieu thereof new ch. 17, §§
17-0--17-4,
17-11--
17-14 and
17-20--17-23, pertaining to the same subject matter. Former ch. 17 was derived
from 1953 Code, ch. 31, §§ 1--6 and the following ordinances:
Ord. No. Sec. Date     Ord. No. Sec. Date
2107     1    11-7-60  3099     1    3-25-68
2121     2    12-19-60 3100     1    3-25-68
2303B    1, 2 5-28-62  3300     1    7-21-69
2630     1    6-26-64  3304     1    8-4-69
2867     1    4-25-66  3305     1    8-4-69
2872     1    5-16-66  3553     1    11-16-70
2993     1    4-10-67  3728     1--6 10-26-71
3086     1, 2 2-13-68  3975     1    1-15-73
3087     1    2-13-68               
 
Sec. 4 of Ord. No. 4169 provided that said ordinance shall neither add to nor
detract from civil remedies now available to persons subjected to
discrimination and stated that said ordinance shall not be construed to mean
the city sanctions discrimination in any manner or in any place not mentioned
specifically or excluded by the ordinance.
   Cross References: Community services, ch.
10B.
__________
Art. I.   Short Title, § 17-0
Art. II.   Declaration of Policy, §§ 17-1--17-10
Art. III.   Civil Rights, §§ 17-11--17-19
Art. IV.   Reserved, §§ 17-20--17-29
Art. V.   Reserved, §§ 17-30--17-39
Art. VI.   Reserved, §§ 17-40--17-49
Art. VII.   Fair Housing, §§ 17-50--17-66
Art. VIII.   Reporting Wrongful Conduct, §§ 17-67--17-69
Art. IX.   Registered Civil Unions, §§ 17-70--17-79
Art. X.   Minimum Wage Act, §§ 17-80 – 17-89
Article I. Short Title
Sec.
17-0.   Title.
Article II. Declaration of Policy
Sec.
17-1.   Policy declaration.
Secs.
17-2--17-10.   Reserved.
Article III. Civil Rights
Sec.
17-11.   Definitions.
Sec.
17-12.   Prohibited acts.
Sec.
17-13.   Exclusion.
Sec.
17-14.   Violation a civil infraction; procedure; penalties.
Sec.
17-15.   Complaint procedures.
Sec.
17-16.   Record-keeping; posting requirement; powers.
Secs.
17-17--17-19.   Reserved.
Article IV. Reserved
Secs.
17-20--17-29.   Reserved.
Article V. Reserved
Secs.
17-30--17-39.   Reserved.
Article VI. Reserved
Secs.
17-40--17-49.   Reserved.
Article VII. Fair Housing
Sec.
17-50.   Definitions.
Sec.
17-51.   Application.
Sec.
17-52.   Discrimination in sale or rental of housing.
Sec.
17-53.   Religious organization or private club exemption.
Sec.
17-54.   Enforcement.
Sec.
17-55.   Record-keeping; posting requirement; powers of commission or EOO.
Sec.
17-56.   Violation a civil infraction; penalties; procedure.
Secs.
17-57--17-66.   Reserved.
Art. VIII. Reporting Wrongful Conduct
Sec.
17-67.   Reporting wrongful conduct.
Secs.
17-68, 17-69. Reserved.
Article IX. Registered Civil Unions
Sec.
17-70.   Title.
Sec.
17-71.   Registered civil unions defined.
Sec.
17-72.   Criteria for civil union.
Sec.
17-73.   Statement of civil union; additional evidence of civil union.
Sec.
17-74.   Termination of civil union.
Sec.
17-75.   Fees; civil union certificate.
Sec.
17-76.   Rights of registered civil union partners.
Sec.
17-77.   Limitation of liabilities.
Sec.
17-78.   Public Records.
Sec.
17-79.    Reserved.
Article X. Minimum Wage Act
Sec.
17-80.   Title and purpose.
Sec.
17-81.   Definitions.
Sec.
17-82.   Minimum wage rate.
Sec.
17-83.   Payment of wages.
Sec.
17-84.   Retaliation prohibited.
Sec.
17-85.   Private cause of action.
Sec.
17-86.   Implementation by the city.
Sec.
17-87.   Enforcement by the city.
Sec.
17-88.   Severability and construction.
Sec.
17-89.    Reserved.
ARTICLE I.
SHORT TITLE
Sec. 17-0. Title.
This chapter may be cited and shall be known as the human relations chapter.
(Ord. No. 4169, § 2, 4-15-74; Ord. No. 4616, § 1, 2-7-77)
ARTICLE II.
DECLARATION OF POLICY
Sec. 17-1. Policy declaration.
It is the policy of the city to eliminate prejudice and discrimination due to
race, color, religion, ancestry, sex, age, disability, national origin, sexual
orientation, gender identity, familial status or marital status, or source of
income in places of public accommodation, in employment, and in housing.
(Ord. No. 4169, § 2, 4-15-74; Ord. No. 4616, § 2, 2-7-77; Ord. No. 8307, § 1,
6-13-94; Ord. No. 9199, § 2, 2-1-99; Ord. No. 11959, § 1, 9-27-22)
Secs. 17-2--17-10. Reserved.
ARTICLE III.
CIVIL RIGHTS*
__________
*   Editors Note: Ord. No. 4616, § 3, adopted Feb. 7, 1977, specifically
amended the Code by repealing former art. III, §
7-2--7-4. The article, which had pertained to the human relations commission,
had been derived from Ord. No. 4169, § 2, adopted April 15, 1974.
   Section 5 of Ord. No. 4616 redesignated former art. IV as art. III, as
herein set out.
__________
Sec. 17-11. Definitions.
In this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:
   (a)   Age means at least eighteen years of age except:
   (1)   Where state law provides for a greater minimum or maximum legal age
   (2)   In section
17-12(b) which shall be deemed to protect any person who is at least forty (40)
years of age.
   (b)   Discriminate or discrimination means to make, directly or indirectly,
any distinction with respect to any person or persons based on race, color,
religion, ancestry, sex, age, disability, national origin, sexual orientation,
gender identity, familial status or marital status.
   (c)   Disability, with respect to an individual, means:
   (1)   A physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more
of the major life activities of such individual, and specifically includes but
is not limited to an individual who has HIV/AIDS;
   (2)   A record of such an impairment; or
   (3)   Being regarded as having such an impairment; but disability does not
include the current illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance (as
defined in the controlled substances act, 21 U.S.C. § 801 et seq.) or the
current use of alcohol that prevents such individual from performing the duties
of the job in question or whose employment, by reason of such current alcohol
abuse, would constitute a direct threat to the property or the safety of
others.
Discrimination on the basis of disability shall be interpreted in a manner
consistent with the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, 42 U.S.C. § 12101
et seq., the federal regulations promulgated thereunder, and judicial decisions
construing them.
   (d)   Educational institution means any private educational institution
located or operating in the City of Tucson which provides educational services
including an academy, college, university, elementary or secondary school,
kindergarten, extension course, nursery school system, and a business nursing,
professional, secretarial, technical or vocational school.
   (e)   Employer, except as otherwise provided, means a person who has one (1)
or more employees, not to exceed one hundred (100) employees for each working
day in each of twenty (20) or more calendar weeks in the current or preceding
calendar year, and any agent of such a person; but such term does not include
an Indian tribe, the City of Tucson, or a bona fide private membership club
(other than a labor organization) which is exempt from federal taxation under
section 501(c) of title 26, United States Code. The jurisdictional maximum
limit of one hundred (100) employees shall not apply to protected classes who
do not have remedies available under either A.R.S. § 41-1401 et seq., or 42
U.S.C. § 2000e et seq.
   (f)   Employment agency means and includes both public and private
employment agencies and any person having an office regularly undertaking, with
or without compensation, to procure, recruit, refer or place employees.
   (g)   Familial status means the state of one or more minor children under
the age of eighteen (18) being domiciled with:
   (1)   A parent or another person having legal custody of such individual or
individuals;
   (2)   The designee of such parent or other person having custody, with the
written permission of such parent or other person; or
   (3)   A foster parent or other person with whom a minor child under the age
of eighteen (18) is placed by court order.
The protections afforded against discrimination on the basis of family status
also apply to any person who is in the process of securing legal custody of a
minor child.
   (h)   Gender identity means an individual's various attributes as they are
understood to be masculine and/or feminine and shall be broadly interpreted to
include pre- and post-operative transsexuals, as well as other persons who are,
or are perceived to be, transgendered.
   (i)   Labor organization means and includes any organization or labor union,
craft union, or such organization, conducting a hiring hall which engages in
the hiring of employees, or any voluntary unincorporated association designed
to further the cause of the rights of union labor, which is constituted for the
purpose in whole or in part of collective bargaining or of dealing with
employers concerning grievances, terms or conditions of employment or
apprenticeships or applications for apprenticeships, or for other mutual aid or
protection in connection with employment, including apprentice jobs or
application for apprenticeship.
   (j)   Marital status means the state of being married, separated, or
unmarried as defined by state law. The term "unmarried" includes persons who
are single, engaged, divorced, or widowed.
   (k)   Person means and includes one or more individuals, partnerships,
associations or corporations, legal representatives, trustees, receivers, or
other organized groups of persons.
   (l)   Reserved.
   (m)   Place of public accommodation means facilities, establishments,
accommodations, services, commodities or use offered to or enjoyed by the
general public, including but not limited to:
   (1)   Hotels, motels, trailer courts and boardinghouses, which shall include
any establishments offering lodging to transient guests for compensation.
   (2)   Restaurants, which shall include lunch counters, coffee shops,
lunchrooms, luncheonettes, cafes, cafeterias, tearooms, snack bars or stands,
mobile food service facilities, grills, sandwich shops, supper clubs, soft
drink fountains, ice cream parlors or stands, and other places which offer
food, ice cream or soft drink beverages for purchase and consumption on or off
the premises.
   (3)   Taverns, which shall include bars, barrooms, saloons, roadhouses and
like establishments, wherein spirituous or malt liquors or wines are offered
for sale for consumption on or off the premises.
   (4)   Theaters, which shall include places, whether indoors or out-of-doors,
at which any theatrical performance, moving picture show, musical concert or
recital, dramatic reading or monologue, circus, carnival or other like
entertainment or amusement is offered.
   (5)   Retail establishments, which shall include retail stores, garages,
automobile and gasoline service stations, and other like establishments serving
the public.
   (6)   Places of public amusement and recreation, which shall include bowling
alleys, billiard halls and poolrooms, dance halls, race courses, shooting
galleries, sports arenas or fields, gymnasiums, exhibitions, skating rinks and
other like establishments.
   (7)   Educational facilities, which shall include institutions defined in
paragraph (d) of this section.
   (8)   Public conveyances, which shall include all transportation facilities
operated on land, air or water as well as the stations and terminals thereof.
   (9)   Funeral parlors and places of burial, including any cemetery,
mausoleum, crypt, or any establishment for the embalming, processing or
interment of corpses.
   (n)   Protected class means each classification for which discrimination is
prohibited in this chapter: race, color, religion, ancestry, sex, age,
disability, national origin, sexual orientation, gender identity, familial
status and marital status.
   (o)   Race includes ancestry, color, ethnic group identification, and ethnic
background. “Race” is inclusive of hair texture, hair type, or a protective
hairstyle that is commonly or historically associated with race. For purposes
of this subsection, “protective hairstyle” includes such hairstyles as afros,
braids, locks and twists.
   (p)   Religion includes all aspects of religious observance and practice, as
well as belief, unless an employer demonstrates that he/she is unable to
reasonably accommodate to an employee’s or prospective employee’s religious
observance or practice without undue hardship on the conduct of the employer’s
business.
   (q)   Religious organization means a religious corporation, association or
society: or a school, college, university, or other educational institution or
institution of learning if the institution is in whole or substantial part
controlled, managed, owned, or supported by a religious corporation,
association or society; or the curriculum of the institution is directed toward
the propagation of a religion.
   (r)   Sex shall include, but is not limited to, discrimination because of or
on the basis of pregnancy, childbirth or related medical conditions; and women
affected by pregnancy, childbirth or related medical conditions shall be
treated the same for all employment-related purposes, including receipt of
benefits under fringe benefit programs, as other persons not so affected but
similar in their ability or inability to work.
   (s)   Sexual orientation means an individual’s heterosexuality,
homosexuality, or bisexuality, whether the orientation is real or perceived.
(Ord. No. 4169, § 2, 4-15-74; Ord. No. 4616, § 5, 2-7-77; Ord. No. 6461, § 1,
7-7-86; Ord. No. 6947, § 2, 5-16-88; Ord. No. 8307, § 2, 6-13-94; Ord. No.
9199, § 3, 2-1-99; Ord. No. 10375, § 1, 2-21-07; Ord. No. 11829, § 1, 4-20-21)
Sec. 17-12. Prohibited acts.
It is a violation of this article:
   (a)   For any owner, operator, lessee, manager, agent or employee of any
place of public accommodation to discriminate against any person, or directly
or indirectly display, circulate, publicize or mail any advertisement, notice
or communication which states or implies that any facility or service shall be
refused or restricted because of race, color, religion, ancestry, sex, age,
disability, national origin, sexual orientation, gender identity, familial
status or marital status, or that any person, because of race, color, religion,
ancestry, sex, age, disability, national origin, sexual orientation, gender
identity, familial status or marital status, would be unwelcome, objectionable,
unacceptable, undesirable or not solicited.
   (b)   For an employer, because of the race, color, religion, ancestry, sex,
age, disability, national origin, sexual orientation, gender identity, familial
status or marital status to refuse to hire or employ any person or to bar or to
discharge from employment such person, or to discriminate against such person
in compensation or in terms, conditions or privileges of employment.
   (c)   For a labor organization, because of race, color, religion, ancestry,
sex, age, disability, national origin, sexual orientation, gender identity,
familial status or marital status to exclude, expel, limit or restrict from its
membership such person, or to provide only second class or segregated
membership, or to discriminate in any manner against any of its members or
against any employer or any person employed by an employer.
   (d)   For any employer or employment agency to print or circulate, or cause
to be printed or circulated, any publication, or to use any form of application
for employment, or to make any inquiry in connection with prospective
employment, which expresses, directly or indirectly, any limitation,
specification or discrimination as to race, color, religion, ancestry, sex,
age, disability, national origin, sexual orientation, gender identity, familial
status or marital status or expresses any intent to make any such limitation,
specification or discrimination.
   (e)   For any employer, labor organization or employment agency to
discharge, expel or otherwise discriminate against any person because he/she
has opposed in a lawful manner any practices forbidden under this chapter, or
because he/she has filed a complaint, testified or assisted in any proceeding
under this chapter.
   (f)   For any person to cause or attempt to cause an employer to
discriminate against an individual in violation of this chapter.
   (g)   For any person to aid, abet, incite, compel or coerce the doing of any
of the acts forbidden under this chapter or to attempt to do so.
   (h)   For any person to discriminate in places of public accommodation,
employment or housing against any person, because that person has made a
complaint, testified, assisted or participated in any manner in an
investigation, proceeding or hearing under this chapter.
   (i)   For any person subject to this article to fail to post notices, to
maintain records, or to supply documents and information requested by the
Office of Equal Opportunity Programs in connection with a matter under
investigation.
(Ord. No. 4169, § 2, 4-15-74; Ord. No. 4616, § 5, 2-7-77; Ord. No. 6947, § 2,
5-16-88; Ord. No. 9199, § 3, 2-1-99; Ord. No. 10375, § 2, 2-21-07)
Sec. 17-13. Exclusion.
   (a)   This article shall not be applicable to any business or enterprise on
or near an Indian reservation with respect to any publicly announced employment
practice of such business or enterprise under which preferential treatment is
given to any individual because he/she is a Native American living on or near a
reservation.
   (b)   This article shall not be applicable to any establishment operated by
a bona fide private club not conducted for the purpose of evading this article,
when the accommodations, advantages, facilities and services are restricted to
members of such club and their guests; nor to any bona fide social, fraternal,
public educational, civic or religious organization or such private club when
the profits of the accommodations, advantages, facilities and services, above
reasonable and necessary expenses, are solely for the benefit of such
organization or club; nor, in the area of housing, (1) to the rental of housing
accommodations for not more than two (2) families living independently of each
other, if the lessor or a member of his/her family resides in one of the
housing accommodations, or (2) to the lease or rental of sleeping facilities in
any single-family housing unit if the lessor or a member of his/her family
resides therein.
   (c)   Any person under the influence of alcohol or other drugs, or who is
guilty of boisterous conduct, or who violates any regulation of any place of
public accommodation that applies to all persons, regardless of race, color,
religion, ancestry, sex, age, disability, national origin, sexual orientation,
gender identity, familial status or marital status may be excluded without
penalty under this article from any such place of public accommodation; and
nothing in this article shall be considered to limit the right of such
exclusion.
   (d)   Except as provided in subsection (e) below, this article shall not be
applicable to a religious organization.
   (e)   This article shall apply to employment or an employment opportunity
with a religious organization, wherein the duties of the position pertain
solely to activities of the organization that generate unrelated business
taxable income subject to taxation under section 511(a) of the internal revenue
code of 1986.
   (f)   Notwithstanding section
17-12, it shall not be a violation of this article:
   (1)   For an employer, labor organization, or employment agency to prohibit
the illegal use of drugs and the use of alcohol at the workplace by all
employees;
   (2)   For an employer, labor organization, or employment agency to require
that employees shall not be under the influence of alcohol or be engaging in
the illegal use of drugs at the workplace;
   (3)   For an employer, labor organization, or employment agency to require
that employees behave in conformance with the requirements established under
the drug-free workplace act of 1988 (41 U.S.C. § 701 et seq.) or under the drug
testing provisions of state law (A.R.S. § 23-493 et seq);
   (4)   For an employer, labor organization, or employment agency to hold an
employee who engages in the illegal use of drugs or who is an alcoholic to the
same qualification standards for employment or job performance and behavior
that such entity holds other employees, even if any unsatisfactory performance
or behavior is related to the drug use or alcoholism of such employee;
   (5)   For a place of public accommodation to afford beneficial pricing or
policies to senior citizens, students, or individuals with disabilities.
   (6)   For a place of public accommodation to operate solely as a male-only
or a female- only fitness center/gymnasium, as long as the fitness center/
gymnasium does not include any of the facilities other than gymnasium listed in
section
17-11(m), and does not discriminate against any other protected group
identified in section
17-1.
(Ord. No. 4169, § 2, 4-15-74; Ord. No. 4616, § 5, 2-7-77; Ord. No. 5472, § 1,
12-14-81; Ord. No. 9199, § 3, 2-1-99; Ord. No. 10375, § 3, 2-21-07)
Sec. 17-14. Violation a civil infraction; procedure; penalties.
   (a)   It is a civil infraction for any person to violate any of the
provisions of this article; however, complaints of violations of this article
shall proceed as prescribed in sections
17-15 and
17-16.
   (b)   The following penalties shall be imposed by the city court for civil
infractions under this article:
   (1)   A person found responsible for a civil infraction for the first time
shall be fined not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) nor more than
twenty-five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per civil infraction. a person found
responsible for the same civil infraction for a second time shall be fined not
less than six hundred dollars ($600.00) nor more than twenty-five hundred
dollars ($2,500.00). A person found responsible for the same civil infraction
for a third or subsequent time shall be fined not less than nine hundred
dollars ($900.00) nor more than twenty-five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). The
imposition of a fine for a civil infraction under this section shall not be
suspended.
   (2)   Failure of a respondent to comply with any order contained in a
judgment for a civil infraction shall result in an additional fine of not less
than three hundred dollars ($300.00) nor more than twenty-five hundred dollars
($2,500.00) for each day the respondent fails to comply. A respondent's second
failure to comply with any order contained in a judgment for a civil infraction
shall result in an additional fine of not less than six hundred dollars
($600.00) nor more than twenty-five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each day
after the first determination of the respondent's failure to comply. A
respondent's third and subsequent failure to comply with any order contained in
a judgment for a civil infraction shall result in an additional fine of not
less than nine hundred dollars ($900.00) nor more than twenty-five hundred
dollars ($2,500.00) for each day after the second determination of respondent's
failure to comply.
(Ord. No. 6461, §§ 8, 9, 7-7-86; Ord. No. 9199, § 3, 2-1-99)
   Editors Note: Ord. No. 4616, §§ 4, 5, adopted Feb. 7, 1977, specifically
amended the Code by repealing former §
17-14 and adopting in lieu thereof new §
17-14 as herein set out. Former §
17-14 had pertained to implementation of the chapter's provisions, and had been
derived from Ord. No. 4169, § 2, adopted Apr. 15, 1974. Subsequently § 8 of
Ord. No. 6461, adopted July 7, 1986, repealed §
17-14; and § 9 enacted a new §
17-14.
Sec. 17-15. Complaint procedures.
   (a)   Any person claiming to be aggrieved by an alleged violation of this
article may file with the Office of Equal Opportunity Programs of the city
manager's office (hereinafter referred to as the "OEOP") a verified charge, in
writing, within ninety (90) calendar days after the alleged violation occurred,
on such forms as may be required by the OEOP. The charge shall set forth the
facts upon which it is based and shall identify the person charged (hereinafter
the "respondent"). The OEOP shall furnish the respondent with a copy of the
charge and shall promptly investigate the allegations of discriminatory
practices set forth in the charge.
   (b)   The respondent may file, not later than twenty (20) days following
receipt of the charge, a written verified answer to the charge.
   (c)   The OEOP shall render written findings as to whether there is
reasonable cause to substantiate the charge not later than one hundred twenty
(120) calendar days from the filing of the charge. The OEOP shall furnish a
report of its findings to the charging party and to the respondent.
   (d)   The charging party, within thirty (30) calendar days after receiving
an OEOP finding of no cause, may file with the Tucson Human Relations
Commission (hereinafter referred to as the "commission"), a request for review
of the finding. The commission, or such members of the commission as the chair
thereof may designate, shall, not later than forty-five (45) calendar days
after the request is filed, schedule a meeting to determine whether the finding
of no cause issued by the OEOP should be upheld or overturned. If it is
determined that the OEOP finding of no cause should be upheld, the commission
shall issue an order dismissing the case and shall furnish a copy of its order
to the OEOP, the charging party, and the respondent. If it is determined that
the OEOP finding of no cause should be reversed, the commission shall issue an
order reversing the OEOP no cause finding and remand the case back to the OEOP
for appropriate action. The commission shall furnish a copy of its order to the
city attorney, the OEOP, the charging party, and the respondent.
   (e)   If the OEOP or the commission, in the event of a request for review,
finds there is reasonable cause to believe that the respondent has engaged in a
discriminatory practice, the OEOP may attempt to eliminate the alleged
discriminatory practice by conference, conciliation and persuasion. The terms
of a conciliation agreement may require the respondent to refrain in the future
from committing discriminatory practices of the type stated in the agreement
and to take such affirmative steps as the OEOP may require to carry out the
purposes of this article. If a conciliation agreement is entered into, the OEOP
shall issue an order stating its terms and furnish a copy of the order to the
charging party and the respondent. Except for the terms of the conciliation
agreement, neither the commission or the OEOP, nor any employee thereof, shall
make public, without the written consent of the charging party and respondent,
information concerning efforts in a particular case to eliminate a
discriminatory practice by conference, conciliation or persuasion, whether or
not there is a conciliation agreement.
   (f)   After a finding of reasonable cause by the OEOP, or by the commission
in the event of a request for review and subsequent reversal of an OEOP finding
of no cause, the OEOP may, in addition to the permissive remedy outlined in
subsection (e), request the city attorney to file a complaint against
respondent in the city court. Appeal of any judgment rendered by the magistrate
shall be by way of special action to the superior court on the record as
prescribed by Rule 23 of the Local Rules of Practice and Procedure in City
Court Civil Proceedings.
   (g)   During the review process, the OEOP decision shall remain in effect.
(Ord. No. 5472, § 2, 12-14-81; Ord. No. 6461, § 3, 7-7-86; Ord. No. 7952, § 1,
11-23-92; Ord. No. 9199, § 3, 2-1-99; Ord. No. 10375, § 4, 2-21-07)
Sec. 17-16. Record-keeping; posting requirement; powers.
   (a)   In connection with an investigation of a charge filed under this
article, the commission or the OEOP shall have access at any reasonable time to
premises, records and documents relevant to the charge and the right to
examine, photograph and copy evidence. The commission or the OEOP may require a
respondent against whom a charge has been filed to file a statement or report
in writing, under oath, as to all the facts and circumstances concerning the
alleged act of discrimination set forth in the charge.
   (b)   Every person subject to this article shall preserve any regularly kept
business records for a period of six (6) months from the date of the making of
the record; such records shall include but not be limited to application forms
submitted by applicants, sales and rental records, credit and reference
reports, personnel records, and any other records pertaining to the status of
an individual's enjoyment of the rights and privileges protected or granted
under this article.
   (c)   Every employer, employment agency, and labor organization, subject to
this article, shall post in conspicuous places, available to employees and
applicants for employment, notices setting forth the provisions of the
nondiscrimination clause.
   (d)   No member of the commission or employee of the OEOP shall make public
with respect to a particular person, without his/her consent, information
obtained by them pursuant to their authority under this article, except as
required by law or as necessary to the conduct of a proceeding under this
article.
   (e)   To accomplish the objectives and to carry out the duties prescribed in
this article, the commission or the OEOP, in addition to other powers conferred
upon it by this article, may:
   (1)   Conduct informal hearings in aid of any investigation or inquiry;
   (2)   Administer an oath or affirmation to any person;
   (3)   Issue subpoenas, interrogatories, or other discovery devices, to any
person, on its own initiative or upon application of any party to a proceeding,
compelling the attendance and testimony of witnesses or requiring the
production of documents, provided such evidence relates to a violation of this
article and is relevant to the charge which is the subject matter of the
investigation.
   (f)   Any person being investigated by the commission or the OEOP under this
article shall have the right to be represented by counsel.
   (g)   If a person fails to respond to a subpoena, to interrogatories, to
permit access, examination, photographing or copying, or fails to make, keep,
or preserve records in accordance with this article, the commission or the OEOP
may issue an order requiring compliance. Upon a failure to comply with the
order of the commission or the OEOP, or to obey a subpoena issued by the
commission or the OEOP, the commission or the OEOP may apply to the city
attorney's office for assistance. The city attorney is empowered to take all
necessary action in the appropriate court, upon request of the commission or
the OEOP, to secure the production of all records, documents or other evidence
necessary to assist the commission or the OEOP in carrying out the provisions
of this article. The city attorney is also empowered to seek fines as described
in section
17-14 for civil infractions arising under this article.
(Ord. No. 5472, § 3, 12-14-81; Ord. No. 6461, §§ 4--7, 7-7-86; Ord. No. 9199, §
3, 2-1-99; Ord. No. 10375, § 5, 2-21-07)
Secs. 17-17--17-19. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV.
RESERVED*
__________
*   Editors Note: Ord. No. 4616, § 6, adopted Feb. 7, 1977, specifically
amended the Code by renumbering art. V, as art. IV, pertaining to
discrimination in city employment and contracts. Ord. No. 7973, § 3, adopted
Jan. 25, 1993, repealed this article in its entirety. Reference to
discrimination in city employment and contracts can be found in chapter
28, Tucson Procurement Code.
__________
Secs. 17-20--17-29. Reserved.
ARTICLE V.
RESERVED*
__________
*   Editors Note: Article V, pertaining to affirmative action by city
contractors and subcontractors, derived from Ord. No. 5472, § 4, adopted Dec.
14, 1981, and was amended by Ord. No. 6108, § 1, adopted Oct. 22, 1984. Ord.
No. 7973, § 3, adopted Jan. 25, 1993, repealed this article in its entirety.
Reference to affirmative action by city contractors and subcontractors can be
found in chapter
28, Tucson Procurement Code.
__________
Secs. 17-30--17-39. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI.
RESERVED*
__________
*   Editors Note: Article VI, pertaining to affirmative action by city
suppliers and consultants, derived from Ord. No. 5472, § 5, adopted Dec. 14,
1981, and was amended by Ord. No. 6108, §§ 5--9, adopted Oct. 22, 1984. Ord.
No. 7973, § 3, adopted Jan. 25, 1993, repealed this article in its entirety.
Reference to affirmative action by city suppliers and consultants can be found
in chapter
28, Tucson Procurement Code.
__________
Secs. 17-40--17-49. Reserved.
ARTICLE VII.
FAIR HOUSING
Sec. 17-50. Definitions.
   As used in this article:
   (a)   Discriminatory housing practice means an act that is unlawful under
section
17-52 of this article.
   (b)   Dwelling means any building, structure, or portion thereof which is
occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or
more families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the
construction or location thereon of any such building, structure, or portion
thereof.
   (c)   Family includes a single individual.
   (d)   Housing for older persons means housing:
      (1)   Provided under any state or federal program that the U.S. secretary
of housing and urban development determines is specifically designed and
operated to assist elderly persons as defined in the state or federal program;
or
      (2)   Intended for, and solely occupied by, persons sixty-two (62) years
of age or older; or
      (3)   Intended and operated for at least one person fifty-five (55) years
of age or older per unit as determined by the secretary of U.S. housing and
urban development.
      In determining whether housing qualifies as housing for older persons
under this article, the EOO shall follow the standards set forth in the Fair
Housing Act and regulations pertaining to housing for older persons as
promulgated by the U.S. secretary of housing and urban development.
   (e)   Person includes one (1) or more individuals, corporations,
partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual
companies, joint-stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations,
trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers, and fiduciaries.
   (f)   Source of income means any lawful source of income or support that
provides funds to or on behalf of a renter or buyer of housing and is
verifiable as to amount, regularity, receipt, and length of time received or to
be received, including, but not limited to, wages, salaries, child support,
spousal support, foster care subsidies, rental assistance, security deposit or
downpayment assistance, income derived from social security or disability
insurance, veterans' benefits, or any other form of governmental assistance,
benefit, or subsidy. Source of income includes any requirement of any such
program, assistance, benefit, or subsidy.
   (g)   To rent includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant
for a consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant.
(Ord. No. 6947, § 1, 5-16-88; Ord. No. 9199, § 4, 2-1-99; Ord. No. 11959, § 2,
9-27-22)
Sec. 17-51. Application.
   (a)   Subject to the provisions of subsection (b) of this section and
section
17-53 of this article, the prohibitions against discrimination in the sale or
rental of housing set forth in section
17-52 of this article shall apply to all dwellings situated within the legal
jurisdiction of the city.
   (b)   Nothing in this article (other than minor section (c) of section
17-52) shall apply to:
   (1)   Any single-family dwelling sold or rented by a private individual
owner. Provided, that such private individual owner does not own more than
three (3) such single-family dwellings at any one (1) time. Provided further,
that in the case of the sale of any such single- family dwelling by a private
individual owner not residing in such dwelling at the time of such sale or who
was not the most recent resident of such dwelling prior to such sale, the
exemption granted by this subsection shall apply only with respect to one (1)
such sale within any twenty- four-month period. Provided further, that such
bona fide private individual owner does not own any interest in, nor is there
owned or reserved on his/her behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement,
title to or any right to all or a portion of the proceeds from the sale or
rental of, more than three (3) such single-family dwellings at any one (1)
time. Provided further, that the sale or rental of any such single-family
dwelling shall be excepted from the application of this subchapter only if such
dwelling is sold or rented (1) without the use in any manner of the sale or
rental facilities or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker,
agent, or salesman, or of such facilities or services of any person in the
business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or agent of any
such broker, agent, salesperson and (2) without the publication, posting or
mailing, after notice, of any advertisement or written notice in violation of
section
17-52 of this article; but nothing in this provision shall prohibit the use of
attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies, and other such
professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title;
   (2)   Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or
intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of
each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living
quarters as his/her residence; or
   (3)   Housing for older persons.
   (c)   For the purposes of subsection (b) of this section, a person shall be
deemed to be in the business of selling or renting dwellings if:
   (1)   He/she has, within the preceding twelve (12) months, participated as
principal in three (3) or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any
dwelling or any interest therein;
   (2)   He/she has, within the preceding twelve (12) months, participated as
agent, other than in the sale of his own personal residence in providing sales
or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two (2) or more
transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest
therein; or
   (3)   He/she is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for occupancy
by, or occupied by, five (5) or more families.
(Ord. No. 6947, § 1, 5-16-88; Ord. No. 9199, § 4, 2-1-99)
Sec. 17-52. Discrimination in sale or rental of housing.
   As made applicable by section
17-51 of this article and except as exempted by sections
17-51(b) and
17-53 of this article, it shall be a violation of this article:
   (a)   To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to
refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or
deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion, ancestry, sex,
age, disability, national origin, sexual orientation, gender identity, familial
status or marital status, or source of income.
   (b)   To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or
facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, religion, ancestry,
sex, age, disability, national origin, sexual orientation, gender identity,
familial status or marital status, or source of income.
   (c)   To make, print, or publish, or cause to be made, printed, or published
any notice, statement, or advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of
a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation, or discrimination based
on race, color, religion, ancestry, sex, age, disability, national origin,
sexual orientation, gender identity, familial status or marital status, or
source of income.
   (d)   To represent to any person because of race, color, religion, ancestry,
sex, age, disability, national origin, sexual orientation, gender identity,
familial status or marital status, or source of income that any dwelling is not
available for inspection, sale, or rental when such dwelling is, in fact, so
available.
   (e)   For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent
any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into
the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, religion,
ancestry, sex, age, disability, national origin, sexual orientation, gender
identity, familial status or marital status, or source of income.
   (f)   For any bank, savings and loan association, insurance company or other
corporation, association, firm or enterprise whose business consists in whole
or in part in the making of commercial or residential real estate loans, to
deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefor for the
purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or maintaining a
dwelling, or to discriminate against such person in the fixing of the amount,
interest rate, duration, or other terms or conditions of such loan or other
financial assistance, because of the race, color, religion, ancestry, sex, age,
disability, national origin, sexual orientation, gender identity, familial
status or marital status, or source of income of such person or of any person
associated with such person in connection with such loan or other financial
assistance or the purposes of such loan or other financial assistance, or of
the present or prospective owners, lessees, tenants, or occupants of the
housing in relation to which such loan or other financial assistance is to be
made or given. Provided, that nothing contained in this section shall impair
the scope or effectiveness of the exceptions contained in section
17-51(b) hereof.
   (g)   To deny any person access to or membership or participation in any
multiple-listing service, real estate brokers’ organization or other service,
organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting
housing, or to discriminate against such person in the terms or conditions of
such access, membership, or participation, on account of race, color, religion,
ancestry, sex, age, disability, national origin, sexual orientation, gender
identity, familial status or marital status, or source of income.
   (h)   To coerce, intimidate, threaten, or interfere with any person in the
exercise and enjoyment of, or on account of his/her having exercised and
enjoyed, or on account of his/her having aided or encouraged any other person
in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or protected under this
article.
   (i)   To fail to post notices, to maintain records, or to supply documents
and information requested by the OEOP in connection with a matter under
investigation.
(Ord. No. 6947, § 1, 5-16-88; Ord. No. 9199, § 4, 2-1-99; Ord. No. 11959, § 3,
9-27-22)
Sec. 17-53. Religious organization or private club exemption.
Nothing in this article shall prohibit a religious organization, association,
or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised
or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association,
or society, from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it
owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same
religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such
religion is restricted on account of race, color, or national origin. Nor shall
anything in this article prohibit a private club not in fact open to the
public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes provides
lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from
limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members or from giving
preference to its members.
(Ord. No. 6947, § 1, 5-16-88; Ord. No. 9199, § 4, 2-1-99)
Sec. 17-54. Enforcement.
   (a)   Any person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing
practice or who believes that he/she shall be irrevocably injured by a
violation of this article that is about to occur (hereinafter "charging party")
may file with the Equal Opportunity Office of the city manager's office
(hereinafter referred to as the "EOO") a verified charge, in writing, within
one hundred eighty (180) days after the alleged violation occurred, on such
forms as may be required by the EOO. The charge shall set forth the facts upon
which it is based and shall identify the person charged (hereinafter the
"respondent"). The EOO shall furnish the respondent with a copy of the charge
and shall promptly investigate the allegations of discriminatory practices set
forth therein. The respondent may file, not later than twenty (20) days
following receipt of the charge, a written verified answer to the charge.
Whenever it would be reasonable and fair to do so, the EOO shall grant leave to
the charging party and respondent to file amended charges and answers thereto.
   (b)   The EOO shall, as promptly as possible and as far as practicable not
later than sixty days (60) from the filing of the charge, render written
findings as to whether there is reasonable cause to substantiate the charge.
The EOO shall furnish a copy of its findings to the charging party and to the
respondent.
   (c)   If, within sixty (60) days after a charge is filed with the EOO, the
EOO has issued findings that there is no reasonable cause to believe that the
respondent has engaged in a discriminatory housing practice, the charging party
may, within fifteen (15) days thereafter, file with the Tucson Human Relations
Commission (hereinafter the "commission") a request for review of the findings.
The commission, or such members of the commission as the chair thereof may
designate, shall as promptly as possible and as far as practicable not later
than forty-five (45) days after the request is filed, schedule a meeting to
determine whether there is reasonable cause to believe that the respondent has
engaged in a discriminatory housing practice. If it is determined that there is
no reasonable cause to believe that the respondent has engaged in a
discriminatory housing practice, the commission shall issue an order dismissing
the charge and furnish a copy of its order to the EOO, the charging party and
the respondent.
   (d)   If the EOO, or the commission in the event of a request for review,
finds there is reasonable cause to believe that the respondent has engaged in a
discriminatory housing practice, the EOO shall promptly attempt to eliminate
the alleged discriminatory practice by conference, conciliation and persuasion.
The terms of a conciliation agreement may require the respondent to refrain in
the future from committing discriminatory practices of the type stated in the
agreement and to take such affirmative action as the EOO may require to carry
out the purposes of this article. If a conciliation agreement is entered into,
the EOO shall issue an order stating its terms and furnish a copy of the order
to the charging party and the respondent. Except for the terms of the
agreement, neither the commission or EOO nor any employee thereof shall make
public, without the written consent of the charging party and respondent,
information concerning efforts in a particular case to eliminate a
discriminatory practice by conference, conciliation or persuasion, whether or
not there is a conciliation agreement.
   (e)   After a finding of reasonable cause by the EOO, or by the commission
in the event of a request for review, the EOO may, in addition to the remedy
outlined in subsection (d) of this section, request the city attorney to file a
complaint against respondent in the city court. Appeal of any judgment rendered
by the magistrate shall be by way of special action to the superior court on
the record as prescribed by rule 23 of the Local Rules of Practice and
Procedure in City Court Civil Proceedings.
   (f)   At any time in its discretion, but not later than one (1) year from
the date of a conciliation agreement, the EOO shall investigate whether the
terms of the conciliation agreement are being complied with by the respondent.
Upon a finding that the terms of the agreement are not being complied with by
the respondent, the EOO shall request the commission to take appropriate action
to assure compliance, which may include the issuance of a cease and desist
order, or the filing of a complaint in city court.
(Ord. No. 6947, § 1, 5-16-88; Ord. No. 9199, § 4, 2-1-99)
Sec. 17-55. Record-keeping; posting requirement; powers of commission or EOO.
   (a)   In connection with an investigation of a charge filed under this
article, the commission or the EOO shall have access at any reasonable time to
witnesses, premises, records, documents, individuals and other evidence or
possible sources of evidence and may examine, record and copy such materials
and take and record the testimony or statements of such persons as are
reasonably necessary for the furtherance of the investigation.
   (b)   Every person subject to this article shall preserve any regularly kept
business records for a period of six (6) months from the date of the making of
the record; such records shall include but not be limited to application forms
submitted by applicants, sales and rental records, credit and reference
reports, and any other records pertaining to the status of an individual's
enjoyment of the rights and privileges protected or granted under this article.
   (c)   Every person subject to this article, shall post in conspicuous
places, notices setting forth the provisions of the nondiscrimination clause.
   (d)   It shall be unlawful for a member of the commission or an employee of
the EOO to make public with respect to a particular person without his/her
consent information obtained by them pursuant to their authority under this
article, except as necessary to the conduct of a proceeding under this article.
   (e)   To accomplish the objectives and to carry out the duties prescribed in
this article, the commission or the EOO, in addition to other powers conferred
by this article, may:
   (1)   Conduct informal hearings in aid of any investigation or inquiry.
   (2)   Administer an oath or affirmation to any person.
   (3)   On its own initiative, conduct periodic tests to ascertain whether
violations of this article are occurring within the city.
   (4)   Issue subpoenas, interrogatories or other discovery devices to any
person, on its own initiative or upon application of any party to a
proceedings, compelling the attendance and testimony of witnesses or requiring
the production of documents, provided such evidence relates to a violation of
this article and is relevant to the charge which is the subject matter of the
investigation.
   (f)   Any person being investigated by the commission or the EOO under this
article shall have the right to be represented by counsel.
   (g)   If a person fails to respond to a subpoena, interrogatories, to permit
access, examination, photographing or copying or fails to make, keep or
preserve records in accordance with this article, the commission or EOO may
issue an order requiring compliance. Upon a failure to comply with the order
of, or upon failure to obey a subpoena issued by the commission or EOO, the
commission or EOO may apply to the city attorney's office for assistance. The
city attorney is empowered to take all necessary action in the appropriate
court, upon request of the commission or EOO, to secure the production of all
records, documents or other evidence necessary to assist the commission or the
EOO in carrying out the provisions of this article. The city attorney is also
empowered to seek fines as described in section
17-56 for civil infractions arising under this article.
(Ord. No. 6947, § 1, 5-16-88; Ord. No. 9199, § 4, 2-1-99)
Sec. 17-56. Violation a civil infraction; penalties; procedure.
   (a)   It is a civil infraction for any person to violate any of the
provisions of this article; provided, however, that complaints of violations of
this article shall proceed as prescribed in section
17-54 and section
17-55.
   (b)   The following penalties shall be imposed by city court for civil
infractions under this article:
   (1)   A person found responsible for a civil infraction for the first time
shall be fined not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) nor more than
twenty-five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per civil infraction. a person found
responsible for the same civil infraction for a second time shall be fined not
less than six hundred dollars ($600.00) nor more than twenty-five hundred
dollars ($2,500.00). A person found responsible for the same civil infraction
for a third or subsequent time shall be fined not less than nine hundred
dollars ($900.00) nor more than twenty-five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). The
imposition of a fine for a civil infraction under this section shall not be
suspended.
   (2)   Failure of a respondent to comply with any order contained in a
judgment for a civil infraction shall result in an additional fine of not less
than three hundred dollars ($300.00) nor more than twenty-five hundred dollars
($2,500.00) for each day the respondent fails to comply. A respondent's second
failure to comply with any order contained in a judgment for a civil infraction
shall result in an additional fine of not less than six hundred dollars
($600.00) nor more than twenty-five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each day
after the first determination of the respondent's failure to comply. A
respondent's third and subsequent failure to comply with any order contained in
a judgment for a civil infraction shall result in an additional fine of not
less than nine hundred dollars ($900.00) nor more than twenty-five hundred
dollars ($2,500.00) for each day after the second determination of respondent's
failure to comply.
(Ord. No. 6947, § 1, 5-16-88; Ord. No. 9199, § 4, 2-1-99)
Secs. 17-57--17-66. Reserved.
ARTICLE VIII.
REPORTING WRONGFUL CONDUCT
Sec. 17-67. Reporting wrongful conduct.
   (a)   Definitions.
   (1)   Employee. All city employees of any status or classification, except
elected officials, persons appointed to an elected official's personal staff,
or individuals appointed to a position in city government by a majority of the
governing body.
   (2)   Supervisory employee. Any supervisor, superintendent, division
director, department director or other employee who has influence over
personnel actions, including disciplinary action.
   (3)   Designated city official, public official or public agency. The mayor,
councilmembers, city manager, city department head, city clerk, city attorney,
county attorney, state attorney general, or a federal, state or local law
enforcement agency.
   (4)   Wrongful conduct. Mismanagement, gross waste of monies or an abuse of
authority, or violation of any law on the part of any city official(s) or city
employee(s) that is reasonably believed to be of public concern.
   (5)   Adverse personnel action. Unsatisfactory overall performance
evaluation; disciplinary action, including a written reprimand, suspension
without pay, demotion, involuntary transfer or reassignment, disciplinary
probation, or termination; withholding of an appropriate salary adjustment or
other significant change in duties or responsibilities which is inconsistent
with the employee's salary or classification.
   (6)   Layoff. Elimination of an employee's position by reason of a shortage
of funds or work or material changes in duties or organization.
   (7)   Retaliation. Any adverse personnel action, layoff and/or change in the
conditions of employment in response to an employee's allegation of wrongful
conduct to a designated city official, public official or public agency.
   (b)   Method of reporting wrongful conduct by an employee to a designated
city official shall be as provided by city administrative directive. Reports of
wrongful conduct made to other public official(s) or public agency(s) as the
employee may choose shall be in accord with any requirements of those public
officials or public agencies.
   (c)   Any employee who believes that he or she has been retaliated against
may make a written complaint as provided by city administrative directive. The
city administrative directive shall prescribe methods of reporting,
investigating and determining whether retaliation has occurred.
Notwithstanding, retaliation shall not be found to have been committed if the
adverse personnel action or layoff was justified for legitimate reasons.
   (d)   A determination under the city procedure that retaliation has occurred
shall immediately result in reversal of the action including restoration of
lost compensation or other lost benefits which have occurred by reason of such
action.
   (e)   Any supervisory employee who under the city procedure is found to have
knowingly retaliated against an employee shall be subject to disciplinary
action, which may include dismissal from city employment.
   (f)   An employee who knowingly makes false accusation that a city official
or city employee has engaged in wrongful conduct shall be subject to
disciplinary action which may include dismissal from city employment.
   (g)   This article neither limits nor extends any other civil or criminal
liability or remedy of any current or former employee or city official who
either alleged the wrongful conduct or was the person against whom the wrongful
conduct was alleged.
(Ord. No. 8126, § 1, 9-20-93)
Secs. 17-68, 17-69. Reserved.
ARTICLE IX.
REGISTERED CIVIL UNIONS*
__________
*Editor's note – It should be noted that the provisions of Ord. No. 9898 became
effective on December 1, 2003. The title of Article IX was revised by Ord. No.
11088, adopted June 18, 2013 and effective July 19, 2013; Article IX was
formerly entitled "Registered Domestic Partnerships".
__________
Sec. 17-70. Title.
   This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Tucson Civil Union
Ordinance".
(Ord. No. 9898, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 11088, § 1, 6-18-13, eff. 7-19-13)
Sec. 17-71. Registered civil unions defined.
   As used in this article, the term "registered civil union" exists between
two (2) persons if one (1) or more of the following is true:
   (1)   The persons who meet the criteria for civil union have filed a
statement of civil union with the city's finance department on the form
provided by the city and paid the required fee.
   (2)   The persons have a valid certificate of domestic partnership issued by
another jurisdiction and meet the criteria for civil union set forth in this
article.
   (3)   The persons are legally recognized as civil union spouses in another
jurisdiction and meet the criteria for civil union set forth in this article.
(Ord. No. 9898, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 11088, § 1, 6-18-13, eff. 7-19-13)
Sec. 17-72. Criteria for civil union.
   For purposes of this article, civil union partners are two (2) persons:
   (1)   Not related by blood closer than would bar marriage in the State of
Arizona;
   (2)   Neither of whom is in a marriage expressly recognized by the State of
Arizona or in any domestic partnership and/or civil union with another person;
   (3)   Both of whom are eighteen (18) years of age or older;
   (4)   Both of whom are competent to enter into a contract;
   (5)   Both of whom declare that they are each other's sole civil union
partner;
   (6)   Both of whom currently share a primary residence, are in a
relationship of mutual support, and declare that they intend to remain in such
for the indefinite future.
(Ord. No. 9898, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 11088, § 1, 6-18-13, eff. 7-19-13)
Sec. 17-73. Statement of civil union; additional evidence of civil union.
   (a)   Civil union partners may make an official record of their civil union
by executing a "civil union registration statement" on the form prescribed by
the city.
   (b)   The statement must include a declaration that the persons are in a
relationship of mutual support, caring and commitment and are responsible for
each other's welfare. For these purposes, "mutual support" means that they
contribute mutually to each other's maintenance and support.
   (c)   The statement must include a declaration that both persons agree to
file a termination of the civil union if there is a change in the status of
their relationship such that they cease to meet the criteria for a civil union
under this ordinance.
   (d)   The sworn statement shall include the date on which the civil union
was registered, and the mailing address(es) of both partners. The civil union
statement shall further state that the civil union partners meet the criteria
set forth in section
17-72.
   (e)   In addition to the registration statement, civil union partners may
submit to the city, and the city shall maintain, a statement or list describing
any additional documents, such as contracts and agreements, that document the
rights, responsibilities and obligations that the civil union partners have
established. In order to prevent public access to private, personal
information, civil union partners may not submit, and the city will not
maintain, the contracts and agreements themselves. By way of example, the
statement or list of additional documents evidencing the parties' civil union
may include a description of:
   (1)   Agreements between the parties regarding the management and ownership
of real and personal property.
   (2)   Agreements between the parties regarding the obligations that either
or both may have agreed to assume regarding the existing children or other
family members of one or both of the parties.
   (3)   Agreements between the parties regarding the obligations that either
or both may have agreed to assume regarding prospective children of one or both
of the parties.
   (4)   Agreements between the parties regarding the disposition of their
property upon the death of either party.
   (5)   Agreements for resolving any disputes that may arise should the
relationship dissolve, through alternative dispute resolution procedures or
otherwise.
   (6)   Documents that establish any other rights or obligations that may be
legally exchanged by and between the parties.
   (f)   As part of the registration statement, the parties to a civil union
may include a statement describing their shared intentions regarding the scope
of the relationship, regardless of whether or not they have entered into any
contracts or agreements of the kind described in subparagraph (e) above.
   (g)   Any documents described in the statement or list provided to the city
pursuant to subsection (e) above, and any statement of shared intent provided
pursuant to subsection (f) above, shall only be effective as provided under
Arizona law and any other applicable law, and the fact that the statement or
list has been submitted to the city and/or is maintained by the city shall not
affect whether those documents are enforceable or binding upon the parties
thereto. For example, some agreements may require additional documentation or
formalities in execution in order to effectuate their intent under Arizona law.
(Ord. No. 9898, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 11088, § 1, 6-18-13, eff. 7-19-13)
Sec. 17-74. Termination of civil union.
   A civil union shall terminate upon the occurrence of any one (1) of the
following:
   (1)   The death of one (1) of the partners;
   (2)   The filing of a sworn termination statement with the city's finance
department on the form prescribed by the city. The person filing the sworn
termination statement shall declare that the civil union is terminated and, if
the termination statement has not been signed by both parties to the civil
union, that the other person has been notified in writing of such termination
at the last known address of such person;
   (3)   The marriage, expressly recognized by the State of Arizona, of either
one of the civil union partners.
(Ord. No. 9898, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 11088, § 1, 6-18-13, eff. 7-19-13)
Sec. 17-75. Fees; civil union certificate.
   (a)   The fee for filing a civil union statement and any attachments shall
be fifty dollars ($50.00) which entitles the person filing the statement on
behalf of the civil union to two (2) certified copies of the official
statement, which shall constitute civil union certificates.
   (b)   The fee for obtaining additional copies shall be ten dollars ($10.00)
per copy.
   (c)   The fee for filing a termination of civil union statement shall be ten
dollars ($10.00).
(Ord. No. 9898, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 11088, § 1, 6-18-13, eff. 7-19-13)
Sec. 17-76. Rights of registered civil union partners.
   (a)   Health care visitation. All health care facilities operating within
the city shall allow the registered civil union partner of a patient to visit
such patient unless no visitors are allowed or the patient expresses a desire
that visitation by the civil union partner be restricted. As used in this
section, "health care facility" means every place, institution, building or
agency, whether organized for profit or not, which provides facilities with
medical services, nursing services, health screening services, other health-
related services, supervisory care services, personal care services or directed
care services and includes home health agencies as defined in A.R.S. § 36-151
and hospice service agencies.
   (b)   Use of and access to city facilities. All facilities owned or operated
by the city, including but not limited to recreational facilities shall allow
the registered civil union partner of a user to be included in any rights and
privileges accorded a spouse for purposes of use of and access to city
facilities.
   (c)   City employee benefits. To the extent authorized by law, any city
employee who is registered with the city as a civil union partner may designate
his or her partner as a beneficiary of any of the benefits provided by the city
in the same manner as a spouse of an employee.
(Ord. No. 9898, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 11088, § 1, 6-18-13, eff. 7-19-13)
Sec. 17-77. Limitation of liabilities.
   (a)   Nothing in this article shall be interpreted to contravene the general
laws of the State of Arizona.
   (b)   Nothing in this article shall be construed to create additional legal
liabilities greater than those already existing under law or to create new
private causes of action.
   (c)   By maintaining records provided by civil union partners pursuant to
this article, including the statement or list of documents as described in
section
17-73(e) and the statement of shared intent as described in section
17-73(f), the city does not make any representation or warranty that such
documents, records or stated intentions are legally enforceable or valid.
(Ord. No. 9898, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 11088, § 1, 6-18-13, eff. 7-19-13)
Sec. 17-78. Public Records.
   The statement of civil union, the civil union certificate and all documents
provided to the city by civil union partners pursuant to this article shall be
treated as a public record pursuant to the laws of the State of Arizona and
shall be subject to disclosure upon request.
(Ord. No. 11088, § 2, 6-18-13, eff. 7-19-13)
Sec. 17-79. Reserved.
ARTICLE X.
MINIMUM WAGE ACT
Sec. 17-80. Title and purpose.
   This article shall be known and may be cited as "The Tucson Minimum Wage
Act".
   The city, by this article, regulates the minimum wages and benefits within
its geographic boundaries, as authorized by the Raise the Arizona Minimum Wage
for Working Arizonans Act.
(Ord. No. 11868, 8-10-21)
Sec. 17-81. Definitions.
   As used in this article:
   (1)   "Adverse action" includes, but is not limited to, demoting,
terminating, failing to rehire after a seasonal interruption of work, engaging
in unfair immigration-related practices, filing a false report with a
government agency, changing an employee's status to that of an independent
contractor, or threatening to do any of the aforementioned things during or
after an employee's employment relationship with an employer.
   (2)   "Aggrieved party" means an employee, former employee, worker for hire,
or former worker for hire who alleges violations of this article.
   (3)   "Department" means the city department of labor standards created by
this article.
   (4)   "Director" means the director of the city department of labor
standards.
   (5)   "Employ" includes to suffer or permit to work, except that:
      a.   A franchisor is not an employer of an employee of a franchisee
except under circumstances allowed by state law;
      b.   An owner of a mark is not an employer of an employee of the
licensee, except under circumstances allowed by state law; and
      c.   A qualified marketplace platform is not an employer of a qualified
marketplace contractor.
   (6)   "Employee" means any individual employed by an employer and who, in a
workweek, performs at least five (5) hours of work for the employer within the
geographic boundaries of the city. The term includes individuals employed on a
full-time, part-time, or temporary basis, and individuals engaged through an
employment or staffing agency, except that an individual who performs only
babysitting services at an employer's home on a casual basis is not an
employee.
   (7)   "Employer" means any individual, partnership, association,
corporation, limited liability company, joint venture, nonprofit organization,
or other entity acting directly or indirectly in the interest of any employer
in relation to an employee and includes the city, the county, and any taxing
district organized under state law, but does not include the state, the United
States, or a tribal entity.
   (8)   "Hiring entity" means any person, partnership, association,
corporation, limited liability company, joint venture, nonprofit organization,
or other entity, that does not satisfy the definition of employer in relation
to a particular individual and who enters into a written or verbal contract
with such individual to perform labor or services within the geographic
boundaries of the city in consideration for remuneration under circumstances in
which the individual is properly treated as a worker for hire. The term does
not include the state, the United States, a tribal entity, a qualified
marketplace platform, or a person who hires an individual only for babysitting
services at the person's home on a casual basis. A franchisor is not the hiring
entity in relation to an individual whose labor or services were retained by a
franchisee.
   (9)   "Individual" means natural person.
   (10)   "Interested party" means any nonprofit organization organized in part
to protect the rights of workers, or any subset of workers, and has at least
one member within the city.
   (11)   "Large employer" means an employer that employed, on average, twenty-
six (26) or more employees during the final quarter of the previous calendar
year, including part-time employees, temporary employees, and those employees
located outside the city. For the purposes of this definition, multiple
entities shall be considered a single employer if deemed to be a single
integrated enterprise under the Fair Labor Standards Act.
   (12)   "Minimum wage" is measured on the basis of a workweek and is the
minimum wage rate set by section
17-82 of this article.
   (13)   "Qualified marketplace contractor" and "qualified marketplace
platform" have the same meanings as provided in state law.
   (14)   "Rate of inflation" means the increase in the consumer price index
(all items consumer price index for all urban consumers for the U.S. city
average), or its successor index, as published by the U.S. department of labor,
for the twelve (12) month period ending in August of each year.
   (15)   "Tip" means a verifiable sum presented by a customer as a gift or
voluntary gratuity in recognition of some service performed for or on behalf of
the customer.
   (16)   "Tipped employee" means an employee who customarily and regularly
receives more than thirty ($30.00) dollars per week in tips, has been informed
by the employer in writing about the tip requirements of this article, retains
all tips received, and whose total compensation (the sum of wages and tips) is
not less than the minimum wage.
    (17)   "Working time" is the compensable time that an employer is required
by this article to pay an employee not less than the minimum wage and includes
time that an employer requires the employee to undergo a security screening
immediately prior to or following a work shift; to be on the employer's
premises; to be at a prescribed work site; or to be logged in and actively
attentive to an employer-provided computer program, phone application, or
similar device.
   (18)   "Worker for hire" means any individual who, in a workweek:
      a.   Provides to or on behalf of a hiring entity at least five (5) hours
of labor or services within the geographic boundaries of the city in
consideration for remuneration;
      b.   Does not satisfy the definition of employee as related to that
hiring entity;
      c.   Is not a qualified marketplace contractor; and
      d.   Whose hiring entity is unable to demonstrate that the following
factors apply to the individual: 1) the individual is free from the control and
direction of the hiring entity in connection with the performance of the work;
2) the individual performs work that is outside the usual course of the hiring
entity's business; and 3) the individual is customarily engaged in an
independently established trade, occupation, or business of the same nature as
that involved in the work performed for the hiring entity.
   (19)   "Workweek" means seven (7) consecutive twenty-four (24) hour periods
that equal one hundred sixty-eight (168) total hours. The start time of a
workweek may be chosen by the employer.
(Ord. No. 11868, 8-10-21)
Sec. 17-82. Minimum wage rate.
   (a)   The minimum wage for all employees and workers for hire shall be:
   (1)   Thirteen dollars ($13.00) an hour on and after April 1, 2022;
    (2)   Thirteen dollars fifty cents ($13.50) an hour on and after January 1,
2023;
   (3)   Fourteen dollars twenty-five cents ($14.25) an hour on and after
January 1, 2024;
   (4)   Fifteen dollars ($15.00) an hour on and after January 1, 2025;
   (5)   On January 1, 2026 and on each January 1 thereafter, an hourly amount
that is increased by the rate of inflation multiplied by the minimum wage on
December 31 of the previous year rounded to the nearest multiple of five cents
($0.05).
   (b)   If the federal minimum wage or state minimum wage is increased above
the minimum wage provided for in this section, the minimum wage under this
section will be increased to match the higher wage and will become the new
minimum wage under this section on the same date that such higher federal or
state minimum wage becomes effective. The adjustment described in subsection
(a)(5) will continue on the following year.
   (c)   Tips regularly and actually received by a tipped employee may be
applied by an employer to offset the employer's minimum wage obligation to a
tipped employee, except that no more than three dollars ($3.00) per hour may be
so applied. This section shall not be construed to prevent a tip pool
arrangement, but an employer, owner, supervisor, or manager shall not
participate in a tip pool arrangement.
(Ord. No. 11868, 8-10-21)
Sec. 17-83. Payment of wages.
   (a)   Beginning April 1, 2022, an employer shall pay each employee not less
than the minimum wage set forth in this article, for all working time within
the geographic boundaries of the city. Beginning April 1, 2022, a hiring entity
shall pay each worker for hire not less than the minimum wage set forth in this
article, for all working time within the geographic boundaries of the city.
   (b)   An employer shall not obligate an employee to receive minimum wage
payments using a pay card, reloadable debit card, or similar method that
requires the employee to possess a valid social security number.
   (c)   A large employer shall pay to an employee at least three (3) hours of
compensation at no less than the minimum wage rate when:
   (1)   An employee is scheduled to work at least three (3) hours; the
employee timely reports for duty; the employee is able to work the entire
shift; and the employer engages the employee for fewer than three (3) hours; or
   (2)   An employee is scheduled to work at least three (3) hours and the
employer cancels the employee's shift with less than twenty-four (24) hours
notice.
   (d)   Except as required by law or court order, an employer shall not deduct
from an employee's wages if doing so will result in the employee receiving less
than the minimum wage, including but not limited to amounts deducted for
employer-provided meals and damaged, lost, or spoiled goods.
   (e)   An individual who satisfies the definitions of employee or worker for
hire becomes an employee or a worker for hire ninety (90) days after annexation
by the city results in the place of work being brought into the corporate
limits of the city. If an employee and employer have a mutual agreement that
the employee is to perform work from the employee's residence, the employee's
residence is subsequently brought within the corporate limits through
annexation, and the employer subsequently discharges the employee during the
ninety (90) day period, there arises a rebuttable presumption that such action
was retaliation in violation of this article.
(Ord. No. 11868, 8-10-21)
Sec. 17-84. Retaliation prohibited.
   (a)   No employer shall take any adverse action against any employee or
worker for hire in retaliation for filing a complaint under the provisions of
this article, asserting any claim or right under this article, assisting
another employee in doing so, communicating a complaint to an interested party,
or for informing another employee about their rights.
   (b)   Taking an adverse action against an individual within ninety (90) days
of an individual's engaging in the rights covered by state minimum wage and
benefits law, or notifying the employer or employer's representative of a
violation of this article, shall raise a rebuttable presumption that such
action was retaliation.
(Ord. No. 11868, 8-10-21)
Sec. 17-85. Private cause of action.
   (a)   The rights afforded employees and workers for hire under the Tucson
Minimum Wage Act are authorized by the Raising Arizona Minimum Wage for Working
Arizonans Act, and nothing contained in this section shall be construed as
requiring an aggrieved party to exhaust the municipal remedies stated herein or
otherwise deprive anyone the right to take action under state law.
   (b)   To the extent allowable by law and within three (3) years after the
cause of action accrued, any individual aggrieved by a violation of this
article or any interested party may commence a civil action against an employer
or against a hiring entity in the city court or in any court of competent
jurisdiction. Upon prevailing, the aggrieved party or interested party shall be
entitled to reasonable attorneys' fees, costs, as well as legal or equitable
relief as may be appropriate, including payment of back wages payable to the
aggrieved party, and an additional equal amount in liquidated damages payable
to the aggrieved party.
   (c)   Any employment contract, written or verbal, formed between an employer
and employee on or after the implementation date of this article shall include,
as terms implied-in-law, the provisions of sections
17-82 and
17-83 of this article.
   (d)   The initiation of an investigation by the department shall not prevent
an aggrieved party or interested party from initiating a civil action against
the same employer or hiring entity, and an aggrieved party need not exhaust
administrative remedies prior to initiating a civil action.
   (e)   Not less than sixty (60) days after an aggrieved party or interested
party submits a complaint to the city using the form prescribed in section
17-86(d) of this article, such aggrieved party or interested party may initiate
steps to file a special action against the city in a court of competent
jurisdiction seeking to compel the city to promptly investigate such complaint.
Prior to filing a special action, the aggrieved party or interested party shall
provide notice to the city attorney of their intention to take such action. The
notification to the city attorney shall allow the city thirty (30) days to: 1)
resolve the complaint; 2) allow the aggrieved party's or interested party's
special action to proceed; or 3) authorize the aggrieved party or interested
party to proceed with an action against the alleged violator in a qui tam
action on behalf of the city. Parties proceeding on behalf of the city shall
bring actions for a civil infraction as described in section
17-87. Should the aggrieved party or interested party prevail, the aggrieved
party or parties will be entitled to thirty (30) percent of any penalties or
fines imposed against the employer or hiring entity, with the balance being
remitted to the city.
(Ord. No. 11868, 8-10-21)
Sec. 17-86. Implementation by the city.
   (a)   Effective April 1, 2022, there is established a department of labor
standards, whose head shall be the director of labor standards. The director's
appointment and removal shall be in accordance with sections
2,
6, and
11 of
chapter V of the charter. The director may promulgate administrative directives
for the implementation of this article.
   (b)   The purposes and functions of the department of labor standards shall
include, but not be limited to: receiving complaints filed by aggrieved
individuals and interested parties, initiating investigations of employers and
hiring entities no later than forty- five (45) calendar days after receipt of
such complaint from an aggrieved party or interested party, initiating
enforcement actions, periodically conducting studies of low-wage workers in the
city for the purpose of guiding the department's targeted enforcement efforts,
educating employers of their obligations under this article, and educating
employees of their rights under this article.
   (c)   There shall be appointed wage investigators under the city's civil
service rules. It shall be the duty of the wage investigators to investigate
suspected violations of this article, communicate with complainants, report and
make recommendations of all suspected violations to the director, and initiate
enforcement actions under the director's guidance.
   (d)   Not later than June 1, 2022, there shall be created an online method
and a paper method for individuals to file complaints with the department.
   (e)   On or before November 1, 2022 and every subsequent November 1, the
director shall announce the minimum wage that will take effect on the following
January 1, shall publish the same on the city website, and shall make other
reasonable efforts to inform employers of the same.
   (f)   An employee, former employee, worker for hire, former worker for hire,
or any other individual may report to the department any suspected violation of
this article. The department shall encourage reporting by keeping confidential,
to the maximum extent permissible by state law, the identifying information of
the employee or worker for hire. Notwithstanding this subsection, the
department may disclose the identifying information of a complainant with the
authorization of such individual, by court order, or in compliance with any
applicable law.
   (g)   To aid in the enforcement of this article, the city may enter into an
intergovernmental agreement with the county or other municipalities located
within the county.
   (h)   Nothing herein precludes the city from imposing a fee on businesses, a
subset of businesses, or from increasing existing license taxes, license fees,
or other levies established in
chapter 19 of this code for the purpose of funding the operations of the
department.
(Ord. No. 11868, 8-10-21)
Sec. 17-87. Enforcement by the city.
   (a)   A violation of this chapter by an employer or hiring entity shall be a
civil infraction. No criminal liability shall attach to any violation of this
article.
   (b)   Employers and hiring entities shall allow the city access to pay and
time records of an employee and worker for hire, with appropriate notice and in
a reasonable manner. Where an employer or hiring entity does not maintain such
records, does not allow the city reasonable access to such records, or such
records were not created contemporaneously, the account of the employee or
worker for hire is presumed accurate.
   (c)   If a violation of this article has been finally determined, the
director shall order the employer to cease and desist from engaging in the
violative practice and may order any of the following additional relief: a
civil penalty of up to one hundred dollars ($100.00) to be paid to the city for
each employee whose rights under this article were violated for each day that
the violation occurred, back pay, and an additional equal amount as liquidated
damages. The city may establish procedures for appeal by employers.
   (d)   If a repeat violation of this article has been finally determined,
except where prohibited by law, the city may revoke, suspend, or decline to
renew any license provided for in
chapter 19 of city code.
   (e)   To the extent allowable by law and within three (3) years after the
cause of action accrued, the city may initiate a civil action in city court or
a court of competent jurisdiction against an employer or a hiring entity.
   (f)   Not later than December 1, 2022, the department shall undertake a
survey of low-wage workers in the city. The survey shall identify those
industries in the city where minimum wage violations are most likely to occur.
No later than July 1, 2023, and in following years, the department shall devote
a portion of its resources to the investigation of employers and hiring
entities belonging to the industries identified by the survey.
(Ord. No. 11868, 8-10-21)
Sec. 17-88. Severability and construction.
   (a)   If any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this article
is declared preempted, unconstitutional, or otherwise illegal by state law by
the judgment of any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not
affect any of the remaining portions of this article.
   (b)   Nothing in this article shall be construed to discourage or prohibit
the adoption or retention of a wage policy more generous than that which is
required herein.
(Ord. No. 11868, 8-10-21)
Sec. 17-89. Reserved.
Chapter 18
SELF-INSURED RISK PROGRAM AND TRUST FUND*
__________
*   Editor's note – Ord. No. 10299, §§ 1 and 2, adopted June 27, 2006,
effective July 1, 2006, repealed
chapter 18, §§ 18-1 – 18-9, which pertained to libraries and derived from Ord.
No. 4015, § 1, adopted May 7, 1973, as amended.
   Current
ch. 18 was enacted by Ord. No. 10904, §§ 1 and 2, adopted June 28, 2011.
__________
Sec.
18-1.   Purpose.
Sec.
18-2.   Definitions.
Sec.
18-3.   Self-insurance program.
Sec.
18-4.   Establishment of self-insured risk trust fund.
Sec.
18-5.   Manner of financing self-insured risk trust fund.
Sec.
18-6.   Expenditure of trust funds.
Sec.
18-7.   Board of trustees.
Sec.
18-8.   Administration of the trust.
Sec.
18-9.   Powers and duties of the administrator.
Sec.
18-10.   Indemnification.
Sec.
18-11.   Stop loss provision.
Sec.
18-12.   Authority to amend trust agreement or terminate trust.
 
   *Editor’s note – Ord. No. 10299, §§ 1 and 2, adopted June 27, 2006,
effective July 1, 2006, repealed chapter 18, §§ 18-1 – 18-9, which pertained to
libraries and derived from Ord. No. 4015, § 1, adopted May 7, 1973, as amended.
   Ch. 18, enacted by Ord. No. 10904, §§ 1 and 2, adopted June 28, 2011, was
repealed and replaced by Ord. No. 11832, §§ 1 and 2, adopted May 4, 2021.
Sec. 18-1. Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to codify the city's self-insurance program
for workers' compensation and general public liability, and to establish the
self-insured risk trust fund so that the city can reach and maintain an
adequate level of reserves to support self-insurance for the management and
administration of a system for direct payment of benefits, losses or claims, or
any combination of insurance and direct payments in conformance with A.R.S. §
11-981. Nothing contained herein shall modify or restrict the legal obligations
of the city to administer and operate appropriate insurance programs for the
city as those programs shall be modified from time to time hereafter by the
mayor and council.
(Ord. No. 11832, § 2, 5-4-21)
Sec. 18-2. Definitions.
   “Administrator” means the risk manager appointed by the city manager. Any
administrator appointed hereunder must be licensed as required by A.R.S. § 20-
281 et seq., or certified as an insurance administrator under A.R.S. § 20-485
et seq.
   “Trust” means the City of Tucson, Arizona, Self-Insured Risk Trust.
   “Trust agreement” means the declaration of trust entered into by and between
City of Tucson, a political subdivision of the State of Arizona and the
individuals executing the declaration of trust, as trustees, setting forth the
powers and duties of the trustees and the administrator; a stop loss provision,
and other terms and conditions.
   "Trustees" or "trustee" means individuals appointed by the mayor and council
in accordance with section 18-7 to oversee the funding and investment of the
trust. The trustees are collectively referred to herein as the board of
trustees.
(Ord. No. 11832, § 2, 5-4-21)
Sec. 18-3. Self-insurance program.
   The city's self-insurance program includes established terms and conditions
of coverage and exclusions of coverage, insurance contracts, the trust, and
contracts required for the management or administration of the program. The
administrator is responsible for the self-insurance program and shall serve as
the city's risk management consultant. Nothing herein shall be interpreted to
expand or increase the liability of the city for any claim.
(Ord. No. 11832, § 2, 5-4-21)
Sec. 18-4. Establishment of self-insured risk trust fund.
   Effective June 28, 2011, the city established the City of Tucson Self
Insured Risk Trust Fund following approval by the mayor and council. The trust
fund is a funding mechanism for the areas of potential liability described in
the trust agreement as approved by the mayor and council. Initially the trust
shall provide a funding source for workers' compensation and general public
liability. The trust shall cover such other areas as are permitted by law and
may be authorized by the annual appropriation of funds by the mayor and
council. The trust shall provide separate accounting for the areas of coverage
but shall not segregate funds within the trust. The finance director shall
segregate all funds previously and hereinafter budgeted for trust purposes and
maintain the trust separately from the city general fund.
(Ord. No. 11832, § 2, 5-4-21)
Sec. 18-5. Manner of financing self-insured risk trust fund.
   The trustees, following consultation with the administrator, shall annually
recommend to the mayor and council the level of funding necessary to achieve
and maintain adequate trust funds. The determination of the appropriate amount
of funding for the trust shall be made annually and shall be solely within the
discretion of the mayor and council. The trust shall be funded by allocation of
funds from general fund and non-general fund departments. General public
liability funds shall be based upon the administrator's analysis of claims
history and pending claims. The trust may also be funded by gifts, grants, any
special taxes levied to satisfy judgments, payment of claims or other
involuntary indebtedness and by monies recovered from litigation, statutory
liens, recovery from insurers, subrogation and salvage value of damaged
property, and interest earned on the funds held by the trust. Additionally, the
trust may be funded through other available financial techniques and methods
permissible under state or federal law and authorized by the trustees and the
mayor and council.
(Ord. No. 11832, § 2, 5-4-21)
Sec. 18-6. Expenditure of trust funds.
   Funds of the trust shall be expended solely for payment of claims,
administration of the trust, training for reduction in liability and other loss
control and loss prevention purposes, in accordance with A.R.S. 11-981. The
administrator shall have final decision making authority with regard to the
expenditure of trust funds, and shall consult with or report to the trustees
regarding appropriate types of expenditures.
(Ord. No. 11832, § 2, 5-4-21)
Sec. 18-7. Board of trustees.
   Sec. 18-7.1. The board of trustees shall include five (5) joint trustees,
all of whom shall be at least twenty-one (21) years old, citizens of the United
States of America and reside or work in the City of Tucson, Arizona. One
trustee shall be the city's finance director and no other trustee shall be an
officer or employee of the City of Tucson. Except for the city's finance
director, the trustees shall be appointed by the mayor and council and
preferably shall have experience or expertise in the field of finance, risk
management, insurance, actuarial science or investment management. Except for
the finance director, the trustees shall be appointed by the mayor and council,
serve staggered terms of no more than four (4) years by a written appointment,
which shall detail the duration of a trustee's term and be lodged with the
clerk and records of the trust.
   Sec. 18-7.2. No person shall qualify as trustee until he or she has been
bonded. The bond requirement may be satisfied by the blanket performance bond
or other coverage provided by the city.
   Sec. 18-7.3. Trustees are subject to removal and substitution by the mayor
and council with or without cause. Trustees also may elect to resign from their
position on the board of trustees for any or no reason. Upon the expiration of
a trustee's term, the mayor and council may appoint another individual to serve
as trustee or the mayor and council may reappoint the exiting trustee to serve
a subsequent term. Alternatively, and if necessary, the mayor and council may
request that the exiting trustee agree to extend the expiring term until a
replacement trustee is appointed by the mayor and council.
   Sec. 18-7.4. The resignation, incompetency, death or termination of any of
the trustees shall not terminate the trust or affect its continuity; however, a
quorum of the trustees is required for the trustees to take action. During a
vacancy, the remaining trustee or trustees may exercise the power of the
trustees hereunder, subject to the quorum requirement. If necessary, the board
of trustees may determine, by majority vote of the remaining trustees, that a
vacancy exists by reason of absence, incompetency or any other reason. Any such
determination made by the board of trustees shall be delivered to the mayor and
council. Vacancies among the trustees shall be filled by the mayor and council
and can be filled on an interim basis if the mayor and council determine that
circumstances warrant a temporary appointment.
   Sec. 18-7.5. Trustees shall not be entitled to receive compensation for
their services as trustees, except trustees shall be entitled to reimbursement
for any reasonable out-of-pocket costs and expenditures made by the trustees in
the performance of their duties as trustees. The finance director shall not
receive any additional compensation for service as a trustee.
   Sec. 18-7.6. The board of trustees shall be responsible for the investment
of trust fund assets. Trust investments shall be prudently managed and shall
take into account the liquidity needs of the trust, as established by the
administrator and the finance director. The board of trustees shall make
recommendations annually to the mayor and council, through the city manager,
regarding the amount of funding recommended to achieve and maintain adequate
reserves in the trust. The trustees shall work together with the administrator
to submit annual funding recommendations to the mayor and council, and to
provide advance review and comment on the administrator's annual report to the
mayor and council on the overall status of the city's self-insurance program.
The trustees may make other recommendations to the mayor and council regarding
the self-insurance program and/or the trust fund, as they deem necessary and
appropriate.
   Sec. 18-7.7. The board of trustees shall work with the administrator to take
all necessary precautions to safeguard the assets of the trust.
   Sec. 18-7.8. The board of trustees shall act in conformance with this
chapter and the terms of the trust agreement.
   Sec. 18-7.9. The board of trustees shall be exempt from the provisions of
chapter 10A, title XIII of the Tucson Code.
(Ord. No. 11832, § 2, 5-4-21)
Sec. 18-8. Administration of the trust.
   Sec. 18-8.1. The financial activities, management and business affairs of
the trust, with the exception of trust investments managed by board of trustees
in accordance with Section
18-7.6, shall be managed effectively and efficiently by the administrator in
consultation with the finance director. The administrator shall submit reports
on the status of the trust to the board of trustees periodically and no less
frequently than annually.
   Sec. 18-8.2. The trust shall comply with all federal, state and local laws,
rules, regulations, standards and executive orders, without limitation to those
designated within the trust agreement.
   Sec. 18-8.3. The trust shall not discriminate against any individual in any
way on account of such individual's race, color, religion, sex, age,
disability, or national origin.
   Sec. 18-8.4. The trust shall be audited annually by an external auditor
engaged in accordance with the city's procurement code. The audit shall be
conducted in accordance with state law requirements and the city's audit
policies, and a copy of the audit report kept on file in the office of the city
clerk for a period of not less than five (5) years. In the event that the audit
of the trust's financial statements is included in the city's CAFR, the trust's
financial statements shall be audited separately, and the external auditor
shall issue an audit opinion with regard to the trust's financial statements.
   Sec. 18-8.5. All purchases by or on behalf of the trust, with the exception
of the purchase of insurance contracts and coverages, shall comply with
Chapter 28 of the Code (the Tucson procurement code). Purchases completed with
trust assets for purposes of settling claims against the city shall not be
considered purchases by or on behalf of the trust and shall not be subject to
the Tucson procurement code. Payment for materials and services contracted for
by the trust shall be the exclusive obligation of the trust, subject to the
termination provisions of section
18-12 and the termination provisions of the trust agreement.
(Ord. No. 11832, § 2, 5-4-21)
Sec. 18-9. Powers and duties of the administrator.
   Sec. 18-9.1. The administrator is authorized to establish, manage, and
administer a program to finance the risk of loss arising from losses, claims,
costs, and expenses that are the obligation of the city. The administrator is
authorized to make disbursements for and on behalf of the city, as necessary to
operate and administer the program. Any program established by the
administrator shall conform to the provisions of the trust agreement regarding
areas of coverage under the trust and applicable law. In the event that the
city, by written policy or directive, requires the administrator to obtain the
consent of the board of trustees regarding disbursements or transfers from the
trust, the administrator shall comply with such policy or directive.
   Sec. 18-9.2. The administrator may procure insurance from any insurer
authorized to do business in the State by the Arizona department of insurance,
establish self-insured retention programs, or combine self-insured retention
programs and procurement of insurance. If a self-insured retention is
maintained, and subject to the city's appropriation of funds, the administrator
is authorized to establish adequate and appropriate reserves, which may include
an allowance for claims incurred but not reported for any claims made against
the city which may be funded by the trust.
   Sec. 18-9.3. The administrator has the authority to establish terms and
conditions of coverage including exclusions of coverage, ensure that all claims
payable through the trust are paid promptly, and enter into contracts required
for the management or administration of the trust.
   Sec. 18-9.4. The administrator, or their designee, is authorized to purchase
all materials and services required for the operation of the program and the
trust. Any and all bids or proposals may be rejected by the administrator if it
is determined by the administrator that rejection is in the best interest of
the city.
   Sec. 18-9.5. The administrator, together with the city's finance director
and the board of trustees, shall make an annual recommendation to the mayor and
council regarding the level of trust funding necessary to achieve and then
maintain adequate reserves in the trust fund.
   Sec. 18-9.6. The administrator shall work with the city's procurement
department to select and appoint an independent qualified actuary for the trust
and shall approve the actuarial assumptions used to value the trust assets and
liabilities, based on recommendations of the actuary.
   Sec. 18-9.7. The administrator is authorized to establish loss control and
prevention programs designed to reduce or eliminate losses and claims against
the physical and financial assets, and human resources, of the city.
   Sec. 18-9.8. The administrator is authorized to settle claims against the
city, its officers, appointees and employees, subject to the following
conditions:
   (1)   The administrator or the administrator's designated representative has
made a thorough investigation regarding questions of liability and damages and
has determined the reasonable dollar value of the claim; and
   (2)   If the settlement involves a matter in litigation, the settlement has
first been approved by the city attorney, regardless of the settlement amount;
and
   (3)   The administrator has the authority to approve administratively the
settlement of claims where the settlement does not exceed:
      (A)   twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) for a bodily injury or
property damage claim;
      (B)   forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00) for a combined bodily injury/
property damage claim; or
      (C)   the amount of the deductible under the city's property insurance
policy for a property damage claim .
   (4)   If the settlement of a claim or lawsuit exceeds the authority levels
stated in subsection (3), the administrator must counsel with the city attorney
prior to approval. Settlement of claims for amounts that exceed the authority
levels stated in subsection (3) above also requires mayor and council approval.
   (5)   If the claim is a workers' compensation claim and the proposed
settlement would be a structured and/or full and final workers' compensation
claim settlement, the administrator is required to secure the approval of the
city attorney prior to settlement. Structured and/or full and final workers'
compensation claims are governed by the Arizona Industrial Commission and must
be in accordance with A.R.S. § 23-941.01; and must be approved by the Arizona
Industrial Commission prior to finalization. Settlement of a workers'
compensation claim under this subsection also requires mayor and council
approval if the amount of the settlement exceeds forty thousand dollars
($40,000).
   (6)   Any and all settlements are conditioned upon an appropriate written
release by the claimant in favor of the city, its officers, appointees, and
employees.
   Sec. 18-9.9. The administrator shall work with the board of trustees to take
all necessary precautions to safeguard the assets of the trust and assist in
the facilitation and administration of the trust in whatever manner is
appropriate and necessary.
   Sec. 18-9.10. In accordance with the provisions of this
Chapter 18 and the terms of the trust agreement, the administrator shall
coordinate the activities of the trustees, prepare and submit annual reports to
the mayor and council on the status of the city's self-insurance program and
the status of the trust.
(Ord. No. 11832, § 2, 5-4-21; Ord. No. 12003, § 1, 5-23-23)
Sec. 18-10. Indemnification.
   To the extent permitted by law, the board of trustees, the trustees and the
administrator shall be indemnified and held harmless against any and all
liabilities (including defense costs and expenses) arising by reason of an act
or failure to act in their fiduciary and administrative capacities to the
system, and for liability and costs resulting from the acts and omissions of
their duly appointed agents, except for those acts, omissions, or conduct
resulting from their own willful misconduct, willful failure to act, or gross
negligence.
(Ord. No. 11832, § 2, 5-4-21)
Sec. 18-11. Stop loss provision.
   Pursuant to the city's risk management program, self-insured retention
levels and reserve requirements will be established for classifications of
risk, depending upon the reasonable availability of excess or stop loss
insurance. The self-insured retention level for a particular type of a risk, if
any, shall be established by the administrator in consultation with the finance
director and the board of trustees.
(Ord. No. 11832, § 2, 5-4-21)
Sec. 18-12.   Authority to amend trust agreement or terminate trust.
   Sec. 18-12.1. The trust agreement may be amended by the mayor and council at
any time, following consultation with the board of trustees.
   Sec. 18-12.2. The mayor and council shall have the exclusive authority to
terminate the City of Tucson Self-Insured Trust Fund, in accordance with the
terms of the trust agreement.
(Ord. No. 11832, § 2, 5-4-21)
Chapter 19
LICENSES AND PRIVILEGE TAXES*
__________
*   Cross References: Licensing of fortunetellers, §
7-62 et seq.; regulation and licensing of going-out-of- business, fire, etc.,
sales, §
7-80 et seq.
   State Law References: License taxes generally, A.R.S. § 42-1101 et seq.;
luxury privilege taxes, § 42-1201 et seq.; transaction privilege taxes, § 42-
1301 et seq.
__________
Art. I.   Occupational License Tax, §§ 19-1--19-98
   Div. 1. General Provisions, §§ 19-1--19-38
   Div. 2. Employee Based Occupational License Tax, §§ 19-39--19-41
   Div. 3. Swap Meet Proprietors, Outdoor Vendors, and Special Event
Occupational License Tax, §§ 19-42--19-50
   Div. 4. Liquor and Vending Machines License Tax, §§ 19-51--19-65
   Div. 5. Tax on Hotels Renting to Transients, §§ 19-66--19-98
Art. II.   Privilege and Excise Taxes, §§ 19-99--19-660
   Div. 1. General Conditions and Definitions, §§ 19-99--19-130
   Div. 2. Determination of Gross Income, §§ 19-200--19-290
   Div. 3. Licensing and Recordkeeping, §§ 19-300--19-380
   Div. 4. Privilege Taxes, §§ 19-400--19-485
   Div. 5. Administration, §§ 19-500--19-595
   Div. 6. Use Tax, §§ 19-600--19-660
    Regulations--Privilege and Excise Taxes, Regs. 19-100.1--19-571.1
Art. III.   Public Utility Tax, §§ 19-699--19-1120
   Div. 1. General Conditions and Definitions, §§ 19-699, 19-700
   Div. 2. Determination of Gross Income, §§ 19-800--19-890
   Div. 3. Licensing and Recordkeeping, §§ 19-900--19-970
   Div. 4. Public Utility Tax, §§ 19-1000--19-1080
   Div. 5. Administration, §§ 19-1100--19-1120
Art. IV.   Reserved, §§ 19-1200--19-1255
Article I. Occupational License Tax
Division 1. General Provisions
Sec.
19-1.   Definitions.
Sec.
19-2.   License required.
Sec.
19-3.   Issuance by tax collector; contents.
Sec.
19-4.   When taxes due.
Sec.
19-5.   Prorating quarterly taxes.
Sec.
19-6.   When taxes delinquent; penalty and interest applied.
Sec.
19-7.   Time, place of payment generally.
Sec.
19-8.   Mistake not to prevent collecting correct amount.
Sec.
19-9.   Notice of termination of business required.
Sec.
19-10.   Imposition of license tax; evidence of engaging in business.
Sec.
19-11.   Right of entry of tax collector, revenue investigators, police; arrest
authority.
Sec.
19-12.   Appointment of revenue investigators; general duties.
Sec.
19-13.   Tax collector, revenue inspectors to file complaints.
Sec.
19-14.   Separate licenses required for separate places of business.
Sec.
19-15.   Licenses to be displayed; exhibition upon demand.
Sec.
19-16.   When certificate or permit from health department required.
Sec.
19-17.   Exemption for businesses engaged in interstate commerce or whom
conduct business solely with the United States Government.
Sec.
19-18.   Conviction, punishment for failing to have license not to excuse non-
payment of tax.
Sec.
19-19.   Suspension and revocation.
Sec.
19-20.   Application for license; information required.
Sec.
19-21.   Rules and Regulations authorized; approval; filing; copies required.
Sec.
19-22.   Exemption for low business volume.
Sec.
19-23.   Administrative review; petition for hearing or for redetermination;
hearing or redetermination; finality of order.
Sec.
19-24.   Civil actions.
Sec.
19-25.   Collection of taxes when there is succession in and/or succession of
business interest.
Sec.
19-26.   Successor in interest exemptions.
Sec.
19-27.   Penalty--Failure to provide number of employees information.
Sec.
19-28.   Limitation periods.
Sec.
19-29.   Discount for timely advance annual payment of taxes.
Sec.
19-30.   Other provisions.
Sec.
19-31.   General administration and enforcement.
Sec.
19-32.   Director of finance to keep records.
Sec.
19-33.   Refund of prepaid license taxes.
Secs.
19-34--19-38.   Reserved.
Division 2. Employee Based Occupational License Tax
Sec.
19-39.   Application fee, annual license fee, annual renewal requirements,
penalty.
Sec.
19-40.   Exemptions for occupations paying other taxes.
Sec.
19-41.   Occupational license tax schedule.
Division 3. Swap Meet Proprietors, Outdoor Vendors, and Special Event
Occupational License Tax
Sec.
19-42.   Swap meet proprietors, street fair vendors, and trade show dealers.
Sec.
19-43.   Promoter.
Sec.
19-44.   Peddlers.
Sec.
19-45.   Ice cream truck vendors.
Secs.
19-46--19-50.   Reserved.
Division 4. Liquor and Vending Machine License Tax
Sec.
19-51.   Imposition--Liquor license tax.
Sec.
19-52.   Quarterly--Liquor license fee schedule.
Sec.
19-53.   Applications.
Sec.
19-54.   Vending machines license fees.
Sec.
19-55.   Business privilege license tax.
Secs.
19-56--19-65.   Reserved.
Division 5. Tax on Hotels Renting to Transients
Sec.
19-66.   Tax imposed; nature and source of transient rental occupational
license tax.
Sec.
19-67.   Registration.
Sec.
19-68.   Determination of rent based upon method of reporting.
Sec.
19-69.   Exclusion of vendor issued coupons and rebates from rental income.
Sec.
19-70.   Exclusion of combined taxes from rent; itemization; notice;
limitations.
Sec.
19-71.   Licensing requirements.
Sec.
19-72.   Special licensing requirements.
Sec.
19-73.   Licensing; duration of license; transferability; display.
Sec.
19-74.   Licensing: cancellation; revocation.
Sec.
19-75.   Operating without a license.
Sec.
19-76.   Recordkeeping requirements.
Sec.
19-77.   Recordkeeping; claim of exclusion, exemption, deduction, or credit;
documentation; liability.
Sec.
19-78.   Inadequate or unsuitable records.
Sec.
19-79.   Administration.
Secs.
19-80   Additional penalties.
Secs.
19-81--19-84.   Reserved.
Division 6. Tax on Secondhand Dealers and Pawnbrokers
Sec.
19-85.   Tax imposed.
Sec.
19-86.   Due date of tax.
Sec.
19-87.   Administration.
Secs.
19-88 – 19-98.   Reserved.
Article II. Privilege and Excise Taxes
Division 1. General Conditions and Definitions
Sec.
19-99.   Words of tense, number and gender; Code references.
Sec.
19-100.   General definitions.
Sec.
19-110.   Definitions: Income-producing capital equipment.
Sec.
19-115.   Definitions: Computer software; custom computer programming. (Reg.
115.1)
Sec.
19-120.   Reserved.
Sec.
19-130.   Reserved.
Division 2. Determination of Gross Income
Sec.
19-200.   Determination of gross income: in general.
Sec.
19-210.   Determination of gross income: Transactions between affiliated
companies or persons.
Sec.
19-220.   Determination of gross income: Artificially contrived transactions.
Sec.
19-230.   Determination of gross income based upon method of reporting.
Sec.
19-240.   Exclusion of cash discounts, returns, refunds, trade-in values,
vendor-issued coupons, and rebates from gross income.
Sec.
19-250.   Exclusion of combined taxes from gross income; itemization; notice;
limitations.
Sec.
19-260.   Exclusion of fees and taxes from gross income; limitations.
Sec.
19-265.   Reserved.
Sec.
19-266.   Exclusion of motor carrier revenues from gross income.
Sec.
19-270.   Exclusion of gross income of persons deemed not engaged in business.
Sec.
19-280.   Reserved.
Sec.
19-285.   Determination of gross income: Moratorium on certain taxes relating
to certain real property.
Sec.
19-290.   Special exemption for activities occurring on Davis Monthan Air Force
Base.
Division 3. Licensing and Recordkeeping
Sec.
19-300.   Licensing requirements.
Sec.
19-305.   Reserved.
Sec.
19-310.   Licensing: Special requirements.
Sec.
19-315.   Reserved.
Sec.
19-320.   License fees; annual renewal; renewal fees.
Sec.
19-330.   Licensing: Duration; transferability; display; penalties; penalty
waiver; relicensing; fees collectible as if taxes.
Sec.
19-340.   Licensing: Cancellation; revocation.
Sec.
19-350.   Operating without a license.
Sec.
19-360.   Recordkeeping requirements.
Sec.
19-362.   Recordkeeping: Income.
Sec.
19-364.   Recordkeeping: Expenditures.
Sec.
19-366.   Recordkeeping: Out-of-city and out-of-state sales.
Sec.
19-370.   Recordkeeping: Claim of exclusion, exemption, deduction, or credit;
documentation; liability.
Sec.
19-372.   Proof of exemption: Sale for resale; sale, rental, lease, or license
of rental equipment.
Sec.
19-380.   Inadequate or unsuitable records.
Division 4. Privilege Taxes
Sec.
19-400.   Imposition of privilege taxes; presumption.
Sec.
19-405.   Advertising. (Regs. 405.1, 405.2)
Sec.
19-407.   Reserved.
Sec.
19-410.   Amusements, exhibitions, and similar activities.
Sec.
19-415.   Construction contracting: Construction contractors.
Sec.
19-415.1.   Liability for MRRA amounts equal to retail transaction privilege
tax due.
Sec.
19-416.   Construction contracting: Speculative builders. (Regs. 416.1, 416.2)
Sec.
19-416.1.   Speculative builders: homeowner's bona fide non-business sale of a
family residence.
Sec.
19-416.2.   Reconstruction contracting.
Sec.
19-417.   Construction contracting: Owner-builders who are not speculative
builders.
Sec.
19-418.   Reserved.
Sec.
19-420.   Reserved.
Sec.
19-425.   Job printing.
Sec.
19-427.   Manufactured buildings.
Sec.
19-430.   Timbering and other extraction.
Sec.
19-432.   Mining.
Sec.
19-435.   Publishing and periodicals distribution. (Reg. 435.1)
Sec.
19-444.   Hotels.
Sec.
19-445.   Rental, leasing, and licensing for use of real property.
Sec.
19-446.   Reserved.
Sec.
19-447.   Reserved.
Sec.
19-450.   Rental, leasing, and licensing for use of tangible personal property.
Sec.
19-452.   Reserved.
Sec.
19-455.   Restaurants and bars.
Sec.
19-460.   Retail sales: Measure of tax; burden of proof; exclusions.
Sec.
19-462.   Retail sales: Food for home consumption.
Sec.
19-465.   Retail sales: Exemptions.
Sec.
19-470.   Telecommunication services.
Sec.
19-475.   Transporting for hire. (Reg. 475.1)
Sec.
19-480.   Utility services.
Sec.
19-485.   Wastewater removal services.
Division 5. Administration
Sec.
19-500.   Administration of this article; rule making.
Sec.
19-510.   Divulging of information prohibited; exceptions allowing disclosure.
Sec.
19-515.   Duties of the taxpayer problem resolution officer.
Sec.
19-516.   Taxpayer assistance orders.
Sec.
19-517.   Basis for evaluating employee performance.
Sec.
19-520.   Reporting and payment of tax.
Sec.
19-530.   When tax due; when delinquent; verification of return; extensions.
Sec.
19-540.   Interest and civil penalties.
Sec.
19-541.   Erroneous advice or misleading statements by the tax collector;
abatement of penalties and interest; definition.
Sec.
19-542.   Prospective application of new law or interpretation or application
of law.
Sec.
19-545.   Deficiencies; when inaccurate return is filed; when no return is
filed; estimates.
Sec.
19-546.   Closing agreements in cases of extensive taxpayer misunderstanding or
misapplication; city attorney approval; rules.
Sec.
19-550.   Limitation periods.
Sec.
19-553.   Examination of taxpayer records; joint audits.
Sec.
19-555.   Tax collector may examine books and other records; failure to provide
records.
Sec.
19-556.   No additional audits or proposed assessments; exceptions.
Sec.
19-560.   Erroneous payment of tax; credits and refunds; limitations.
Sec.
19-565.   Payment of tax by the incorrect taxpayer or to the incorrect Arizona
city or town.
Sec.
19-567.   Reserved.
Sec.
19-570.   Administrative review; petition for hearing or for redetermination;
finality of order.
Sec.
19-571.   Jeopardy assessments. (Reg. 571.1)
Sec.
19-572.   Expedited review of jeopardy assessments.
Sec.
19-575.   Judicial review.
Sec.
19-577.   Refunds of taxes paid under protest.
Sec.
19-578.   Reimbursement of fees and other costs; definitions.
Sec.
19-580.   Criminal penalties.
Sec.
19-590.   Civil actions.
Sec.
19-595.   Collection of taxes when there is succession in and/or cessation of
business.
Sec.
19-596.   Agreement for installment payments of tax.
Sec.
19-597.   Private taxpayer rulings; request; revocation or modification;
definition.
Division 6. Use Tax
Sec.
19-600.   Use tax: definitions.
Sec.
19-601.   Reserved.
Sec.
19-602.   Reserved.
Sec.
19-610.   Use tax: imposition of tax; presumption.
Sec.
19-620.   Use tax: liability for tax.
Sec.
19-630.   Use tax: record-keeping requirements.
Sec.
19-640.   Use tax: credit for equivalent excise taxes paid another
jurisdiction.
Sec.
19-650.   Use tax: exclusion when acquisition subject to use tax is taxed or
taxable elsewhere in this chapter; limitation.
Sec.
19-660.   Use tax: exemptions.
 
Reg.
19-100.1.   Brokers.
Reg.
19-100.2.   Delivery, installation, or other direct customer services.
Reg.
19-100.3.   Retailers.
Reg.
19-100.4.   Out-of-city/out-of-state sales: Sales to Native Americans.
Reg.
19-100.5.   Remediation contracting.
Reg.
19-110.1.   Reserved.
Reg.
19-110.2.   Reserved.
Reg.
19-115.1.   Computer hardware, software, and data services.
Reg.
19-120.1.   Reserved.
Reg.
19-200.1.   When refundable deposits are includable in gross income.
Reg.
19-250.1.   Excess tax collected.
Reg.
19-270.1.   Proprietary activities of municipalities are not considered
activities of a governmental entity.
Reg.
19-270.2.   Proprietary clubs.
Reg.
19-300.1.   Reserved.
Reg.
19-300.2.   Reserved.
Reg.
19-310.1.   Reserved.
Reg.
19-310.2.   Reserved.
Reg.
19-310.3.   Reserved.
Reg.
19-350.1   Reserved.
Reg.
19-350.2.   Reserved.
Reg.
19-350.3.   Reserved.
Reg.
19-360.1.   Reserved.
Reg.
19-360.2.   Reserved.
Reg.
19-405.1.   Local advertising examples.
Reg.
19-405.2.   Advertising activity within the city.
Reg.
19-407.1.   Reserved.
Reg.
19-415.1.   Distinction between the categories of construction contracting.
Reg.
19-415.2.   Distinction between construction contracting and certain related
activities.
Reg.
19-415.3.   Construction contracting; tax rate effective date.
Reg.
19-416.1.   Reserved.
Reg.
19-416.2.   Reserved.
Reg.
19-425.1.   Distinction between job printing and certain related activities.
Reg.
19-435.1.   Distinction between publishing of periodicals and certain related
activities.
Reg.
19-435.2.   Advertising income of publishers and distributors of newspapers and
other periodicals.
Reg.
19-445.1.   When the rental, leasing, and licensing of real property is exempt
as "casual."
Reg.
19-445.2.   Reserved.
Reg.
19-445.3.   Rental, leasing, and licensing of real property as lodging: Room
and board; furnished lodging.
Reg.
19-447.1.   Reserved.
Reg.
19-450.1.   Distinction between rental, leasing, and licensing for use of
tangible personal property and certain related activities.
Reg.
19-450.2.   Rental, leasing, and licensing for use of tangible personal
property: Membership fees; other charges.
Reg.
19-450.3.   Rental, leasing, and licensing for use of equipment with operator.
Reg.
19-450.4.   Rental, leasing, and licensing for use of tangible personal
property: Semi-permanently or permanently installed tangible personal property.
Reg.
19-450.5.   Rental, leasing, and licensing for use of tangible personal
property: Delivery, installation, repair, and maintenance charges.
Reg.
19-455.1.   Gratuities related to restaurant activity.
Reg.
19-460.1.   Distinction between retail sales and certain other transfers of
tangible personal property.
Reg.
19-460.2.   Retail sales: Trading stamp company transactions.
Reg.
19-460.3.   Retail sales: Membership fees of retailers.
Reg.
19-460.4.   Retail sales: Professional services.
Reg.
19-460.5.   Retail sales: Monetized bullion; numismatic value of coins.
Reg.
19-460.6.   Retail sales: Consignment sales.
Reg.
19-465.1.   Retail sales: Repair services.
Reg.
19-465.2.   Retail sales: Warranty, maintenance and similar service contracts.
Reg.
19-465.3.   Retail sales: Sale of containers, paper products, and labels.
Reg.
19-465.4.   Retail sales: Aircraft acquired for use outside the state.
Reg.
19-470.1.   Reserved.
Reg.
19-475.1.   Distinction between transporting for hire and certain related
activities.
Reg.
19-520.1.   Reports made to the city.
Reg.
19-520.2.   Change of method of reporting.
Reg.
19-555.1.   Administrative request for the attendance of witnesses or the
production of documents; service thereof; remedies and penalties for failure to
respond.
Reg.
19-571.1.   Collection of tax in jeopardy.
Article III. Public Utility Tax
Division 1. General Conditions and Definitions
Sec.
19-699.   Words of tense, number and gender; Code references.
Sec.
19-700.   General definitions.
Division 2. Determination of Gross Income
Sec.
19-800.   Determination of gross income in general.
Sec.
19-805.   Exclusion from gross income of amounts derived from activities other
than public utility business activities.
Sec.
19-810.   Determination of gross income--Transactions between affiliated
companies or persons.
Sec.
19-820.   Same--Artificially contrived transactions.
Sec.
19-830.   Same--Based upon method of reporting.
Sec.
19-840.   Exclusion of cash discounts, returns, refunds, trade-in values,
vendor-issued coupons, and rebates from gross income.
Sec.
19-850.   Exclusion of combined taxes from gross income; itemization; notice;
limitations.
Sec.
19-870.   Exclusion of gross income of persons deemed not engaged in business.
Sec.
19-890.   Exclusion of certain activities occurring on Davis Monthan Air Force
Base from the measure of gross income.
Division 3. Licensing and Recordkeeping
Sec.
19-900.   Licensing requirements.
Sec.
19-905.   Special licensing requirements.
Sec.
19-910.   Licensing--Duration of license; transferability; display.
Sec.
19-920.   Same--Cancellation; revocation.
Sec.
19-930.   Operating without a license.
Sec.
19-950.   Recordkeeping requirements.
Sec.
19-960.   Recordkeeping; claim of exclusion, exemption, deduction, or credit;
documentation; liability.
Sec.
19-970.   Inadequate or unsuitable records.
Division 4. Public Utility Tax
Sec.
19-1000.   Imposition of public utility tax; credit; presumption.
Sec.
19-1070.   Telecommunication services.
Sec.
19-1080.   Utility services.
Division 5. Administration
Sec.
19-1100.   Administration of this article.
Sec.
19-1110.   Criminal penalties.
Sec.
19-1120.   Civil actions.
Article IV. Reserved
Sec.
19-1200 – 19-1255. Reserved.
ARTICLE I.
OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE TAX
DIVISION 1.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 19-1. Definitions.
As used in this article:
   Broker means any person engaged or continuing in business who acts for
another for a consideration in the conduct of a business activity taxable under
this article, and who receives for his principal all or part of the gross
income from the taxable activity.
   Business includes all activities or acts including professions, trades and
occupations, personal or corporate, engaged in and caused to be engaged in with
the object of gain, benefit or advantage, either direct or indirect, but not
casual activities or sales.
   Casual activity or sale means a transaction of an isolated nature made by a
person who neither represents himself to be nor is engaged in a business
subject to a tax imposed by this article; and which is wholly unrelated to that
person's normal business transaction and which transaction occurs no more than
once per calendar year.
   Cigarette vending machine means any automatic vending machine used for the
sale of cigarettes and controlled by the insertion of a coin, slug, token,
plate or disc.
   City means the City of Tucson, Arizona, in its present incorporated form or
in any later reorganized, consolidated, enlarged or re-incorporated form.
   Combined taxes means the sum of all applicable state transaction privilege
and use taxes, all applicable transportation taxes imposed upon gross income by
Pima County as authorized by A.R.S. Chapter 8.3, title 42, and all applicable
taxes imposed by article I of this chapter.
   Dealer trade show means an event having a duration not exceeding twenty (20)
consecutive days, whereby dealers are engaged in sales to other dealers;
however, such sales activity need not be limited exclusively to sales between
dealers.
   Employee means any individual who performs services for an employing unit
and who is subject to the direction, rule, or control of the employing unit as
to both the method of performing or executing the services and the results to
be effected or accomplished; or who directs, rules or controls the employing
unit, except employee does not include:
   (1)   An individual who performs services as an independent contractor,
business person, agent or consultant, or in a capacity characteristic of an
independent profession, trade, skill or occupation.
   (2)   An individual subject to the direction, rule, control or subject to
the right of direction, rule or control of an employing unit solely because of
a provision of law regulating the organization, trade or business of the
employing unit.
   Employing unit means an individual or type of organization, including a sole
proprietorship, partnership, association, trust estate, joint-stock company,
insurance company or corporation, whether domestic or foreign, or the receiver,
trustee in bankruptcy, trustee or successor of any of the foregoing, or the
legal representative of a deceased person, who directs, rules or controls
activity of one or more employees toward a purpose or objective.
   Federally exempt organization means an organization which has received a
determination of exemption under 26 U.S.C. section 501(c) and rules and
regulations of the Commissioner of Internal Revenue pertaining to same, but not
including a "governmental entity", "non-licensed business" or "public
educational entity".
   Finance director means the finance director of the city.
   Hotel means any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is
occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling,
lodging or sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, inn, tourist home or
house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house,
apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobile home, at a fixed
location or other similar structure or portion thereof, and also means any
space, lot or slab which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by
transients in a mobile home or house trailer furnished by them for such
occupancy. It includes any building or group of buildings containing sleeping
accommodations for more than five (5) persons which are open to the transient
public. It does not mean any convalescent home or facility, home for the aged,
hospital, jail, military installation, fraternity or sorority house, nor does
it mean a structure operated exclusively by an association, institution,
governmental agency or corporation for religious, charitable or educational
purpose or purposes, no part of the earnings of which association or
corporation inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual.
   Hotel operator means the person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in
the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee or
any other capacity. Where the operator performs his functions through a
managing agency of any type or character other than an employee, the managing
agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this section and
shall have the same duties and liabilities as his principal.
   Jukebox means any music vending machine, contrivance or device which, upon
the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc or key into any slot, crevice
or other opening, or by the payment of any price, operates or may be operated
for the emission of songs, music or similar amusement.
   Liquor sale means the sale of all alcoholic beverages as regulated by the
Arizona Department of Liquor License and Control.
   Mechanical amusement device includes any machine, except any machine in or
upon which children may ride, which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token,
plate or disc, may be operated by the public generally or used as a game,
entertainment or amusement, excepting pay television, whether or not
registering a score, as well as such devices as marble machines, pinball
machines, skill ball, mechanical grab machines, miniature or mechanical
billiard or snooker tables, or bumper pool, and all games, operation or
transactions similar thereto.
   Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to the use or
possession, of any room or rooms or portion thereof, in any hotel for dwelling,
lodging or, sleeping purposes and includes furnishings or services and
accommodations accompanying the use or possession of said dwelling space,
including storage for the property of the tenant and mandatory valet parking
services.
   Pawnbroker has the same meaning it does in A.R.S. § 44-1621.
   Person means an individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association,
corporation, estate, trust, receiver, syndicate, broker, the federal
government, this state or any political subdivision or agency of this state.
For the purposes of this chapter, a person shall be considered a distinct and
separate person from any general or limited partnership or joint venture or
other association with which such person is affiliated. A subsidiary
corporation shall be considered a separate person from its parent corporation
for purposes of taxation of transactions with its parent corporation.
   Promoter means an individual who promotes, schedules, contracts for, or
otherwise arranges for a sales event, show, exhibition or any other public
event where other individuals gather to sell, show, exhibit, display, entertain
or in any other way render services to the general public for periods of
twenty-one (21) consecutive days or less.
   Receipt (of notice) by the taxpayer means the earlier of actual receipt or
first attempted delivery by certified United States mail to the taxpayer's
address of record with the tax collector.
   Recreational vehicle means a motor vehicle or trailer designed for dwelling,
lodging, or sleeping purposes.
   Recreational vehicle park means any space, lot, or slab which is occupied or
intended or designed for occupancy by occupants in a recreational vehicle as
defined in section
19-1.
   Recreational vehicle park operator means a person who is proprietor of a
park, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in
possession, licensee or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his
functions through a managing agency of any type or character other than an
employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes
of this section and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his
principal.
   Rent means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the
occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money,
goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property
and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever.
   Secondhand dealer has the same meaning it has in section
7-97(4) of this Code.
   Street fair means an open-air marketplace event, having a duration not
exceeding five (5) consecutive days, the boundaries of which have been set by
the city for use by street fair vendors selected as set forth in section
7-300(b) and (c) of this Code and in which:
   (1)   Public access to the city streets and alleys is curtained by city
action designating the specific portions of streets and alleys to be utilized
for a specific time for street fair purposes only; and
   (2)   Public access to city sidewalks is curtained by city action limiting
use of the sidewalks to pedestrian traffic only and prohibiting vending to,
from, or upon those sidewalks during the specific time set for the street fair.
   Street fair vendor means anyone who sells a product or renders a service at
a street fair as defined in this article.
   Successor in interest means any person who acquires a business interest by
any means whatsoever.
   Swap meet means a place of commercial activity, popularly known as a swap
meet, flea market, park-and-swap, which is:
   (1)   Open to the general public for the purchase of merchandise on the
premises;
   (2)   Available to the general public who wish to sell merchandise on the
premises, whether such sellers or vendors are in the business of vending or are
making casual sales or some combination thereof;
   (3)   Composed of stalls, stands or spaces allotted to vendors, at least one
(1) of whom does not occupy the same allotted space or spaces on an
uninterrupted continuous daily basis.
   Swap meet premises means any building, structure, lot or other area at which
a swap meet sale is conducted.
   Swap meet proprietor means any person who rents, sells, donates or otherwise
makes available to swap meet vendors any space within premises owned or
controlled by the swap meet proprietor for the purpose of making sales.
   Swap meet vendor means any person upon the swap meet premises for the
purpose of causing the advertisement of or making a sale at a swap meet.
   Tax collector means the finance director or his/her designee or agent.
   Transient means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to
occupancy of a hotel or recreational vehicle space as defined in this section
by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license, or other agreement
on a daily or weekly basis, or on any other basis for less than thirty (30)
consecutive calendar days, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any
such person so occupying space in a hotel or recreational vehicle space shall
be deemed to be a transient unless there is an agreement in writing between the
operator and the occupant providing for a period of occupancy of thirty (30)
days or more. In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted
periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of
this section may be considered.
   Vending machine or machine means cigarette vending machine, jukebox or
mechanical amusement machine.
   Vending machine distributor means any person having his principal place of
business in the city, or who conducts any portion of his business in the city,
who sells, leases or rents for operation in the city under any kind of an
agreement, or has an interest in by agreement or contract or otherwise, or
services and maintains, one (1) or more of the machines defined in this
section.
   Vending machine owner-operator means any person who owns and operates or
maintains one (1) or more "vending machines" as defined in this section, upon
premises owned, operated, controlled or leased by him.
(Ord. No. 7885, § 2, 8-3-92; Ord. No. 8128, § 1, 9-27-93; Ord. No. 10360, § 1,
12-19-06, eff. 1-1-07; Ord. No. 10790, § 4, 5-18-10, eff. 1-1-11; Ord. No.
11472, § 1, 6-20-17, eff. 9-1-17)
Sec. 19-2. License required.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person, whether as principal or agent,
clerk or employee, either for himself or any other person, or for any body
corporate, or an officer of any corporation, or as a member of any firm or
copartnership, or otherwise, to:
   (1)   Commence, practice, transact or carry on any trade, calling,
profession, occupation or business, subject to the imposition of a license tax
under this article without first having procured a license from the city to do
so, or without complying with any and all relations of such trade, calling,
profession, occupation or business designated in this article.
   (2)   Fail or refuse to make any return required by this article.
   (3)   Fail to remit as and when due the full amount of any tax or additional
tax or penalty and interest thereon.
   (4)   Make or cause to be made a false or fraudulent return.
   (5)   Make or cause to be made a false or fraudulent statement in a return,
in written support of a return, or to demonstrate or support entitlement to a
deduction, exclusion or credit or to entitle the person to an allocation or
apportionment or receipts subject to tax.
   (6)   Fail or refuse to permit any lawful examination of any book, account,
record or other memorandum by the tax collector.
   (7)   Fail or refuse to obtain a quarterly business license or to aid or
abet another in any attempt to intentionally refuse to obtain such a license or
evade the license fee.
   (8)   Reproduce, forge, falsify, fraudulently obtain or secure, or aid or
abet another in any attempt to reproduce, forge, falsify, or fraudulently
obtain or secure, an exemption from taxes imposed by this article.
   (b)   The violation of any provision of subsection (a) above shall
constitute class 2 misdemeanor. Such violation shall constitute a separate
violation of this article for each and every day that such trade, calling,
profession, occupation or business is practiced, transacted or carried on. The
granting of a license is not to be deemed as evidence or proof that the
licensee has complied with the provisions of this chapter or other provisions
of this Code, nor shall it estop the prosecution by the city for any violation
of this Code.
(Ord. No. 7885, § 2, 8-3-92)
Sec. 19-3. Issuance by tax collector; contents.
The tax collector, or such other person to whom may be assigned the duty, shall
prepare and issue a license under this article for every person required to pay
a license tax hereunder and to state the period of time covered thereby, and
the location or place of business where such trade or business is to be
practiced or carried on.
(Ord. No. 7885, § 2, 8-3-92; Ord. No. 10448, § 1, 9-5-07, eff. 1-1-08)
Sec. 19-4. When taxes due.
   (a)   The quarterly license tax provided for in divisions 2 and 3, of this
article shall be due and payable on the first day of January, April, July and
October of each year.
   (b)   Annual licenses taxes as set out in divisions 2 and 3, of this article
shall become due on the first day of January, April, July, or October,
according to date of original application.
(Ord. No. 7885, § 2, 8-3-92)
Sec. 19-5. Prorating quarterly taxes.
License taxes prescribed by this article shall be diminished by one-third ( 1/
3) of a full quarterly fee for each month of the tax period which has fully
lapsed at the date of the license application.
(Ord. No. 7885, § 2, 8-3-92)
Sec. 19-6. When taxes delinquent; penalty and interest applied.
   (a)   Any quarterly license tax provided for herein shall become delinquent
if not received by the city within twenty (20) days after becoming due. The tax
collector shall, on the day the same becomes delinquent, add thereto an amount
equal to ten (10) percent of the total amount of any tax unpaid and delinquent
as a penalty. No license shall be issued by the tax collector until the
delinquent license taxes and penalties have been paid in full.
   (b)   Annual license taxes shall become delinquent if not received by the
tax collector within twenty (20) days after becoming due. The tax collector
shall, on the day such tax becomes delinquent, add thereto a penalty in the
amount equal of ten (10) percent of the amount owed. No license shall be issued
by the tax collector until the delinquent license taxes and penalty have been
paid in full
   (c)   It shall be the taxpayer's responsibility to cause his return and
remittance to be timely received. Mailing the return or remittance on or before
the due day or delinquency date does not relieve the taxpayer of the
responsibility of causing his report and remittance to be received on or before
the twentieth (20th) day of the month in which the [license tax] becomes due.
(Ord. No. 7885, § 2, 8-3-92; Ord. No. 8128, § 2, 9-27-93; Ord. No. 10790, § 5,
5-18-10, eff. 1-1-11)
Sec. 19-7. Time, place of payment generally.
All taxes required by this article shall be paid in advance to the tax
collector at city hall.
(Ord. No. 7885, § 2, 8-3-92)
Sec. 19-8. Mistake not to prevent collecting correct amount.
In no case shall any mistake made by the tax collector in stating, fixing or
collecting the amount of any license tax prevent, prejudice or estop the city
from collecting the correct amount due as provided by this article.
(Ord. No. 7885, § 2, 8-3-92)
Sec. 19-9. Notice of termination of business required.
The holder of any license required by this article shall notify the city, in
writing, of the termination of his business, occupational or professional
activity either before the termination date or within ten (10) days thereafter.
(Ord. No. 7885, § 2, 8-3-92)
Sec. 19-10. Imposition of license tax; evidence of engaging in business.
   (a)   There is imposed upon any person, engaged in carrying on any and all
professions, trades, callings, occupations, and kinds of business within the
city, license taxes in the amounts prescribed by this article. No person shall
engage in any business in the city without first having procured a license from
the city and paid the tax prescribed or without having complied with the
applicable provisions of this article.
   (b)   This section shall not be construed to require any person to obtain a
license prior to engaging in business within the city if such requirement
conflicts with applicable statutes of the United States or of the state.
Persons not so required to obtain a license prior to engaging in business
within the city nevertheless shall be liable for payment of the tax imposed by
this article.
   (c)   Every person who shall conduct a business, profession, trade or
calling outside the city and who solicits, canvasses or advertises within the
city and delivers his products or performs a service within the city shall pay
a license tax.
   (d)   When any person shall by use of signs, circulars, cards, telephone
book or newspapers, advertise, hold out, or represent that said person is
engaged in business in the city, or when any person holds an active license or
permit issued by a governmental agency for conducting business in the city,
after being requested to do so by the collector, then these facts shall be
considered prima facie evidence that business is being conducted in the city.
(Ord. No. 7885, § 2, 8-3-92)
Sec. 19-11. Right of entry of tax collector, revenue investigators, police;
arrest authority.
The tax collector, revenue investigators, and police officers shall have and
exercise the power to enter, free of charge, at any time, any place of business
for which a license is required by this article, and to demand the exhibition
of his license for the current term from any person engaged or employed in the
transaction of such business. Denial of right of entry by the licensee or his
agents or employees shall be a misdemeanor. Police officers may make arrests in
the discharge of their duties for violations of any provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 7885, § 2, 8-3-92)
Sec. 19-12. Appointment of revenue investigators; general duties.
There shall be appointed revenue investigators under the civil service rules
and regulations. It shall be the duty of the revenue investigators to inspect
all places of business subject to the provisions of this article and the books
and records thereof, and report all violations to the tax collector.
(Ord. No. 7885, § 2, 8-3-92)
Sec. 19-13. Tax collector, revenue investigators to file complaints.
It shall be the duty of the tax collector, revenue investigators, or others to
whom the duty is given to cause complaints to be filed against all persons
violating any of the provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 7885, § 2, 8-3-92)
Sec. 19-14. Separate licenses required for separate places of business.
A separate license must be obtained for each branch establishment or separate
place of business in which any trade, calling, profession, occupation or
business is practiced, transacted or carried on.
(Ord. No. 7885, § 2, 8-3-92)
Sec. 19-15. Licenses to be displayed; exhibition upon demand.
Every person having a license under the provisions of this article and carrying
on a trade, calling, profession, occupation or business at a fixed place of
business shall keep such license posted and exhibited, while in force, in some
conspicuous part of such place of business. Every person having such a license
and not having a fixed place of business shall carry such license with him at
all times while carrying on the trade, calling, profession, occupation or
business for which the license was granted. Every person having a license under
the provisions of this article shall produce and exhibit such license when
applying for a renewal thereof, and whenever requested to do so by any police
officer or by any officer authorized to issue, inspect or collect licenses.
(Ord. No. 7885, § 2, 8-3-92)
Sec. 19-16. When certificate or permit from health department required.
Where any trade, occupation, profession or calling as set out in this article
is subjected to a certificate of health or sanitary examination, before any
license is issued, the applicant must produce such certificate or permit from
the county health department.
(Ord. No. 7885, § 2, 8-3-92)
Sec. 19-17. Exemption for business engaged in interstate commerce or whom
conduct business solely with the United States Government.
No license levied under this article upon practice, transaction or carrying on
of any profession, trade, calling, occupation or business licensed by the city
shall be presumed to apply to any part of such practice, transaction or
carrying on of any profession, trade, calling, occupation or business which is
a part of interstate commerce; or in which such practice, transaction, calling,
occupation or business is conducted as an agency or department of the United
States Government for which such government has failed to make provisions
allowing states and municipalities to so tax.
(Ord. No. 7885, § 2, 8-3-92)
Sec. 19-18. Conviction, punishment for failing to have license not to excuse
non-payment of tax.
The conviction and punishment of any person for transacting any trade, calling,
profession, occupation or business without a license shall not excuse or exempt
such person from the payment of any license due or unpaid at the time of such
conviction.
(Ord. No. 7885, § 2, 8-3-92)
Sec. 19-19. Suspension and revocation.
Any license issued under the provisions of this article may, for good cause, be
suspended or revoked. The determination of suspension or revocation is subject
to the provisions of section
19-23, relating to hearings or to the provisions of Chapter
7, relating to businesses regulated.
(Ord. No. 7885, § 2, 8-3-92; Ord. No. 9240, § 3, 6-21-99)
Sec. 19-20. Application for license; information required.
At a minimum, the applicant shall provide the following information to the tax
collector:
   (1)   The name of the person to whom the license is issued;
   (2)   The business licensed;
   (3)   The place where such business is to be transacted and carried on;
   (4)   The place where such business is to be carried on, and if the same is
not to be carried on at any permanent place of business, the places of
residence of the owners of same;
   (5)   In the event that application is made for the issuance of a license to
a person doing business under a fictitious name, the application shall set
forth the names and places of residences of those owning said business;
   (6)   In the event that the application is made for the issuance of a
license to a corporation or a partnership, the application shall include the
names and places of residences of the officers or partners thereof;
   (7)   Any further information which the tax collector may require to enable
the issuance of a license applied for;
   (8)   Such other information as may be necessary for the enforcement of this
article.
(Ord. No. 7885, § 2, 8-3-92)
Sec. 19-21. Rules and Regulations authorized; approval; filing; copies
required.
The tax collector is hereby authorized and directed to formulate rules and
regulations and prescribe forms and procedures necessary to the efficient
enforcement of this article; when approved by the mayor and council, such rules
and regulations, forms, and procedures, shall be binding upon and obeyed by all
persons taxed by this article, after three (3) copies of any such rules and
regulations shall have been filed in the office of the city clerk and there
kept for the use of any such taxpayer and the public at any time during regular
office hours of that office. A printed copy of all rules and regulations shall
be furnished to any person taxed by this section at minimal cost upon request.
(Ord. No. 7885, § 2, 8-3-92)
Sec. 19-22. Exemption for low business volume.
There shall be an exemption of half (fifty (50) percent) of the license tax as
set out in section
19-41A of this article for persons who are actively engaged in business and
whose gross income or gross receipts do not exceed two thousand five hundred
dollars ($2,500.00) for the previous quarter. The licensee shall have the
burden of applying for the exemption hereby authorized and of establishing the
level of gross income or gross receipts derived during that quarter to the
satisfaction of the tax collector.
(Ord. No. 7885, § 2, 8-3-92)
Sec. 19-23. Administrative review; petition for hearing or for redetermination;
hearing or redetermination; finality of order.
The determination of the tax collector of any amount due pursuant to this
article is subject to the provisions of section
19-570 of article II, relating to hearings or appeals.
(Ord. No. 7885, § 2, 8-3-92)
Sec. 19-24. Civil actions.
   (a)   Liens.
   (1)   Any tax, interest or penalty imposed under this article which has
become final, as provided in this article, shall become a lien when the city
perfects a notice and claim of lien setting forth the name of the taxpayer; the
amount of the tax, penalty and interest; the period or periods for which they
are due; and the date of accrual thereof, and stating that the city claims a
lien therefor.
   (2)   The notice of claim of lien shall be signed by the tax collector under
his official seal or the official seal of the city; and, with respect to real
property, shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder of any county
in which the taxpayer owns real property; and, with respect to personal
property, shall be filed in the office of the secretary of state. After the
notice and claim of lien is recorded or filed, the taxes, penalty and interest
in the amounts specified therein shall be a lien on all real property of the
taxpayer located in such county where recorded, and all tangible personal
property of the taxpayer within the state, superior to all other liens and
assessments recorded or filed subsequent to the recording or filing of the
notice and claim of lien.
   (3)   Every tax imposed by this article, and all increases, interest and
penalties thereon, shall become from the time the same is due and payable as a
personal debt from the person liable to the city, but shall be payable to and
recoverable by the tax collector and which may be collected in the manner set
forth in subsection (b) below.
   (4)   Any lien perfected pursuant to this section shall, upon payment of the
taxes, penalties and interest affected thereby, be released by the tax
collector in the same manner as mortgages and judgements are released. The tax
collector may, at his sole discretion, release a lien in part, that is against
only specified property, for partial payment of moneys due to the city.
   (b)   Actions to recover tax. An action may be brought by the city attorney
or other legal advisor to the city designated by the city council, at the
request of the tax collector, in the name of the city, to recover the amount of
any taxes, penalties and interest due under this article; provided that:
   (1)   No action or proceeding may be taken or commenced to collect any taxes
levied by this article until the amount thereof has been established by
assessment, correction or reassessment; and
   (2)   Such collection effort is made or the proceedings begun:
   a.   Within six (6) years after the assessment of the tax;
   b.   Prior to the expiration of any period of collection agreed upon in
writing by the tax collector [and] the taxpayer before the expiration of such
six-year period, or any extensions thereof; or
   c.   At any time for the collection of tax arising by reason of a tax lien
perfected, recorded or possessed by the city under this section.
(Ord. No. 7885, § 2, 8-3-92)
Sec. 19-25. Collection of taxes when there is succession in and/or succession
of business interest.
   (a)   In addition to any remedy provided elsewhere in this Code that may
apply, the tax collector may apply the provisions of subsections (b) through
(e) below concerning the collection of taxes when there is succession in and/or
succession of business interest.
   (b)   The taxes imposed by this article are a lien on the property of any
person subject to this article who sells his business, or quits his business
for any reason whatsoever, if that person fails to make a final return and
payment of the tax within fifteen (15) days after selling or quitting his
business.
   (c)   Any person who purchases, or who acquires by foreclosure, by sale
under trust deed or warranty deed in lieu of foreclosure, or by any other
method, improved real property or a portion of improved real property for which
the tax imposed by this article has not been paid shall be responsible for
payment of such tax as a successor in interest.
   (d)   A person's successors or assignees shall withhold from the purchase
money an amount sufficient to cover the taxes required to be paid, and interest
or penalties due and payable, until the former owner produces a receipt from
the tax collector showing that all city tax has been paid or a certificate
stating that no amount is due as then shown by the records of the tax
collector.
   (e)   If the seller of a business or stock of goods fails to obtain a
certificate as provided by this section, the purchaser is liable for payment of
the amount of taxes required to be paid by the former owner on account of the
business so purchased, with interest and penalties accrued by the former owner
or assignees.
(Ord. No. 7885, § 2, 8-3-92)
Sec. 19-26. Successor in Interest Exemptions.
   (a)   Any person identified as a successor in interest by definition in
section
19-1 of this article may not be subject to the provisions of section
19-25 of this article if that person has withheld from the purchase price an
amount equal to or greater than the taxes, interest and penalties owned by the
seller and has placed that amount in escrow in the name of the city;
   (b)   Any person identified as a successor in interest by definition in
section
19-1 of this article may not be subject to the provisions of section
19-25 of this article if that person's predecessor has been provided a
certificate from the city that no amount is due;
   (c)   Any person identified as successor in interest by definition in
section
19-1 of this article may not be subject to the provisions of section
19-25 of this article if a period of more than twelve (12) months has expired
between the time that the successor in interest acquires the property and the
time the predecessor quit the business; or
   (d)   Any person identified as a successor in interest by definition in
section
19-1 of this article may not be subject to the provisions of section
19-25 of this article if that person acquired the business or business property
only to protect his investment and does not operate the business nor sell the
business to another party who will operate the business.
(Ord. No. 7885, § 2, 8-3-92)
Sec. 19-27. Penalty--Failure to provide number of employees information.
A taxpayer who fails to provide information regarding the number of employees,
upon which the license fee as provided in section
19-41A of this article is based, to the city within thirty (30) days following
a written request by the city; shall be subject to license revocation and/or
other administrative remedies as provided in this article.
(Ord. No. 7885, § 2, 8-3-92)
Sec. 19-28. Limitation periods.
   (a)   Limitation when a return has been filed.
   (1)   Except as provided elsewhere in this section, the tax collector may
assess additional tax due at any time within four (4) years after the month in
which the return is required to be filed, or within four (4) years after the
month in which the return is filed, whichever period expires later.
   (2)   In the event of any delay in commencement or completion of any
examination by the tax collector, when the delay is requested by, agreed to, or
caused by any act of the taxpayer, all periods of time reasonably attributable
to any such delay shall be excluded from the computation of any limitation
period prescribed by this section, and the tax collector shall be entitled to
make a determination for taxes due without exclusion of any such time period,
and any limitation period shall be extended for a length of time equivalent to
the period of delay.
   (3)   Any assessment of additional tax due by the tax collector shall be
deemed to have been made by mailing a copy of a notice of audit assessment by
certified mail to the taxpayer's address of record with the tax collector or by
personal delivery of a copy of a notice of audit assessment to the taxpayer or
his authorized agent.
   (4)   Any request by a taxpayer for refund of taxes paid in error must be
presented in writing to the tax collector no later than four (4) years after
the tax was paid.
   (b)   Suspension of limitation period. The limitation period on assessment
shall be suspended for the period:
   (1)   The assets of the taxpayer are in the control or custody of the court
in any proceeding before any court of jurisdiction within the United States of
America, and for one hundred eighty (180) calendar days thereafter; or
   (2)   Of any extension of time for the expiration of the limitation period
which the taxpayer and the tax collector agree upon in writing.
   (c)   When no return filed; false/fraudulent return; failure to obtain a
license. In the case of a false or fraudulent return, or failure or refusal to
file a return, or civil fraud or evasion, for any period, the tax collector may
assess the amount of taxes payable for that month at any time, without any
reliance by the taxpayer upon any time limitation provided elsewhere in this
article. In addition, there shall be no limitation to the assessment of taxes
found to be due for any period where the taxpayer has failed to obtain the
license required by this article.
(Ord. No. 7885, § 2, 8-3-92; Ord. No. 8128, § 3, 9-27-93)
Sec. 19-29. Discount for timely advance annual payment of taxes.
   (a)   A five (5) percent discount shall be given taxpayers paying
occupational and liquor license taxes for categories enumerated in sections
19-41 and
19-43 of this Code, for the timely advance annual payment of these taxes.
   (b)   Payment is timely when received by the finance department prior to the
twenty- first day of any calendar quarter.
   (c)   The provisions of this section will not apply to taxpayers claiming
the exemption authorized pursuant to section
19-22.
(Ord. No. 7885, § 2, 8-3-92)
Sec. 19-30. Other provisions.
Except as provided elsewhere in this article, the provisions of this division
are incorporated by this reference and made a part of divisions 2, 3 and 4 of
article I as though fully set forth therein and shall apply to the tax levied
in sections
19-41,
19-51,
19-54, and
19-66 with full force and effect.
(Ord. No. 7885, § 2, 8-3-92; Ord. No. 10360, § 2, 12-19-06, eff. 1-1-07)
Sec. 19-31. General administration and enforcement.
The administration of this article is vested in and shall be exercised by the
director of finance, or such other person to whom may be assigned the duty of
administering, assessing and collecting the taxes hereby imposed except as
otherwise specifically provided herein, subject to the direction and
supervision of the city manager and the mayor and council; the director of
finance, or such other person to whom he may assign the duty of administering,
assessing and collecting the taxes hereby imposed, is hereby empowered to
enforce the provisions of this article, together with the city attorney, who is
hereby charged with the duty of taking, commencing and prosecuting such legal
remedies as are provided by law, including this article.
(Ord. No. 7885, § 2, 8-3-92)
Sec. 19-32. Director of finance to keep records.
The director of finance shall keep such records and accounts as shall be
necessary to adequately show separately the taxes collected under each of the
classifications and amounts collected from businesses taxed by this article;
the director of finance shall keep full and accurate records of all moneys
received by him, and shall preserve all reports and tax returns filed with him
pursuant to the terms hereof for a period of four (4) years.
(Ord. No. 7885, § 2, 8-3-92)
Sec. 19-33. Refund of prepaid license taxes.
Taxpayers who provide written notification to the finance department, within
the same calendar quarter, that there is a cessation of business, transfer of
location, or change of ownership, shall be entitled to a refund of any
succeeding prepaid quarters.
(Ord. No. 7885, § 2, 8-3-92)
Secs. 19-34--19-38. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
EMPLOYEE BASED OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE TAX*
__________
*   Editors Note: Ord. No. 10448, § 3, adopted September 5, 2007, effective
January 1, 2008, amended the title of Art. I, Div. 2 to read as herein set out.
Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Div. 2 was entitled, "Occupational
License Tax."
__________
Sec. 19-39. Application fee, annual license fee, annual renewal requirements,
penalty.
   (a)   A person shall apply to the tax collector for a business license
accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
   (b)   Licensees whose initial application for a business license is received
by the tax collector on or after January 1, 2015, will be subject to an initial
annual license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) on a proration schedule as
follows:
 
Business Start Date    Applicable License Fee
January 1--March 31    $50.00
April 1--June 30       $37.50
July 1--September 30   $25.00
October 1--December 31 $12.50
 
   (c)   The business license shall be valid only for the calendar year in
which it is issued unless renewed each year by filing the renewal form and
paying the renewal fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) which is due and payable on
January 1 and shall be considered delinquent if not received on or before the
last business day of January. Renewal form and payment for renewal must be
received by the tax collector by such date to be deemed filed and paid.
   (d)   If a taxpayer fails to renew their license on or before the date
provided in subsection (c), the taxpayer shall be deemed to be operating
without a license after such date until the appropriate application for renewal
and a renewal fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) has been received by the tax
collector.
(Ord. No. 10448, § 2, 9-5-07, eff. 1-1-08; Ord. No. 11198, § 1, 9-9-14, eff. 1-
1-15)
Sec. 19-40. Exemptions for occupations paying other taxes.
   (a)   The occupational license tax imposed under this division shall not
apply to any person licensed and taxed pursuant to divisions 3, 4, and 5 of
article I or articles II and III of chapter
19.
   (b)   For purposes of the exemption provided in this section, the term
"other taxes" does not include regulatory fees paid pursuant to chapter
7 of this Code.
(Ord. No. 7885, § 2, 8-3-92; ; Ord. No. 8128, § 4, 9-27-93; Ord. No. 10448, §
2, 9-5-07, eff. 1-1-08)
Sec. 19-41. Occupational license tax schedule.
   (a)   The occupational license tax set out in the following schedule is
established for all businesses, occupations, trades, callings, and professions
engaged in within the city and shall be paid by all persons who shall practice,
transact, carry on, or engage in any business, occupation, trade, calling, or
profession not subject to the imposition of a business privilege tax pursuant
to articles II and III of this chapter.
 
Number of Employees Quarterly License Tax
0--10               $00.00
11--35              00.00
36--100             00.00
Over 100            00.00
 
   (b)   Taxpayers may select the appropriate method of reporting number of
employees from the following options:
   (1)   Taxpayer reports same number of employees reported to the Arizona
Department of Economic Security; or
   (2)   Taxpayer reports number of employees fitting the definition of
"employee", as set out in this article; or
   (3)   Taxpayers utilizing part-time employees may divide total weekly
employee hours by thirty (30) (assuming a 30-hour work week) or divide total
annual employee hours by one thousand five hundred sixty (1,560) to determine
taxable number of employees by the week or by the year.
   Editors Note: Taxpayers paying the tax on a quarterly basis would use the
weekly method and taxpayers paying the tax on an annual basis would use the
annual method of reporting part-time employees.
(Ord. No. 8071, § 1, 6-21-93; Ord. No. 8128, § 4, 9-27-93; Ord. No. 9316, § 1,
11-15-99; Ord. No. 9693, § 3, 4-15-02; Ord. No. 10041, § 2, 9-20-04; Ord. No.
10236, § 2, 12-20-05, eff. 6-1-06; Ord. No. 10448, §§ 3, 4, 9-5-07, eff. 1-1-
08)
DIVISION 3.
SWAP MEET PROPRIETORS, OUTDOOR VENDORS, AND SPECIAL EVENT OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE
TAX
Sec. 19-42. Swap meet proprietors, street fair vendors, and trade show dealers.
In lieu of the occupational license tax imposed by section
19-41(a), swap meet proprietors, street fair vendors, and trade show dealers
shall pay an occupational license tax as follows:
   (1)   Swap meet proprietor.
   a.   Swap meet proprietor occupational license tax is based on gross
receipts.
   b.   Percentage of gross receipts of swap meet proprietor--4.75%.
   c.   Payment. Proprietor occupational license tax shall be due and payable
monthly on or before the first day of the second month next succeeding the
month in which the tax accrues and shall be delinquent five (5) days
thereafter.
   d.   Application. A proprietor license may be issued by the city upon the
prior city approval of the application of the proprietor on forms supplied by
the city for such a proprietor license and upon the prior payment by the
proprietor to the city of a one-time thirty- dollar ($30.00) proprietor
occupational license tax application fee.
   (2)   Street fair and community special event vendor.
   a.   Except as provided in subparagraph (b) each street vendor and community
special event vendor shall pay a tax of seventeen dollars and seventy-five
cents ($17.75) per location per street fair event.
   b.   Every person who is currently licensed by the city under any other
provision of chapter
19 is exempt from this section and shall not be classified as a street fair or
community special event vendor.
   (3)   Dealers-Trade shows. Each location, each dealer--$28.00.
(Ord. No. 10448, § 4, 9-5-07, eff. 1-1-08)
   Note: Formerly, §
19-41(c). Renumbered §
19-42 by § 4 of Ord. No. 10448.
Sec. 19-43. Promoter.
Promoters, as defined in section
19-1, shall pay a city license tax per each event as follows:
 
1--10 participants    $ 24.00
11--35 participants   48.00
36--100 participants  123.00
Over 100 participants 186.00
 
(Ord. No. 10448, § 4, 9-5-07, eff. 1-1-08)
   Note: Formerly, §
19-41(d). Renumbered §
19-43 by § 4 of Ord. No. 10448.
Sec. 19-44. Peddlers.
Peddlers, as defined in section
7-26(3), shall pay an annual occupational license tax of fifty dollars ($50.00)
for each licensed location of the peddler.
(Ord. No. 10448, § 4, 9-5-07, eff. 1-1-08)
   Note: Formerly, §
19-41(e). Renumbered §
19-44 by § 4 of Ord. No. 10448.
Sec. 19-45. Ice cream truck vendors.
Ice cream truck vendors, as defined in section
7-490(6), shall pay an annual occupational license tax of fifty dollars
($50.00).
(Ord. No. 10448, § 4, 9-5-07, eff. 1-1-08)
   Note: Formerly, §
19-41(f). Renumbered §
19-45 by § 4 of Ord. No. 10448.
Secs. 19-46--19-50. Reserved.
DIVISION 4.
LIQUOR AND VENDING MACHINE LICENSE TAX*
__________
*   Note: Formerly, Art. I, Div. 3. Renumbered Art. I, Div. 4 by § 10 of Ord.
No. 10448.
__________
Sec. 19-51. Imposition--Liquor license tax.
Businesses in the city, selling alcoholic beverages, shall possess a city
liquor license and pay a license tax as set out in section
19-52 of this article.
(Ord. No. 7885, § 2, 8-3-92; Ord. No. 8128, § 5, 9-27-93)
____
Sec. 19-52. Quarterly--Liquor license fee schedule.
Series 1.  Distiller's License                                         $225.00
Series 2.  Brewer's License                                            $202.50
Series 3.  Winer's License                                             $103.50
Series 5.  Government License                                          $342.00
Series 6.  Bar License--All Spirituous Liquor                          $274.50
Series 7.  Bar License Beer and Wine                                   $117.00
Series 9.  Liquor Store License Packaged Goods                         $94.50
Series 10. Beer and Wine Store License--Packaged Beer and Wine         $90.00
Series 11. Hotel/Motel License--All Spirituous Liquor Consumed on      $342.00
           Premises
Series 12. Restaurant License--All Spirituous Liquor Consumed on       $342.00
           Premises
Series 14. Club License                                                $61.20
Series 17. Governmental License to Serve and Sell Spirituous Liquor on $405.00
           Special Premises
Series 18. Daily On-Sale Special Event License                         None
 
(Ord. No. 7885, § 2, 8-3-92)
____
Sec. 19-53. Applications.
Application fees are based on full cost recovery. Application processing costs
shall be reviewed in conjunction with the city's biennial budget process to
ensure that cost recovery is being achieved. Applications for liquor licenses
for establishments located within the city limits, whether original or
transfer, shall be made in accordance with the following procedure:
   (1)   Application shall first be made with the State of Arizona Department
of Liquor Licenses and Control in such form and manner as required by the
director.
   (2)   A copy of the state application will be sent to the city clerk by the
State of Arizona Department of Liquor Licenses and Control.
   (3)   An application for a special event license, an extension of premises,
wine festival or fair, or a craft distillery festival or fair shall be filed
with the city clerk forty-five (45) days before the date of its proposed use in
order to be considered timely. Applications filed between twenty-two (22) and
forty-four (44) days prior to the date of proposed use shall incur additional
late processing fees conforming to the schedule under subsection (4) below. No
application for a special event license, extension of premises, wine or craft
distillery festival or fair shall be accepted within twenty-one (21) days
before its proposed use, except that the city clerk or the clerk's designee may
grant a one-time only waiver to an organization or applicant after consultation
with the ward office where the use will occur.
   (4)   Upon receipt of a copy of the state application by the city for a
license, the applicant shall pay a nonrefundable application fee to the city
conforming to the following schedule:
License Type                         Applicable Fee 
Regular
Original License                     $1,636.00
Location Transfer                    $1,636.00
Person Transfer                      $1,636.00
Person/Location Transfer             $1,636.00
Continuation of Restaurant           $1,636.00
License
Agent Change –
Acquisition of Control –           $463.00
Restructure
Special Event
0--500 Attendees                     $125.00
501--2,500 Attendees                 $240.00
2,501--5,000 Attendees               $297.00
Over 5,000 Attendees                 $480.00
Late Processing Fee                  $75.00
(Day 30 to Day 44)
Late Processing Fee                  $125.00
(Day 22 to Day 29)
Wine Festival/Wine Fair/Craft Distillery Festival/Craft Distillery Fair
License                              $50.00 per day
Late Processing Fee                  $75.00
(Day 30 to Day 44)
Late Processing Fee                  $125.00
(Day 22 to Day 29)
Temporary Extension of Premises
Initial Application                  $25.00 per 100 square feet, up to a
                                     maximum of $526.00
Subsequent applications for
the same type extension of           $15.00 per 100 square feet, up to a
premises as the initial, made        maximum of $526.00
within 12 months of the initial
application
                                     $82.50 for the initial inspection and 1
Fire Inspection Fees per application re-inspection. Additional inspections will
                                     be charged $82.50 per inspection
Late Processing Fee                  $75.00
(Day 30 to Day 44)
Late Processing Fee                  $125.00
(Day 22 to Day 29)
Permanent Extension of Premises
Initial Application                  $60.00 per 100 square feet, up to a
                                     maximum of $1,344.00
Subsequent applications for
the same type extension of           $35.00 per 100 square feet, up to a
premises as the initial, made        maximum of $1,344.00
within 12 months of the initial
application
                                     $82.50 for the initial inspection and 1
Fire Inspection Fees per application re-inspection. Additional inspections will
                                     be charged $82.50 per inspection
 
(Ord. No. 7885, § 2, 8-3-92; Ord. No. 9839, §§ 1 – 3, 5-5-03; Ord. No. 10402, §
1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 10554, § 1, 6-25-08, eff. 8-1-08; Ord. No. 10836, § 1,
eff. 9-8-10; Ord. No. 10919, § 1, 8-9-11; Ord. No. 11022, § 1, 9-19-12, eff.
11-1-12; Ord. No. 11399, § 1, 9-20-16; Ord. No. 11492, § 1, 9-19-17, eff. 10-1-
17)
Sec. 19-54. Vending machines license fees.
   (a)   Before being granted a distributor's license, each applicant therefor
shall pay an annual license tax which is hereby imposed in the amount of one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for licenses issued prior to April 1; one
hundred twelve dollars and fifty cents ($112.50) for licenses issued after
March 31 and prior to July 1; seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for licenses issued
after June 30 and prior to October 1; and thirty-seven dollars and fifty cents
($37.50) for licenses issued after September 30 of each calendar year. All
distributors' licenses will expire on December 31 of each calendar year. In
addition, there shall be paid an annual tax of six dollars ($6.00) per machine
operating or operated in the city, listed in the application. For each machine
placed in operation by a new licensee and for each additional machine placed in
operation by existing licensees on and after July 1 of each calendar year, the
six dollars ($6.00) tax shall be reduced to three dollars ($3.00) for the
calendar year remainder.
   (b)   Each owner-operator shall pay a six dollar ($6.00) annual registration
tax for each machine placed in operation prior to July 1 of each year and a
three dollar ($3.00) proportional registration tax for each machine placed in
operation on or after that date. All machine registrations shall expire on
December 31 of each year and must be renewed annually.
(Ord. No. 7885, § 2, 8-3-92)
Sec. 19-55. Business privilege license tax.
No provision of this division shall be construed to avoid payment of the
business privilege license taxes in accordance with this chapter.
Secs. 19-56--19-65. Reserved.
DIVISION 5.
TAX ON HOTELS RENTING TO TRANSIENTS*
__________
*   Note: Formerly, Art. I, Div. 4. Renumbered Art. I, Div. 5 by § 10 of Ord.
No. 10448.
__________
Sec. 19-66. Tax imposed; nature and source of transient rental occupational
license tax.
   (a)   Six (6) percent tax. Every person who operates or causes to be
operated a hotel or recreation vehicle park within the city is subject to and
shall pay an occupational license tax in an amount equal to six (6) percent of
the rent charged by the operator to a transient. The transient rental
occupational license tax imposed on the class of lodging house and recreation
vehicle park operators serving transients as defined in section
19-1 is not on the privilege of doing business within the city, but is a
license tax on the transient rental occupation. The tax, when due, constitutes
a debt owed by the operator to the city which is extinguished only by payment
thereof to the city. If the rent is charged by the operator to the transient in
installments, the tax thereon shall be due as provided herein for the calendar
month in which the installment was charged. Upon the transient’s ceasing to
occupy space in the hotel, the tax on any uncharged rent shall be due for that
calendar month.
   (b)   Variable dollar amount surtax. In addition to the measure of tax
established in subsection (a), there is imposed upon every person who operates
or causes to be operated a hotel within the city an additional amount of tax at
the rate of four dollars ($4.00) and, effective August 1, 2018, upon every
person who operates or causes to be operated a recreational vehicle park within
the city an additional amount of tax at the rate of zero dollars ($0.00) for
each twenty-four (24) hour period or fraction thereof that each occupancy is
rented. The amount of such additional tax shall be separately identified in the
reports required by the rules and regulations for administration of the
transient rental tax to be made by the taxpayer to the city and on the books
and records of the taxpayer. The administrative rules and regulations
aforementioned shall apply to this additional tax unless in conflict with this
paragraph (b).
   (c)   Exclusions. The occupational license tax imposed by subsections (a)
and (b) shall not apply to:
   (1)   Income derived from incarcerating or detaining prisoners who are under
the jurisdiction of the United States, Arizona, or any other state or a
political subdivision of this state or of any other state in a privately
operated prison, jail, or detention facility;
   (2)   Gross proceeds of sales or gross income that is properly included in
another business activity under chapter
19, article II and that is taxable to the person engaged in that business
activity, but the gross proceeds of sales or gross income to be deducted shall
not exceed the consideration paid to the person conducting the activity;
   (3)   Gross proceeds of sales or gross income from transactions or
activities that are not limited to transients and that would not be taxable if
engaged in by a person not subject to tax under this division;
   (4)   Gross proceeds of sales or gross income from transactions or
activities that are not limited to transients and that would not be taxable if
engaged in by a person subject to taxation under sections
19-410 or
19-475 due to an exclusion, exemption, or deduction;
   (5)   Gross proceeds of sales or gross income from commissions received from
a person providing services or property to the customers of the hotel; however,
such commissions may be subject to tax under sections
19-445 or
19-450 as rental, leasing, or licensing for use of real or tangible personal
property; or
   (6)   Income from providing telephone, fax, or internet services to
customers at an additional charge that is separately stated to the customer and
is separately maintained in the hotel's books and records; however, such gross
proceeds of sales or gross income may be subject to tax under section
19-470 as telecommunication services.
(Ord. No. 7885, § 2, 8-3-92; Ord. No. 9838, § 1, 5-5-03; Ord. No. 10360, § 3,
12-19-06, eff. 1-1-07; Ord. No. 10685, § 4, 6-16-09, eff. 7-1-09; Ord. No.
11369, § 1, 6-7-16, eff. 7-1-16; Ord. No. 11472, § 1, 6-20-17, eff. 9-1-17;
Ord. No. 11550, § 1, 5-22-18, eff. 8-1-18)
Sec. 19-67. Registration.
Within thirty (30) days after commencing business, each hotel within the city
renting occupancy to transients shall be registered with the director of
finance in the name of the operator. A transient rental tax license will be
issued and will be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises.
The first of these licenses will be automatically issued to those hotels
currently holding a city business privilege license, but this provision in no
way relieves the operator of the responsibility of registering such hotel and
obtaining a license after the effective date of the section. Thereafter, such
license will be issued with the city business privilege license. The license
shall, among other things, state the following:
   (1)   Name of the operator;
   (2)   Address of the hotel;
   (3)   The date upon which the license was issued.
(Ord. No. 7885, § 2, 8-3-92; Ord. No. 8128, § 6, 9-27-93)
Sec. 19-68. Determination of rent based upon method of reporting.
The method of reporting chosen by the taxpayer, as provided in section
19-520 shall necessitate the following adjustments to gross income for all
purposes under this article:
   (1)   Cash basis. When a person elects to report and pay taxes on a cash
basis, rent for the reporting period shall include:
   (A)   The total amounts received on "paid in full" transactions, against
which are allowed all applicable deductions and exclusions; and
   (B)   All amounts received on accounts receivable, conditional sales
contract, or other similar transactions against which no deductions and no
exclusions from rent are allowed.
   (2)   Accrual basis. When a person elects to report and pay taxes on an
accrual basis, rent shall include all rent for the applicable period regardless
of whether receipts are for cash, credit, conditional, or partially deferred
transactions and regardless of whether or not any security document or
instrument is sold, assigned, or otherwise transferred to another. Persons
reporting on the accrual basis may deduct bad debts, provided that:
   (A)   The amount deducted for the bad debt is deducted from rent of the
month in which the actual charge-off was made and only to the extent that such
amount was actually charged off and also only to the extent that such amount is
or was included as taxable rental income; and
   (B)   If any amount is subsequently collected on such charged-off account,
it shall be included in rental income for the month in which it was collected
without deduction for expense of collection.
(Ord. No. 7885, § 2, 8-3-92; Ord. No. 10360, § 3, 12-19-06, eff. 1-1-07)
Sec. 19-69. Exclusion of vendor issued coupons and rebates from rental income.
   (a)   The following items shall not be included in rent:
   (1)   When coupons issued by a vendor are later accepted by the vendor as a
discount against the transaction, the discount may be excluded from rental
income as a cash discount. Amounts credited or refunded by a vendor for
redemption of coupons issued by any person other than the vendor may not be
excluded from rental income.
   (2)   Rebates issued by the vendor to a customer as a discount against the
transaction may be excluded from rental income as a cash discount. Rebates
issued by a person other than the vendor may not be excluded from rental
income, even when the vendee assigns his right to the rebate to the vendor.
   (b)   If the amount specified in subsection (a) above is credited by a
vendor subsequent to the reporting period in which the original transaction
occurs, such amount may be excluded from the taxable rental income of that
subsequent reporting period but only to the extent that the excludable amount
was reported as taxable rental income in that prior reporting period.
(Ord. No. 10360, § 3, 12-19-06, eff. 1-1-07)
Sec. 19-70. Exclusion of combined taxes from rent; itemization; notice;
limitations.
   (a)   When tax is separately charged and/or collected. The total amount of
rental income shall be exclusive of combined taxes only when the person upon
whom the tax is imposed establishes to the satisfaction of the tax collector
that such tax has been added to the total price of the transaction. The
taxpayer must provide to his customer and also keep a reliable record of the
actual tax charged or collected, shown by cash register tapes, sales tickets,
or other accurate record, separating net transaction price and combined tax. If
at any time the tax collector cannot ascertain from the records kept by the
taxpayer the total or amounts billed or collected on account of combined taxes,
the claimed taxes collected may not be excluded from rental income unless such
records are completed and/or clarified to the satisfaction of the tax
collector.
   (b)   Remittance of all tax charged and/or collected. When an added charge
is made to cover city (or combined) transient rental tax, the person upon whom
the tax is imposed shall pay the full amount of the city taxes due, whether
collected by him or not. In the event the taxpayer collects more than the
amount due, the excess shall be remitted to the tax collector. In the event the
tax collector cannot ascertain from the records kept by the taxpayer the total
or amounts of taxes collected, and the tax collector is satisfied that the
taxpayer has collected taxes in an amount in excess of the tax assessed under
this division, the tax collector may determine the amount collected and collect
the tax so determined in the manner provided in this division.
   (c)   Itemization. In order to be entitled to exclude from rent any amounts
paid by customers for combined taxes passed on to such customers, the taxpayer
shall show to the tax collector that the customer was provided with a written
record of the transaction showing, at a minimum, the price before the tax, the
combined taxes, and the total cost. This shall be in addition to the record
required to be kept under subsection (a) above.
   (d)   When tax has been neither separately charged nor separately collected.
When the person upon whom the tax is imposed establishes by means of invoices,
sales tickets, or other reliable evidence that no added charge was made to
cover combined taxes, the taxpayer may exclude tax collected from such income
by dividing such taxable rent by 1.00 plus a decimal figure representing the
effective combined tax rate expressed as a fraction of 1.00.
(Ord. No. 10360, § 3, 12-19-06, eff. 1-1-07)
Sec. 19-71. Licensing requirements.
   (a)   Generally. Every person desiring to engage or continue in business
activities within the city upon which a transient rental tax is imposed by this
article shall make application to the tax collector for a transient rental tax
license, accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00),
and no person shall engage or continue in business or engage in such activities
without such a license.
   (b)   Limitation. The issuance of a transient rental license by the tax
collector shall not be construed as permission to operate a business activity
in violation of any other law or regulation to which such activity may be
subject.
(Ord. No. 10360, § 3, 12-19-06, eff. 1-1-07; Ord. No. 10448, § 5, 9-5-07, eff.
1-1-08)
Sec. 19-72. Special licensing requirements.
   (a)   Partnerships. Application for a transient rental license by a
partnership engaging or continuing in business in the city shall provide, at a
minimum, the names and addresses of all general partners. Licenses issued to
persons engaged in business as partners, limited or general, shall be in the
name of the partnership.
   (b)   Corporations. Application for a transient rental license by a
corporation engaging or continuing in business in the city shall provide, at a
minimum, the names and addresses of both the chief executive officer and chief
financial officer of the corporation. Licenses issued to persons engaged in
business as corporations shall be in the name of the corporation.
   (c)   Multiple locations or multiple business names. A person engaged in or
conducting one (1) or more businesses at two (2) or more locations or under two
(2) or more business names shall procure a license for each such location or
business name. A "location" is a place of a separate business establishment.
   (d)   Conditions. Licenses shall not be issued until all legal requirements
are met. It shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of a license that
all statutes, ordinances, regulations, and other requirements affecting the
public peace, health, and safety are complied with in total.
(Ord. No. 10360, § 3, 12-19-06, eff. 1-1-07)
Sec. 19-73. Licensing; duration of license; transferability; display.
   (a)   Except as provided in section
19-74, the transient rental license shall be valid until request for
cancellation and/or surrender of the license by the licensee or expiration
through cessation by the licensee of the business activity for which it was
issued.
   (b)   The transient rental license shall be nontransferable between owners
or locations and shall be on display to the public in the licensee's place of
business.
   (c)   Any licensee whose license expires through cancellation as provided in
section
19-74, by a request for cancellation, by surrender of the license, or by the
cessation of the business activity for which the license was issued and who
thereafter applies for license shall be granted a new license as an original
applicant and shall pay the current license fee. Any licensee who loses or
misplaces his transient rental license which is still in effect shall be
charged the current license fee for each re-issuance of a license.
(Ord. No. 10360, § 3, 12-19-06, eff. 1-1-07)
Sec. 19-74. Licensing: cancellation; revocation.
   (a)   Cancellation. The tax collector may cancel the city transient rental
license of any licensee as inactive:
   (1)   If the taxpayer, required to report monthly to the city, has neither
filed any return nor remitted to the city any taxes imposed by this article for
a period of six (6) consecutive months;
   (2)   If the taxpayer, required to report quarterly, has neither filed any
return nor remitted any taxes imposed by this article for two (2) consecutive
quarters; or
   (3)   If the taxpayer, required to report annually, has neither filed any
return nor remitted any taxes imposed by this article when such annual report
and tax are due to be filed with and remitted to the tax collector.
   (b)   Revocation. If any licensee fails to pay any tax, interest, penalty,
fee, or sum required to be paid to the city under this division or if such
licensee fails to comply with any provision of this article, the tax collector
may revoke the city transient rental license of the licensee.
   (c)   Notice and hearing. The tax collector shall deliver notice to such
licensee of cancellation or revocation of the transient rental license. If
within twenty (20) days the licensee so notified requests a hearing, he shall
be granted a hearing before the tax collector.
   (d)   Relicensing. After cancellation or revocation of a taxpayer's license,
the taxpayer shall not be relicensed until all reports have been filed, all
fees, taxes, interest, and penalties due have been paid, and the taxpayer is in
compliance with this article.
(Ord. No. 10360, § 3, 12-19-06, eff. 1-1-07)
Sec. 19-75. Operating without a license.
It shall be unlawful for any person who is required by this article to obtain a
transient rental tax license to engage in or continue in business within the
city without a license. The tax collector shall assess any delinquencies in
tax, interest, and penalties which may apply against such person upon any
transactions subject to the taxes imposed by this division.
(Ord. No. 10360, § 3, 12-19-06, eff. 1-1-07)
Sec. 19-76. Recordkeeping requirements.
   (a)   Every person subject to the tax imposed by this division shall keep
and preserve suitable records and such other books and accounts as may be
necessary to determine the amount of tax for which he is liable under this
division. The books and records must contain, at a minimum, such detail and
summary information as may be required by regulation or, when records are
maintained within an electronic data processing (edp) system, the requirements
established by the Arizona Department of Revenue for privilege tax filings will
be accepted. Every person subject to the tax imposed by this division shall
keep and preserve such books and records for a period equal to the applicable
limitation period as provided in section
19-28 for assessment of tax and all such books and records shall be open for
inspection by the tax collector during any business day.
   (b)   The tax collector may direct, by letter, a specific taxpayer to keep
specific other books, records, and documents. Such letter directive shall
apply:
   (1)   Only for future reporting periods; and
   (2)   Only by express determination of the tax collector that such specific
recordkeeping is necessary due to the inability of the city to conduct an
adequate examination of the past activities of the taxpayer, which inability
resulted from inaccurate or inadequate books, records, or documentation
maintained by the taxpayer.
(Ord. No. 10360, § 3, 12-19-06, eff. 1-1-07)
Sec. 19-77. Recordkeeping; claim of exclusion, exemption, deduction, or credit;
documentation; liability.
   (a)   All deductions, exclusions, exemptions, and credits provided in this
division are conditional upon adequate proof and documentation of such as may
be required either by this division or regulation.
   (b)   Any person who claims and receives an exemption, deduction, exclusion,
or credit to which the person is not entitled under this division, shall be
subject to, liable for, and pay the tax on the transaction as if the vendor
subject to the tax had passed the burden of the payment of the tax to the
person wrongfully claiming the exemption. A person who wrongfully claimed such
exemption shall be treated as delinquent in the payment of the tax and shall be
subject to interest and penalties upon such delinquency. However, if the tax is
collected from the vendor on such transaction it shall not again be collected
from the person claiming the exemption, or if collected from the person
claiming the exemption, it shall not also be collected from the vendor.
(Ord. No. 10360, § 3, 12-19-06, eff. 1-1-07)
Sec. 19-78. Inadequate or unsuitable records.
In the event the records provided by the taxpayer are considered by the tax
collector to be inadequate or unsuitable to determine the amount of the tax for
which such taxpayer is liable under the provisions of this division, the
taxpayer shall either:
   (1)   Provide such other records as required by this division or regulation;
or
   (2)   Correct or reconstruct the taxpayer's records to the satisfaction of
the tax collector.
(Ord. No. 10360, § 3, 12-19-06, eff. 1-1-07)
Sec. 19-79. Administration.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, the administration of this
division shall be governed by the provisions of division 5, article II and the
regulations thereunder.
(Ord. No. 10360, § 3, 12-19-06, eff. 1-1-07)
Secs. 19-80 Additional penalties.
   (a)   In addition to the penalties applicable under section
19-540, if a taxpayer fails to file a return for a tax imposed by this division
for more than six (6) months after the delinquency date of the return and the
delinquent tax amount, including amounts that have, under section
19-540(a)(1), become part of the principal amount, is in excess of twenty-five
thousand dollars ($25,000.00), the taxpayer shall pay a penalty in an amount
equal to one hundred percent (100%) of the unpaid principal.
   (b)   For the purposes of this section, no reasonable-cause defense shall be
applicable, but the tax collector may, in its sole discretion, consider waiver
based on the factors in section
19-540(f).
   (c)   This penalty provision is intended to promote compliance, deter tax
evasion, and otherwise mitigate the substantial burden (including but not
limited to the time, personnel resources, and expenses) required to address and
remedy significant and ongoing taxpayer delinquency under this division. This
section will apply to the fullest extent legally permissible and is expressly
intended to and shall apply to any delinquent taxes due and owing as of the
effective date of this section as well as delinquencies that occur thereafter.
(Ord. No. 11936, § 1, 7-12-22)
Secs. 19-81--19-84. Reserved.
DIVISION 6. TAX ON SECONDHAND DEALERS AND PAWNBROKERS
Sec. 19-85. Tax imposed.
   (a)   In general. Except as provided in subsections (b) and (c), there is
imposed on every secondhand dealer and pawnbroker operating in fixed location
in the city an occupational license tax in the amount of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00).
   (b)   Out of city dealers.
   (1)   A secondhand dealer described in subsection (b)(2) shall pay an
occupational license tax as follows:
   (A)   If the dealer conducts one (1) or two (2) shows in a calendar year, a
tax of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
   (B)   If the dealer conducts three (3) or more shows in a calendar year, a
tax of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
   (2)   A secondhand dealer liable for the tax imposed by subsection (b)(1) is
one who:
   (A)   Has not already paid the tax imposed by subsection (a) in that year;
and
   (B)   Conducts business at a location that is not that person's or entity's
actual business address, such as a hotel, meeting hall, convention center, or
other short term leased or rented location
   (c)   Exclusion. A secondhand dealer or pawnbroker who has submitted less
than one thousand (1,000) reports to the chief of police, as required by
section
7-98, in the calendar year prior to the date the tax imposed by subsection (a)
is due is exempt from the tax imposed by such subsection. The chief of police
shall transmit to the director of finance the names of all secondhand dealers
and pawnbrokers subject to such tax no later than January 15 of each year.
(Ord. No. 10790, § 6, 5-18-10, eff. 1-1-11)
Sec. 19-86. Due date of tax.
   The tax imposed by section
19-85 is due and payable on March 1.
(Ord. No. 10790, § 6, 5-18-10, eff. 1-1-11)
Sec 19-87. Administration.
   The administration of this division shall be governed by division 5, article
II, and the regulations thereunder.
(Ord. No. 10790, § 6, 5-18-10, eff. 1-1-11)
Secs. 19-88 – 19-98. Reserved.
ARTICLE II.
PRIVILEGE AND EXCISE TAXES*
__________
   *Editors Note: Section 1 of Ord. No. 6674, adopted Mar. 23, 1987, repealed
former art. II, §§
19-39--19-181; and § 3 added a new art. II, §§
19-99--19-602, and Regs. 19-100.1--19-571.1. The article was formerly derived
from 1953 Code, ch. 29, §§ 1--36, 39, and Ord. Nos. 1850, 1923, 1924, 2318,
2384, 2494, 2586, 2878, 2891, 3098, 3238, 3378, 3854, 3869, 3885, 4332, 4396,
4433, 4636, 4710, 4826, 4899, 4918, 5136, 5147, 5170, 5230, 5300, 5337, 5488,
6021, 6064, 6097, 6483, 6538, 6646. Prior to its amendment by Ord. No. 6674,
the article was entitled "Business Privilege Licenses (Sales Tax)." Section 2
of Ord. No. 6674, changed the title to "Privilege and Excise Taxes."
Ordinance No. 6969, adopted June 6, 1988, is not included herein, but §§ 1--
3 of such ordinance provide as follows:
   Section 1. The document entitled "Corrective Amendment to the 1988
Amendments to City Tax Code" (which Amendments were adopted in Ordinance No.
6938) three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk, is
hereby declared to be a public record and said copies are ordered to remain on
file with the city clerk.
   Section 2. The document made a public record in section 1, a copy of which
is attached as Exhibit A to this ordinance, is hereby adopted and made a part
hereof as though fully set out herein.
   Section 3. The provisions of this ordinance are effective retroactively to
April 25, 1988."
__________
DIVISION 1.
GENERAL CONDITIONS AND DEFINITIONS
Sec. 19-99. Words of tense, number and gender; Code references.
   (a)   For the purposes of this article, all words of tense, number and
gender shall comply with A.R.S. section 1-214 as amended.
   (b)   For the purposes of this article, all Code references, unless
specified otherwise, shall:
   (1)   Refer to this City Code;
   (2)   Be deemed to include all amendments to such code references.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87)
Sec. 19-100. General definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply:
   Assembler means a person who unites or combines products, wares or articles
of manufacture so as to produce a change in form or substance of such items
without changing or altering component parts.
   Broker means any person engaged or continuing in business who acts for
another for a consideration in the conduct of a business activity taxable under
this article, and who receives for his principal all or part of the gross
income from the taxable activity.
   Business includes all activities or acts, personal or corporate, engaged in
or caused to be engaged in with the object of gain, benefit or advantage,
either directly or indirectly, but does not include either: casual activities
or sales; or the transfer of electricity from a solar photovoltaic generation
system to an electric utility distribution system.
   Business day means any day of the week when the tax collector's office is
open for the public to conduct the tax collector's business.
   Casual activity or sale means a transaction of an isolated nature made by a
person who neither represents himself to be nor is engaged in a business
subject to a tax imposed by this article. However, no sale, rental, license for
use, or lease transaction concerning real property nor any activity entered
into by a business taxable by this article shall be treated, or be exempt, as
casual. This definition shall include sales of used capital assets, provided
that the volume and frequency of such sales do not indicate that the seller
regularly engages in selling such property.
   Combined taxes means the sum of all applicable Arizona Transaction Privilege
and Use Taxes; all applicable transportation taxes imposed upon gross income by
this county as authorized by A.R.S. title 42, chapter 6, article III; and all
applicable taxes imposed by this chapter.
   Commercial property is any real property, or portion of such property, used
for any purpose other than lodging or lodging space, including structures built
for lodging, but used otherwise, such as model homes, apartments used as
offices, etc.
   Communications channel means any line, wire, cable, microwave, radio signal,
light beam, telephone, telegraph or any other electromagnetic means of moving a
message.
   Construction contracting refers to the activity of a construction
contractor.
   Construction contractor means a person who undertakes to or offers to
undertake to, or purports to have the capacity to undertake to, or submits a
bid to, or does himself or by or through others, construct, alter, repair, add
to, subtract from, improve, move, wreck or demolish any building, highway,
road, railroad, excavation, or other structure, project, development, or
improvement to real property, or to do any part thereof. "Construction
contractor" includes subcontractors, specialty contractors, prime contractors,
and any person receiving consideration for the general supervision and/or
coordination of such a construction project, except for remediation
contracting. This definition shall govern without regard to whether or not the
construction contractor is acting in fulfillment of a contract.
   Delivery (of notice) by the tax collector means "receipt (of notice) by the
taxpayer."
   Delivery, installation, or other direct customer services means services or
labor, excluding repair labor, provided by a taxpayer to or for his customer at
the time of transfer of tangible personal property, provided further that the
charge for such labor or service is separately billed to the customer and
maintained separately in the taxpayer's books and records.
   Engaging, when used with reference to engaging or continuing in business,
includes the exercise of corporate or franchise powers.
   Equivalent excise tax means either:
   (1)   A privilege or use tax levied by another Arizona municipality upon the
transaction in question, and paid either to such Arizona municipality directly
or to the vendor; or
   (2)   An excise tax levied by a political subdivision of a state other than
Arizona upon the transaction in question, and paid either to such jurisdiction
directly or to the vendor; or
   (3)   An excise tax levied by a native american government organized under
the laws of the federal government upon the transaction in question, and paid
either to such jurisdiction directly or to the vendor.
   Federal government means the United States Government, its departments and
agencies, but not including national banks or federally chartered or insured
banks, savings and loan institutions, or credit unions.
   Food means any items intended for human consumption as defined by rules and
regulations adopted by the Department of Revenue, State of Arizona, pursuant to
A.R.S. § 42-5106. Under no circumstances shall "food" include alcoholic
beverages or tobacco, or food items purchased for use in conversion to any form
of alcohol by distillation, fermentation, brewing, or other process. Under no
circumstances shall "food" include an edible product, beverage, or ingredient
infused, mixed, or in any way combined with medical marijuana or an active
ingredient of medical marijuana.
   Hotel means any public or private hotel, inn, hostelry, tourist home, house,
motel, rooming house, apartment house, trailer or other lodging place within
the city offering lodging, wherein the owner thereof, for compensation,
furnishes lodging to any transient, except foster homes, rest homes, sheltered
care homes, nursing homes, or primary health care facilities.
   Jet fuel means jet fuel as defined in A.R.S. § 42-5351.
   Job printing means the activity of copying or reproducing an article by any
means, process or method. "Job printing" includes engraving of printing plates,
embossing, copying, micrographics, and photo reproduction.
   Lessee includes the equivalent person in a rental or licensing agreement for
all purposes of this article.
   Lessor includes the equivalent person in a rental or licensing agreement for
all purposes of this article.
   Licensing (for use) means any agreement between the user ("licensee") and
the owner or the owner's agent ("licensor") for the use of the licensor's
property whereby the licensor receives consideration, where such agreement does
not qualify as a "sale" or "lease" or "rental" agreement.
   Lodging (lodging space) means any room or apartment in a hotel or any other
provider of rooms, trailer spaces, or other residential dwelling spaces; or the
furnishings or services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession
of said dwelling space, including storage or parking space for the property of
said tenant.
   Manufactured buildings means a manufactured home, mobile home or factory
built building, as defined in A.R.S. section 41-2142.
   Manufacturer means a person engaged or continuing in the business of
fabricating, producing or manufacturing products, wares, or articles for use
from other forms of tangible personal property, imparting to such new forms,
qualities, properties, and combinations.
   Medical marijuana means "marijuana" used for a "medical use" as those terms
are defined in A.R.S. § 36-2801.
   Mining and metallurgical supplies means all tangible personal property
acquired by persons engaged in activities defined in section
19-432 for such use. This definition shall not include:
   (1)   Janitorial equipment and supplies;
   (2)   Office equipment, office furniture, and office supplies;
   (3)   Motor vehicles licensed for use upon the highways of the state.
   Modifier means a person who reworks, changes or adds to products, wares, or
articles of manufacture.
   Nonprofit entity means any entity organized and operated exclusively for
charitable purposes, or operated by the Federal Government, the state, or any
political subdivision of the state.
   Occupancy (of real property) means any occupancy or use, or any right to
occupy or use, real property, including any improvements, rights, or interests
in such property.
   Out-of-city sale means the sale of tangible personal property and job
printing if all of the following occur:
   (1)   Transference of title and possession occur without the city; and
   (2)   The stock from which such personal property was taken was not within
the corporate limits of the city; and
   (3)   The order is received at a permanent business location of the seller
located outside the city, which location is used for the substantial and
regular conduct of such business sales activity. In no event shall the place of
business of the buyer be determinative of the situs of the receipt of the
order.
For the purpose of this definition, it does not matter that all other indicia
of business occur within the city, including, but not limited to, accounting,
invoicing, payments, centralized purchasing, and supply to out-of-city
storehouses and out-of-city retail branch outlets from a primary storehouse
within the city.
   Out-of-state sale means the sale of tangible personal property and job
printing if all of the following occur:
   (1)   The order is placed from without the state; and
   (2)   The property is delivered to the buyer at a location outside the
state; and
   (3)   The property is purchased for use outside the state.
   Owner-builder means an owner or lessor of real property who, by himself or
by or through others, constructs or has constructed or reconstructs or has
reconstructed any improvement to real property.
   Person means an individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association,
corporation, estate, trust, receiver, syndicate, broker, the Federal
Government, this state, or any political subdivision or agency of this state.
For the purposes of this article, a person shall be considered a distinct and
separate person from any general or limited partnership or joint venture or
other association with which such person is affiliated. A subsidiary
corporation shall be considered a separate person from its parent corporation
for purposes of taxation of transactions with its parent corporation.
   Prosthetic means any of the following tangible personal property if such
items are prescribed or recommended by a licensed podiatrist, chiropractor,
dentist, physician or surgeon, naturopath, optometrist, osteopathic physician
or surgeon, psychologist, hearing aid dispenser, physician assistant, nurse
practitioner, or veterinarian:
   (1)   Any man-made device for support or replacement of a part of the body,
or to increase acuity of one of the senses. Such items include: prescription
eyeglasses; contact lenses; hearing aids; artificial limbs or teeth; neck,
back, arm, leg, or similar braces.
   (2)   Insulin, insulin syringes, and glucose test strips sold with or
without a prescription.
   (3)   Hospital beds, crutches, wheelchairs, similar home health aids, or
corrective shoes.
   (4)   Drugs or medicine, including oxygen.
   (5)   Equipment used to generate, monitor, or provide health support
systems, such as respiratory equipment, oxygen concentrator, dialysis machine.
   (6)   Durable medical equipment which has a Federal Health Care Financing
Administration Common Procedure Code, is designated reimbursable by Medicare,
can withstand repeated use, is primarily and customarily used to serve a
medical purpose, is generally not useful to a person in the absence of illness
or injury and is appropriate for use in the home.
   (7)   Orthodontic devices dispensed by a dental professional who is licensed
under Title 32, Chapter 11 to a patient as part of the practice of dentistry.
   (8)   Under no circumstances shall "prosthetic" include medical marijuana
regardless of whether it is sold or dispensed pursuant to a prescription,
recommendation, or written certification by any authorized person.
   Qualifying community health center means
   (1)   An entity that is recognized as nonprofit under Section 501(c)(3) of
the United States Internal Revenue Code, that is a community-based, primary
care clinic that has a community-based board of directors and that is either:
   a.   The sole provider of primary care in the community.
   b.   A nonhospital affiliated clinic that is located in a federally
designated medically under served area in this state.
   (2)   Includes clinics that are being constructed as qualifying community
health centers.
   Qualifying health care organization means an entity that is recognized as
nonprofit under Section 501(c) of the United States Internal Revenue Code and
that uses, saves or invests at least eighty (80) percent of all monies that it
receives from all sources each year only for health and medical related
educational and charitable services, as documented by annual financial audits
prepared by an independent certified public accountant, performed according to
generally accepted accounting standards and filed annually with the Arizona
Department of Revenue. Monies that are used, saved or invested to lease,
purchase or construct a facility for health and medical related education and
charitable services are included in the eighty (80) percent requirement.
   Qualifying hospital means any of the following:
   (1)   A licensed hospital which is organized and operated exclusively for
charitable purposes, no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit
of any private shareholder or individual.
   (2)   A licensed nursing care institution or a licensed residential care
institution or a residential care facility operated in conjunction with a
licensed nursing care institution or a licensed kidney dialysis center, which
provides medical services, nursing services or health related services and is
not used or held for profit.
   (3)   A hospital, nursing care institution or residential care institution
which is operated by the federal government, this state or a political
subdivision of this state.
   (4)   A facility that is under construction and that on completion will be a
facility under subdivision (1), (2), or (3) of this paragraph.
   Receipt (of notice) by the taxpayer means the earlier of actual receipt or
the first attempted delivery by certified United States mail to the taxpayer's
address of record with the tax collector.
   Remediation means those actions that are reasonable, necessary, cost-
effective and technically feasible in the event of the release or threat of
release of hazardous substances into the environment such that the waters of
the state are or may be affected, such actions as may be necessary to monitor,
assess and evaluate such release or threat or release, actions of remediation,
removal or disposal of hazardous substances or taking such other actions as may
be necessary to prevent, minimize or mitigate damage to the public health or
welfare or to the waters of the state which may otherwise result from a release
or threat of release of a hazardous substance that will or may affect the
waters of the state. Remediation activities include the use of biostimulation
with indigenous microbes and bioaugmentation using microbes that are
nonpathogenic, nonopportunistic and that are naturally occurring. Remediation
activities may include community information and participation costs and
providing an alternative drinking water supply.
   Rental equipment means tangible personal property sold, rented, leased, or
licensed to customers to the extent that the item is actually used by the
customer for rental, lease, or license to others; provided that:
   (1)   The vendee is regularly engaged in the business of renting, leasing,
or licensing such property for a consideration; and
   (2)   The item so claimed as "rental equipment" is not used by the person
claiming the exemption for any purpose other than rental, lease, or license for
compensation, to an extent greater than fifteen (15) percent of its actual use.
   Rental supply means an expendable or nonexpendable repair or replacement
part sold to become part of "rental equipment", provided that:
   (1)   The documentation relating to each purchased item so claimed
specifically itemizes to the vendor the actual item of "rental equipment" to
which the purchased item is intended to be attached as a repair or replacement
part; and
   (2)   The vendee is regularly engaged in the business of renting, leasing,
or licensing such property for a consideration; and
   (3)   The item so claimed as "rental equipment" is not used by the person
claiming the exemption for any purpose other than rental, lease, or license for
compensation, to an extent greater than fifteen (15) percent of its actual use.
   Repairer means a person who restores or renews products, wares, or articles
of manufacture.
   Resides within the city means in cases other than individuals, whose legal
addresses are determinative of residence, the engaging, continuing, or
conducting of regular business activity within the city.
   Restaurant means any business activity where articles of food, drink or
condiment are customarily prepared or served to patrons for consumption on or
off the premises, also including bars, cocktail lounges, the dining rooms of
hotels, and all caterers. For the purposes of this article, a "fast food"
business, which includes street vendors and mobile vendors selling in public
areas or at entertainment or sports or similar events, who prepares or sells
food or drink for consumption on or off the premises is considered a
"restaurant" and not a "retailer."
   Retail sale (sale at retail) means the sale of tangible personal property,
except the sale of tangible personal property to a person regularly engaged in
the business of selling such property.
   Retailer means any person engaged or continuing in the business of sales of
tangible personal property at retail.
   Sale means any transfer of title or possession, or both, exchange, barter,
conditional or otherwise, in any manner or by any means whatsoever, including
consignment transactions and auctions, of property for a consideration. "Sale"
includes any transaction whereby the possession of such property is
transferred, but the seller retains the title as security for the payment of
the price. "Sale" also includes the fabrication of tangible personal property
for consumers who, in whole or in part, furnish either directly or indirectly
the materials used in such fabrication work.
   Solar daylighting means a device that is specifically designed to capture
and redirect the visible portion of the solar beam, while controlling the
infrared portion, for use in illuminating interior building spaces in lieu of
artificial lighting.
   Solar energy device means a system or series of mechanisms designed
primarily to provide heating, to provide cooling, to produce electrical power,
to produce mechanical power, to provide solar daylighting, or to provide any
combination of the foregoing by means of collecting and transferring solar
generated energy into such uses either by active or passive means, including
wind generator systems that produce electricity. Solar energy systems may also
have the capability of storing solar energy for future use. Passive systems
shall clearly be designed as a solar energy device, such as a trombe wall, and
not merely as a part of a normal structure, such as a window.
   Speculative builder means either:
   (1)   An owner-builder who sells or contracts to sell, at any time, improved
real property (as provided in section
19-416) consisting of:
   a.   Custom, model, or inventory homes, regardless of the stage of
completion of such homes; or
   b.   Improved residential or commercial lots without a structure; or
   (2)   An owner-builder who sells or contracts to sell improved real
property, other than improved real property specified in subsection (1) above:
   a.   Prior to completion; or
   b.   Before the expiration of twenty-four (24) months after the improvements
of the real property sold are substantially complete.
   Substantially complete means the construction contracting or reconstruction
contracting:
   (1)   Has passed final inspection or its equivalent; or
   (2)   Certificate of occupancy or its equivalent has been issued; or
   (3)   Is ready for immediate occupancy or use.
   Supplier means any person who rents, leases, licenses, or makes sales of
tangible personal property within the city, either directly to the consumer or
customer or to wholesalers, jobbers, fabricators, manufacturers, modifiers,
assemblers, repairers, or those engaged in the business of providing services
which involve the use, sale, rental, lease, or license of tangible personal
property.
   Tax collector means the finance director or his/her designee or agent for
all purposes under this article.
   Taxpayer means any person liable for any tax under this article.
   Taxpayer problem resolution officer means the individual designated by the
city to perform the duties identified in sections
19-515 and
19-516. In cities with a population of fifty thousand (50,000) or more, the
taxpayer problem resolution officer shall be an employee of the city. In cities
with a population of less than fifty thousand (50,000), the taxpayer problem
resolution officer need not be an employee of the city. Regardless of whether
the taxpayer problem resolution officer is or is not an employee of the city,
the taxpayer problem resolution officer shall have substantive knowledge of
taxation. The identity of and telephone number for the taxpayer problem
resolution officer can be obtained from the tax collector.
   Telecommunication service means any service or activity connected with the
transmission or relay of sound, visual image, data, information, images, or
material over a communications channel or any combination of communications
channels.
   Transient means any person who either at the person's own expense or at the
expense of another obtains lodging space or the use of lodging space on a daily
or weekly basis, or on any other basis for less than thirty (30) consecutive
days.
   Utility service means the producing, providing, or furnishing of
electricity, electric lights, current, power, gas (natural or artificial), or
water to consumers or ratepayers.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 6938, §§ 1--3, 4-25-88; Ord. No. 7446, §
2.1, 7-2-90; Ord. No. 8440, § 1, 1-23-95; Ord. No. 8784, § 1, 12-2-96; Ord. No.
8793, § 1, 1-6-97; Ord. No. 8794, § 1, 1-6-97; Ord. No. 9004, § 1(1), 1-5-98;
Ord. No. 9069, § 1(1), 6-15-98; Ord. No. 9841, § 1, 5-12-03; Ord. No. 10361, §
1, 12-19-06; Ord. No. 10524, § 1, 5-13-08, eff. 7-1-08; Ord. No. 10911, § 1, 8-
9-11, eff. 6-1-11; Ord. No. 10949, § 1, 12-13-11; Ord. No. 11183, § 2, 6-17-
14*)
   *Editor's note – Ord. No. 11183, § 18, adopted June 17, 2014, provides that
the amendments made to Sec.
19-100 relating to the definition of "Business" shall be effective from and
after January 1, 2007.
Sec. 19-110. Definitions: Income-producing capital equipment.
   (a)   The following tangible personal property, other than items excluded in
subsection (d) below, shall be deemed "income-producing capital equipment" for
the purposes of this article:
   (1)   Machinery or equipment used directly in manufacturing, processing,
fabricating, job printing, refining or metallurgical operations. The terms
manufacturing, processing, fabricating, job printing, refining, and
metallurgical, as used in this paragraph, refer to and include those operations
commonly understood within their ordinary meaning. "Metallurgical Operations"
includes leaching, milling, precipitating, smelting and refining.
   (2)   Mining machinery, or equipment, used directly in the process of
extracting ores or minerals from the earth for commercial purposes, including
equipment required to prepare the materials for extraction and handling,
loading or transporting such extracted material to the surface. "Mining"
includes underground, surface and open pit operations for extracting ores and
minerals.
   (3)   Tangible personal property, sold to persons engaged in business
classified under the telecommunications classification, including a person
representing or working on behalf of such a person in a manner described in
section
19-415(B)(12) and A.R.S. Section 42-5075, subsection O, consisting of central
office switching equipment; switchboards; private branch exchange equipment;
microwave radio equipment, and carrier equipment, including optical fiber,
coaxial cable, and other transmission media which are components of carrier
systems.
   (4)   Machinery, equipment, or transmission lines used directly in producing
or transmitting electrical power, but not including distribution. Transformers
and control equipment used at transmission substation sites constitute
equipment used in producing or transmitting electrical power.
   (5)   Pipes or valves four (4) inches in diameter or larger and related
equipment, used to transport oil, natural gas, artificial gas, water, or coal
slurry. For the purpose of this section, related equipment includes: compressor
units, regulators, machinery and equipment, fittings, seals and any other parts
that are used in operating the pipes or valves.
   (6)   Aircraft, navigational and communication instruments, and other
accessories and related equipment sold to:
      a.   A person:
         1.   Holding, or exempted by federal law from obtaining, a federal
certificate of public convenience and necessity for use as, in conjunction with
or becoming part of an aircraft to be used to transport persons for hire in
intrastate, interstate, or foreign commerce.
         2.   That is certificated or licensed under Federal Aviation
Administration regulations (14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 121 or 135) as
a scheduled or unscheduled carrier of persons for hire for use as or in
conjunction with or becoming part of an aircraft to be used to transport
persons for hire in intrastate, interstate, or foreign commerce.
         3.   Holding a foreign air carrier permit for air transportation for
use as or in conjunction with or becoming a part of aircraft to be used to
transport persons, property or United States mail in intrastate, interstate or
foreign commerce.
         4.   Operating an aircraft to transport persons in any manner for
compensation or hire, or for use in a fractional ownership program that meets
the requirements of federal aviation administration regulations (14 Code of
Federal Regulations Part 91, Subpart k), including as an air carrier, a foreign
air carrier or a commercial operator or under a restricted category, within the
meaning of 14 Code of Federal Regulations, regardless of whether the operation
or aircraft is regulated or certified under Part 91, 119, 121, 133, 135, 136 or
137, or another part of 14 Code of Federal Regulations.
         5.   That will lease or otherwise transfer operational control, within
the meaning of Federal Aviation Administration Operations Specification A008,
or its successor, of the aircraft, instruments or accessories to one or more
persons described in item 1, 2, 3, or 4 of this subdivision, subject to A.R.S.
Section 42-5009, subsection N.
      b.   Any foreign government.
      c.   Persons who are not residents of this state and who will not use
such property in this state other than in removing such property from this
state. This subdivision also applies to corporations that are not incorporated
in this state, regardless of maintaining a place of business in this state, if
the principal corporate office is located outside this state and the property
will not be used in this state other than in removing the property from this
state.
   (7)   Machinery, tools, equipment, and related supplies used or consumed
directly in repairing, remodeling or maintaining aircraft, aircraft engines or
aircraft component parts by or on behalf of a certificated or licensed carrier
of persons or property.
   (8)   Railroad rolling stock, rails, ties and signal control equipment used
directly to transport persons or property.
   (9)   Machinery or equipment used directly to drill for oil or gas or used
directly in the process of extracting oil or gas from the earth for commercial
purposes.
   (10)   Buses or other urban mass transit vehicles which are used directly to
transport persons or property for hire or pursuant to a governmentally adopted
and controlled urban mass transportation program and which are sold to bus
companies holding a federal certificate of convenience and necessity or
operated by a city, town or other governmental entity or by any person
contracting with such a governmental entity as part of a governmentally adopted
and controlled program to provide urban mass transportation.
   (11)   Metering, monitoring, receiving, and transmitting equipment acquired
by persons engaged in the business of providing utility services or
telecommunications services; but only to the extent that such equipment is to
be used by the customers of such persons and such persons separately charge or
bill their customers for use of such equipment.
   (12)   Groundwater measuring devices required under A.R.S. section 45-604.
   (13)   Machinery or equipment used in research and development. In this
paragraph, “research and development” means basic and applied research in the
sciences and engineering, and designing, developing or testing prototypes,
processes or new products, including research and development of computer
software that is embedded in or an integral part of the prototype or new
product or that is required for machinery or equipment otherwise exempt under
this section to function effectively. Research and development do not include
manufacturing quality control, routine consumer product testing, market
research, sales promotion, sales service, research in social sciences or
psychology, computer software research that is not included in the definition
of research and development or other nontechnological activities or technical
services.
   (14)   New machinery and equipment consisting of agricultural aircraft,
tractors, tractor- drawn implements, self-powered implements, and drip
irrigation lines, acquired by persons engaged or continuing in business for use
in the commercial production of agricultural, horticultural, viticultural, or
floricultural crops in this State. For the purposes of this paragraph:
      a.   “new machinery and equipment” means machinery or equipment which has
never been sold at retail, except pursuant to leases or rentals which do not
total two years or more.
      b.   "agricultural aircraft" means an aircraft that is built for
agricultural use for the aerial application of pesticides or fertilizer or for
aerial seeding.
      c.   "self-powered implements" includes machinery and equipment that are
electric powered.
   (15)   Included in income producing capital equipment are liquid, solid or
gaseous chemicals used in manufacturing, processing, fabricating, mining,
refining, metallurgical operations, research and development or job printing,
if using or consuming the chemicals, alone or as part of an integrated system
of chemicals, involving direct contact with the materials from which the
product is produced for the purpose of causing or permitting a chemical or
physical change to occur in the materials as part of the production process.
This subsection does not include chemicals that are used or consumed in
activities such as packaging, storage or transportation but does not affect any
deduction for such chemicals that is otherwise provided by this Code. Chemicals
meeting the requirements of this subsection are deemed not to be expendable
under subsection (d) of this section.
   (16)   Cleanrooms that are used for manufacturing, processing, fabrication
or research and development, as defined in paragraph (13) of this subsection,
of semiconductor products. For purposes of this paragraph, “cleanroom” means
all property that comprises or creates an environment where humidity,
temperature, particulate matter and contamination are precisely controlled
within specified parameters, without regard to whether the property is actually
contained within that environment or whether any of the property is affixed to
or incorporated into real property. Cleanroom:
      a.   Includes the integrated systems, fixtures, piping, movable
partitions, lighting and all property that is necessary or adapted to reduce
contamination or to control airflow, temperature, humidity, chemical purity or
other environmental conditions or manufacturing tolerances, as well as the
production machinery and equipment operating in conjunction with the cleanroom
environment.
      b.   Does not include the building or other permanent, nonremovable
component of the building that houses the cleanroom environment.
   (17)   Machinery and equipment that are purchased by or on behalf of the
owners of a soundstage complex and primarily used for motion picture,
multimedia or interactive video production in the complex. This paragraph
applies only if the initial construction of the soundstage complex begins after
June 30, 1996 and before January 1, 2002 and the machinery and equipment are
purchased before the expiration of five (5) years after the start of initial
construction. For purposes of this paragraph:
      a.   “Motion picture, multimedia or interactive video production includes
products for theatrical and television release, educational presentations,
electronic retailing, documentaries, music videos, industrial films, cd-rom,
video game production, commercial advertising and television episode production
and other genres that are introduced through developing technology.
      b.   “Soundstage complex” means a facility of multiple stages including
production offices, construction shops and related areas, prop and costume
shops, storage areas, parking for production vehicles and areas that are leased
to businesses that complement the production needs and orientation of the
overall facility.
   (18)   Tangible personal property that is used by either of the following to
receive, store, convert, produce, generate, decode encode, control or transmit
telecommunications information:
      a.   Any direct broadcast satellite television or data transmission
service that operates pursuant to 47 Code of Federal Regulations Parts 25 and
100.
      b.   Any satellite television or data transmission facility, if both of
the following conditions are met:
         i.      Over two- thirds (2/3) of the transmissions, measured in
megabytes, transmitted by the facility during the test period were transmitted
to or on behalf of one (1) or more direct broadcast satellite television or
data transmission services that operate pursuant to 47 Code of Federal
Regulations Parts 25 and 100.
         ii.   Over two-thirds (2/3) of the trans-missions, measured in
megabytes, transmitted by or on behalf of those direct broadcast television or
data transmission services during the test period were transmitted by the
facility to or on behalf of those services.
         For purposes of subdivision (b) of this paragraph, “test period” means
the three hundred sixty-five (365) day period beginning on the later of the
date on which the tangible personal property is purchased or the date on which
the direct broadcast satellite television or data transmission service first
transmits information to its customers.
   (19)   Machinery and equipment that is used directly in the feeding of
poultry, the environmental control of housing for poultry, the movement of eggs
within a production and packaging facility or the sorting or cooling of eggs.
This exemption does not apply to vehicles used for transporting eggs.
   (20)   Machinery or equipment, including related structural components, that
is employed in connection with manufacturing, processing, fabricating, job
printing, refining, mining, natural gas pipelines, metallurgical operations,
telecommunications, producing or transmitting electricity or research and
development that is used directly to meet or exceed rules or regulations
adopted by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, the United States
Environmental Protection Agency, the United States Nuclear Regulatory
Commission, the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality or a political
subdivision of this state to prevent, monitor, control or reduce land, water or
air pollution.
   (21)   Machinery or equipment that enables a television station to originate
and broadcast or to receive and broadcast digital television signals and that
was purchased to facilitate compliance with the Telecommunications Act of 1996
(P.I. 104-104; 110 Stat. 56; 47 United States Code Section 336) and the Federal
Communications Commission Order issued April 21, 1997, 47 Code of Federal
Regulations Part 73. this paragraph does not exempt any of the following:
      (A)   Repair or replacement parts purchased for the machinery or
equipment described in this paragraph.
      (B)   Machinery or equipment purchased to replace machinery or equipment
for which an exemption was previously claimed and taken under this paragraph.
      (C)   Any machinery or equipment purchased after the television station
has ceased analog broadcasting, or purchased after November 1, 2009, whichever
occurs first.
   (b)   The term “income-producing capital equipment” shall further include
ancillary machinery and equipment used for the treatment of waste products
created by the business activities which are allowed to purchase “income-
producing capital equipment” defined in subsection (a) above.
   (c)   The term “income-producing capital equipment” shall further include
repair and replacement parts, other than the items in subsection (d) below,
where the property is acquired to become an integral part of another item
itemized in subsection (a) or (b) above.
   (d)   The tangible personal property defined as income-producing capital
equipment in this section shall not include:
   (1)   Expendable materials. For purposes of this paragraph, expendable
materials do not include any of the categories of tangible personal property
specified in subsections (a), (b) or (c) of this section regardless of the cost
or useful life of that property.
   (2)   Janitorial equipment and hand tools.
   (3)   Office equipment, furniture, and supplies.
   (4)   Tangible personal property used in selling or distributing activities.
   (5)   Motor vehicles required to be licensed by the state, except buses or
other urban mass transit vehicles specifically exempted pursuant to subsection
(a)(10) above without regard to the use of such motor vehicles.
   (6)   Shops, buildings, docks, depots, and all other materials of whatever
kind or character not specifically included as exempt.
   (7)   Motors and pumps used in drip irrigation systems.
   (e)   For the purposes of this section:
   (1)   “Aircraft” includes:
      a.   An airplane flight simulator that is approved by the federal
aviation admini- stration for use as a phase II or higher flight simulator
under Appendix H, 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 121.
      b.   Tangible personal property that is permanently affixed or attached
as a component part of an aircraft that is owned or operated by a certificated
or licensed carrier of persons or property.
   (2)   “Other accessories and related equipment” includes aircraft
accessories and equipment such as ground service equipment that physically
contact aircraft at some point during the overall carrier operation.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 8440, § 2, 1-23-95; Ord. No. 9069, § 3,
6-15-98; Ord. No. 9069, § 1(2), 6-15-98; Ord. No. 9322, § 1, 11-22-99; Ord. No.
11936, § 2, 7-12-22)
   Editor’s note – Section 2 of Ord. No. 11936, adopted July 12, 2022, provides
for an effective date of January 1, 2015, for subsection (a)(3); June 1, 1998,
for subsection (a)(6) [except (a)(6)4, eff. January 1, 2018]; April 17, 1985,
for subsection (a)(14).
Sec. 19-115. Definitions: Computer software; custom computer programming. (Reg.
115.1)
   (a)   Computer software means any computer program, part of such a program,
or any sequence of instructions for automatic data processing equipment.
Computer software which is not "custom computer programming" is deemed to be
tangible personal property for the purposes of this article, regardless of the
method by which title, possession, or right to use the software is transferred
to the user.
   (b)   Custom computer programming means any computer software which is
written or prepared exclusively for a customer and includes those services
represented by separately stated charges for the modification of existing
prewritten programs when the modifications are written or prepared exclusively
for a customer.
   (1)   The term does not include a prewritten program which is held or
existing for general or repeated sale, lease or license, even if the program
was initially developed on a custom basis for in-house, or for a single
customer's, use.
   (2)   Modification to an existing prewritten program to meet the customer's
needs is custom computer programming only to the extent of the modification,
and only to the extent that the actual amount charged for the modification is
separately stated on invoices, statements and other billing documents supplied
to the customer.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87)
Sec. 19-120. Reserved.
   Editor's note – Ord. No. 11183, § 7, adopted June 17, 2014 and effective
January 1, 2013, repealed §
19-120, which pertained to definitions relating to food for home consumption.
Sec. 19-130. Reserved.
   Editor's note – Ord. No. 10949, § 2, adopted December 13, 2011, repealed §
19-130, which pertained to persons paying privilege tax not being liable for
occupational tax under article I.
DIVISION 2.
DETERMINATION OF GROSS INCOME
Sec. 19-200. Determination of gross income: In general.
   (a)   Gross income includes:
   (1)   The value proceeding or accruing from the sale of property, the
providing of service, or both.
   (2)   The total amount of the sale, lease, license for use or rental price
at the time of such sale, rental, lease or license.
   (3)   All receipts, cash, credits, barter, exchange, reduction of or
forgiveness of indebtedness, and property of every kind or nature derived from
a sale, lease, license for use, rental or other taxable activity.
   (4)   All other receipts whether payment is advanced prior to,
contemporaneous with, or deferred in whole or in part subsequent to the
activity or transaction. (Reg. 200.1)
   (b)   Barter, exchange, trade-outs or similar transactions are includable in
gross income at the fair market value of the service rendered or property
transferred, whichever is higher, as they represent consideration given for
consideration received.
   (c)   No deduction or exclusion is allowed from gross income on account of
the cost of the property sold, the time value of money, expense of any kind or
nature, losses, materials used, labor or service performed, interest paid, or
credits granted.
   (d)   For the purposes of this chapter the total amount of gross income,
gross receipts or gross proceeds of sales for nuclear fuel shall be deemed to
be the value of the purchase price of uranium oxide used in producing the fuel.
The tax imposed by this chapter may be imposed only once for any one quantity
or batch of nuclear fuel regardless of the number of transactions or financing
arrangements which may occur with respect to that nuclear fuel.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 11183, § 6, 6-17-14, eff. 1-1-13)
Sec. 19-210. Determination of gross income: Transactions between affiliated
companies or persons.
In transactions between affiliated companies or persons, or in other
circumstances where the relationship between the parties is such that the gross
income from the transaction is not indicative of the market value of the
subject matter of the transaction, the tax collector shall determine the
"market value" upon which the city privilege and use taxes shall be levied.
"Market value" shall correspond as nearly as possible to the gross income from
similar transactions of like quality or character by other taxpayers where no
common interest exists between the parties, but otherwise under similar
circumstances and conditions.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87)
Sec. 19-220. Determination of gross income: Artificially contrived
transactions.
The tax collector may examine any transaction, reported or unreported, if, in
his opinion, there has been or may be an evasion of the taxes imposed by this
article and to estimate the amount subject to tax in cases where such evasion
has occurred. The tax collector shall disregard any transaction which has been
undertaken in an artificial manner in order to evade the taxes imposed by this
article.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87)
Sec. 19-230. Determination of gross income based upon method of reporting.
The method of reporting chosen by a taxpayer, as provided in section
19-520, necessitates the following adjustments to gross income for all purposes
under this article:
   (1)   Cash basis. When a person elects to report and pay taxes on a cash
basis, gross income for the reporting period shall include:
   a.   The total amounts received on "paid in full" transactions, against
which are allowed all applicable deductions and exclusions; and
   b.   All amounts received on accounts receivable, conditional sales
contract, or other similar transactions, against which no deductions and no
exclusions from gross income are allowed. Interest on finance contracts may be
deducted if separately itemized on all books and records.
   (2)   Accrual basis. When a person elects to report and pay taxes on an
accrual basis, gross income shall include all gross income for the applicable
period regardless of whether receipts are for cash, credit, conditional, or
partially deferred transactions, and regardless of whether or not any security
document or instrument is sold, assigned, or otherwise transferred to another.
Persons reporting on the accrual basis may deduct bad debts, provided that:
   a.   The amount deducted for the bad debt must be deducted from gross income
of the month in which the actual charge-off was made, and only to the extent
that such amount was actually charged off, and also only to the extent that
such amount is or was included as taxable gross income; and
   b.   If any amount is subsequently collected on such charged-off account, it
shall be included in gross income for the month in which it was collected,
without deduction for expense of collection.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 8784, § 2, 12-2-96)
Sec. 19-240. Exclusion of cash discounts, returns, refunds, trade-in values,
vendor-issued coupons, and rebates from gross income.
   (a)   The following items are not included in gross income:
   (1)   Cash discounts allowed by the vendor for timely payment, but only
discounts allowed against taxable gross income.
   (2)   The value of property returned by customers to the extent of the
amount actually refunded either in cash or by credit and the amount refunded
was included in taxable gross income.
   (3)   The trade-in allowance for tangible personal property accepted as
payment, not to exceed the full sales price for any tangible personal property
sold, when the full sales price is included in taxable gross income. Trade-in
allowances are not allowed for manufactured buildings taxable under section
19-427.
   (4)   When coupons issued by a vendor are later accepted by the vendor as a
discount against the transaction, the discount may be excluded from gross
income as a cash discount. Amounts credited or refunded by a vendor for
redemption of coupons issued by any person other than the vendor may not be
excluded from gross income.
   (5)   Rebates issued by the vendor to a customer as a discount against the
transaction may be excluded from gross income as a cash discount. Rebates
issued by a person other than the vendor may not be excluded from gross income,
even when the vendee assigns his right to the rebate to the vendor.
   (6)   In computing the tax base, gross proceeds of sales or gross income
does not include a manufacturer's cash rebate on the sales price of a motor
vehicle if the buyer assigns the buyer's right in the rebate to the retailer.
   (b)   If the amount specified in subsection (a) above is credited by a
vendor subsequent to the reporting period in which the original transaction
occurs, such amount may be excluded from the taxable gross income of that
subsequent reporting period, but only to the extent that the excludable amount
was reported as taxable gross income in that prior reporting period.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 8440, § 4, 1-23-95; Ord. No. 8784, § 3,
12-2-96)
Sec. 19-250. Exclusion of combined taxes from gross income; itemization;
notice; limitations.
   (a)   When Tax Is Separately Charged and/or Collected. The total amount of
gross income shall be exclusive of combined taxes only when the person upon
whom the tax is imposed shall establish to the satisfaction of the tax
collector that such tax has been added to the total price of the transaction.
The taxpayer must provide to his customer and also keep a reliable record of
the actual tax charged or collected, shown by cash register tapes, sales
tickets or other accurate record, separating net transaction price and combined
tax. If at any time the tax collector cannot ascertain from the records kept by
the taxpayer the total or amounts billed or collected on account of combined
taxes, the claimed taxes collected may not be excluded from gross income unless
such records are completed and/or clarified to the satisfaction of the tax
collector.
   (1)   Remittance of all tax charged and/or collected. When an added charge
is made to cover city (or combined) privilege and use taxes, the person upon
whom the tax is imposed shall pay the full amount of the city taxes due,
whether collected by him or not; and in the event he collects more than the
amount due, he shall remit the excess to the tax collector. In the event the
tax collector cannot ascertain from the records kept by the taxpayer the total
or amounts of taxes collected by him, and the tax collector is satisfied that
the taxpayer has collected taxes in an amount in excess of the tax assessed
under this article, the tax collector may determine the amount collected and
collect the tax so determined in the manner provided in this article. (Reg.
250.1)
   (2)   Itemization. A taxpayer, in order to be entitled to exclude from his
gross income any amounts paid to him by customers for combined taxes passed on
to the customer, must prove that he has provided his customer with a written
record of the transaction showing at a minimum the price before the tax, the
combined taxes, and the total cost. This shall be in addition to the record
required to be kept under subsection (a) above.
   (b)   When Tax Has Been Neither Separately Charged nor Separately Collected.
When the person upon whom the tax is imposed shall establish, by means of
invoices, sales tickets or other reliable evidence, that no added charge was
made to cover combined taxes, the taxpayer may exclude tax collected from such
income by dividing such taxable gross income by 1.00 plus a decimal figure
representing the effective combined tax rate expressed as a fraction of 1.00.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87)
Sec. 19-260. Exclusion of fees and taxes from gross income; limitations.
   (a)   There shall be excluded from gross income of vendors of motor vehicles
those motor vehicle registration fees, license fees and taxes, and lieu taxes
imposed pursuant to A.R.S. title 28 in connection with the initial purchase of
a motor vehicle, but only to the extent that such taxes or fees or both have
been separately itemized and collected from the purchaser of the motor vehicle
by the vendor, actually remitted to the proper registering, licensing and
taxing authorities, and the provisions of division 3, regarding recordkeeping,
are met. For the purpose of the exclusion provided by this subsection only, the
terms "vendor" and "vendee" shall also apply to a lessor and lessee
respectively of a motor vehicle if, in addition to all other requirements of
this subsection, the lease agreement specifically requires the lessee to pay
such fees or taxes, and such amounts are separately itemized in the
documentation provided to the lessee.
   (b)   There shall be excluded from gross income of vendors at retail of
heavy trucks and trailers the amount attributable to Federal excise taxes
imposed by 26 U.S.C. section 4051, but only to the extent that the provisions
of division 3, relating to recordkeeping, have been met.
   (c)   There shall be excluded from gross income the following fees, taxes,
and lieu taxes, but only to the extent that such taxes or fees or both have
been separately itemized and collected from the purchaser by the vendor,
actually remitted to the proper registering, licensing, and taxing authorities,
and the provisions of Article III, regarding recordkeeping, are met:
   (1)   Emergency telecommunication services excise tax imposed pursuant to
A.R.S. § 42-5252. "Emergency telecommunication services" means
telecommunication services or systems that use number 911 or a similarly
designated telephone number for emergency calls;
   (2)   The telecommunication devices for the deaf and the severely hearing
and speech impaired excise tax imposed pursuant to A.R.S. § 42-5252;
   (3)   Federal excise taxes on communications services as imposed by 26
U.S.C. § 4251;
   (4)   Car rental surcharge imposed pursuant to A.R.S. § 48-4234;
   (5)   Federal excise taxes on passenger vehicles as imposed by 26 U.S.C. §
4001(.01);
   (6)   Waste tire disposal fees, imposed pursuant to A.R.S. § 44-1302.
   (d)   There shall be excluded from gross income of vendors of motor vehicles
dealer documentation fees, but only to the extent that such fees have been
separately itemized and collected from the purchaser of the motor vehicle by
the vendor.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 8784, § 4, 12-2-96; Ord. No. 9841, § 2,
5-12-03)
Sec. 19-265. Reserved.
   Editors Note: Ordinance No. 8440, § 5, adopted January 23, 1995, amended the
city tax code by the addition of §
19-265 as a reserved section.
Sec. 19-266. Exclusion of motor carrier revenues from gross income.
There shall be excluded from gross income the gross proceeds of sale or gross
income derived from any of the following:
   (a)   A motor carrier's use on the public highways in this State if the
motor carrier is subject to a fee prescribed in A.R.S. Title 28, Chapter 15,
Article 4 or A.R.S. Title 28, Chapter 16, Article 4.
   (b)   Leasing, renting, or licensing a motor vehicle, subject to and upon
which the fee has been paid under A.R.S. Title 28, Chapter 16.
   (c)   The sale of a motor vehicle and any repair and replacement parts and
tangible personal property becoming a part of such motor vehicle, to a motor
carrier who is subject to a fee prescribed in A.R.S. Title 28, Chapter 16 and
who is engaged in the business of leasing, renting, or licensing such property.
   (d)   For the purposes of these exclusions, "motor carrier" includes a motor
vehicle weighing twenty-six thousand (26,000) pounds or more, a lightweight
motor vehicle which weighs twelve thousand one (12,001) pounds to twenty-six
thousand (26,000) pounds and a light motor vehicle weighing twelve thousand
(12,000) pounds or less, which pay the fee prescribed in A.R.S. Title 28,
Chapter 15, Article 4 or A.R.S. Title 28, Chapter 16.
(Ord. No. 8958, § 6, 9-22-97; Ord. No. 9069, § 1(4), 6-15-98; Ord. No. 10361, §
2, 12-19-06)
Sec. 19-270. Exclusion of gross income of persons deemed not engaged in
business.
   (a)   For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall
apply:
   (1)   Federally exempt organization means an organization which has received
a determination of exemption, or qualifies for such exemption, under 26 U.S.C.
section 501(c) and rules and regulations of the commissioner of internal
revenue pertaining to same, but not including a "governmental entity,"
"nonlicensed business" or "public educational entity" as defined in paragraphs
(2), (3) and (5) of this subsection.
   (2)   Governmental entity means the federal government, the State of
Arizona, any other state, or any political subdivision, department or agency of
any of the foregoing. Persons contracting with such a governmental entity to
operate any part of a governmentally adopted and controlled program to provide
urban mass transportation shall be deemed a governmental entity in all
activities such person performs when engaged in such contract.
   (3)   Nonlicensed business means any person conducting any business activity
for gain or profit, whether or not actually realized, which person is not
required to be licensed for the conduct or transaction of activities subject to
the tax imposed under this article.
   (4)   Proprietary club means any club which has qualified or would otherwise
qualify as an exempt club under the provisions of 26 U.S.C. section 501(c)(7),
(8) and (9), notwithstanding the fact that some or all of the members may own a
proprietary interest in the property and assets of the club.
   (5)   Public educational entity means any educational entity operated
pursuant to any provisions of A.R.S. title 15.
   (b)   Transactions which, if conducted by any other person, would produce
gross income subject to tax under this article shall not be subject to the
imposition of such tax if conducted entirely by a public educational entity;
governmental entity, except "proprietary activities" of municipalities as
provided by regulation; or nonlicensed business. (Reg. 270.1)
   (c)   Transactions which, if conducted by any other person, would produce
gross income subject to the tax under this article shall not be subject to the
imposition of such tax if conducted entirely by a federally exempt organization
or proprietary club with the following exceptions:
   (1)   Transactions involving proprietary clubs and organizations exempt
under 26 U.S.C. section 501(c)(7), (8) and (9), where the gross revenue of the
activity received from persons other than members and bona fide guests of
members is in an amount in excess of fifteen (15) percent of total gross
revenue, as prescribed by regulation. In the event this fifteen (15) percent
limit is exceeded, the entire gross income of such entity shall be subject to
the applicable tax. (Reg. 270.2)
   (2)   Gross income from "unrelated business income" as that term is defined
in 26 U.S.C. section 512, including all statutory definitions and
determinations, the rules and regulations of the commissioner of internal
revenue, and his administrative interpretations and guidelines.
   (3)   Reserved.
   (d)   Except as may be provided elsewhere in this article, transactions
where customers are exempt organizations, proprietary clubs, public educational
entities, governmental entities, or nonlicensed businesses shall be deemed
taxable transactions for the purpose of the imposition of taxes under this
article, notwithstanding that property so acquired may in fact be resold or
leased by the acquiring person to others. In the case of sales, rentals, leases
or licenses to proprietary clubs or exempt organizations, the vendor may be
relieved from the responsibility for reporting and paying tax on such income
only by obtaining from its vendee a verified statement that includes:
   (1)   A statement that when the property so acquired is resold, rented,
leased or licensed, that the otherwise exempt vendee chooses, or is required,
to pay city privilege tax or an equivalent excise tax on its gross income from
such transactions and does in fact file returns on same; and
   (2)   The privilege license number of the otherwise exempt vendee; and
   (3)   Such other information as the tax collector may require.
   (e)   Franchisees or concessionaires operating businesses for or on behalf
of any exempt organization, governmental entity, public educational entity,
proprietary club, or nonlicensed business shall not be considered to be such an
exempt organization, club, entity or nonlicensed business, but shall be deemed
to be a taxpayer subject to the provisions of this article, except as provided
in the definition of governmental entity, regarding urban mass transit.
   (f)   In any case, if a federally exempt organization, proprietary club, or
non-licensed business rents, leases, licenses, or purchases any tangible
personal property for its own storage or use, and no city privilege or use tax
or equivalent excise tax has been paid on such transaction, said organization,
club, or business shall be liable for the use tax upon such acquisitions or use
of such property.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 9840, § 1, 5-5-03)
Sec. 19-280. Reserved.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87)
Sec. 19-285. Determination of gross income: Moratorium on certain taxes
relating to certain real property.
   (a)   A Moratorium period of "X" years means that consecutive passage of
time commencing upon the date when real property first qualifies for the
provisions of this section and ending at midnight (12:00 p.m.) of that same
month and day "X" years thereafter.
   (b)   Gross income derived from construction contracting upon real property
not owned by a governmental entity shall be exempt from the taxes imposed by
sections
19-415 through
19-418 for a moratorium period of three (3) years from the date upon which such
real property shall have been annexed to and become a part of the city provided
the real property is annexed prior to July 2, 2001. Gross income derived from
construction contracting upon real property annexed into the city pursuant to
an annexation agreement with the city prior to October 24, 1988, shall be
exempt from the taxes imposed by sections
19-415 through
19-418 for a moratorium period of seven (7) years from the date upon which such
real property shall have been annexed to and become a part of the city.
   (c)   Gross income derived from the following activities shall be exempt
from the taxes imposed by this article for a moratorium period of twenty (20)
years, when such activities occur upon real property which, pursuant to state
law, possesses appurtenant water rights which are based upon a history of
agricultural irrigation, and such rights have been contractually or otherwise
irrevocably committed to be surrendered, assigned or transferred to the city
prior to the expiration of the moratorium period.
   (1)   Construction contracting as provided by sections
19-415 through
19-418.
   (2)   Rental, leasing or licensing for use of real property for any purpose
other than for lodging or lodging space as provided by section
19-445.
   (d)   The provisions of this section shall be irrevocably vested in any real
property that qualifies under this section after the adoption of this section
as part of the City Code, or upon the adoption of any substantially similar
ordinance previously adopted, whichever occurs earlier.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 7082, § 1, 12-12-88; Ord. No. 9579, § 1,
7-2-01)
Sec. 19-290. Special exemption for activities occurring on Davis Monthan Air
Force Base.
Notwithstanding provisions contained elsewhere in this article, gross income
derived from the following transactions and activities that would be considered
taxable, occurring elsewhere in the city, shall be deemed exempt from the taxes
imposed by this article when the transaction or activity occurs on Davis
Monthan Air Force Base:
   (1)   Construction contracting on the base.
   (2)   Providing telecommunication or utility service to customers on the
base.
   (3)   Retail sales and restaurant activity at locations on the base.
   (4)   Storage or use of tangible personal property by persons residing on
the base.*
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 7446, § 2.3, 7-2-90; Ord. No. 10040, §
1, 9-20-04)
*Note-- Section 5 of Ord. No. 10040 states that §
19-290(4) is effective retroactively to July 1, 2003.
DIVISION 3.
LICENSING AND RECORDKEEPING
Sec. 19-300. Licensing requirements.
   (a)   The following persons shall make application to the tax collector for
a transaction privilege and use tax license and no person shall engage or
continue in business or engage in such activities until he shall have such a
license:
   (1)   Every person engaging or continuing in business activities within the
city upon which a transaction privilege tax is imposed by this chapter.
   (2)   Every person engaging or continuing in business within the city and
storing or using tangible personal property in this municipality upon which a
use tax is imposed by this chapter.
   (3)   (Reserved).
   (b)   For the purpose of determining whether a transaction privilege and use
tax license is required, a person shall be deemed to be "engaging or continuing
in business" within the city if:
   (1)   Engaging in any activity as a principal or broker, the gross receipts
of which may be subject to transaction privilege tax under Article IV of this
chapter, or
   (2)   Maintaining within the city directly or, if a corporation, by a
subsidiary, an office, distribution house, sales house, warehouse or other
place of business; maintaining within the city directly or, if a corporation,
by a subsidiary, any real or tangible personal property; or having any agent or
other representative operating within the city under the authority of such
person or, if a corporation, by a subsidiary, irrespective of whether such
place of business, property, or agent or other representative is located here
permanently or temporarily, or
   (3)   Soliciting sales, orders, contracts, leases, and other similar forms
of business relationships, within the city from customers, consumers, or users
located within the city, by means of salesmen, solicitors, agents,
representatives, brokers, and other similar agents or by means of catalogs or
other advertising, whether such orders are received or accepted within or
without this city.
   (4)   A person shall also be deemed to be "engaging or continuing in
business" if engaging in any activity subject to use tax under Article VI of
this chapter for business purposes. Individuals who acquire items subject to
use tax for their own personal use or their family's personal use are not
required to obtain a license.
   (5)   (Reserved).
   (6)   (Reserved).
   (c)   A person engaging in more than one activity subject to transaction
privilege tax at any one business location is not required to obtain a separate
license for each activity, provided that, at the time such person makes
application for a license, he or she shall list on such application each
category of activity in which he or she is engaged.
   (d)   The licensee shall inform the tax collector of any changes in his
business activities, location, or mailing address within thirty (30) days.
   (e)   Limitation. The issuance of a transaction privilege and use tax
license by the tax collector shall in no way be construed as permission to
operate a business activity in violation of any other law or regulation to
which such activity may be subject.
   (f)   Casual activity. For the purposes of this chapter, individuals
engaging in a "casual activity or sale" are not subject to the license
requirements imposed under this article provided that they are only engaged in
private sales activities, such as the sale of a personal automobile or garage
sale, on no more than three (3) separate occasions during any calendar year.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 8440, § 7, 1-23-95; Ord. No. 9840, § 2,
5-5-03; Ord. No. 10448, § 7, 9-5-07, eff. 1-1-08; Ord. No. 11219, § 1, 12-9-14,
eff. 1-1-15)
Sec. 19-305. Reserved.
   Editor's note – Ord. No. 11219, § 1, adopted December 9, 2014 and effective
January 1, 2015, repealed § 19-305, which pertained to special licensing
requirements and derived from Ord. No. 6938, § 5, 4-25-88.
Sec. 19-310. Licensing: Special requirements.
   (a)   Partnerships. Application for a transaction privilege and use tax
license for a partnership engaging or continuing in business shall provide, as
a minimum, the names and addresses of all general partners. Licenses issued to
persons engaging in business as partners, limited or general, shall be in the
name of the partnership.
   (b)   Limited liability companies. Application for a transaction privilege
and use tax license for a limited liability company (LLC) engaging or
continuing in business shall provide, as a minimum, the names and addresses of
all members and the manager. Licenses issued to persons engaging in business as
limited liability companies shall be in the name of the LLC.
   (c)   Corporations. Application for a transaction privilege and use tax
license for a corporation engaging or continuing in business shall provide, as
a minimum, the names and addresses of both the chief executive officer and
chief financial officer of the corporation. Licenses issued to persons engaging
in business as corporations shall be in the name of the corporation.
   (d)   Multiple locations or multiple business names. A person engaging or
continuing in one (1) or more businesses at two (2) or more locations or under
two (2) or more business names shall procure a license for each such location
or business name. A "location" is a place of a separate business establishment.
   (e)   Real property rental, leasing, and licensing for use. In all cases the
transaction privilege and use tax license shall be issued only to the owner of
the real property regardless of the owner engaging a property manager or other
broker to oversee the owner's business activity including filing tax returns on
behalf of the owner. Each rental property that can be independently sold or
transferred is deemed to be a separate business establishment. Each platted
parcel of real property subject to the tax imposed by this chapter is deemed to
be a separate business establishment and requires a separate license,
regardless of the number of rental units located on that platted parcel. If one
(1) structure is located on multiple parcels in a manner such that ownership of
an individual parcel cannot be sold or transferred without requiring alteration
to divide the structure, one (1) license shall be required for all affected
parcels.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 6938, § 6, 4-25-88; Ord. No. 7446, §
2.2, 7-2-90; Ord. No. 10448, § 8, 9-5-07, eff. 1-1-08; Ord. No. 11198, § 2, 9-
9-14, eff. 1-1-15; Ord. No. 11219, § 1, 12-9-14, eff. 1-1-15)
Sec. 19-315. Reserved.
(Ord. No. 6938, § 7, 4-25-88)
Sec. 19-320. License fees; annual renewal; renewal fees.
   (a)   The transaction privilege and use tax license shall be valid upon
receipt of a non-refundable license fee of twenty dollars ($20.00), except for
a license to engage in the business activity of residential or commercial real
property rental, leasing, and licensing for use as separately identified in
this section. The transaction privilege and use tax license shall be valid only
for the calendar year in which it is issued unless renewed each year by filing
the appropriate application for license renewal and paying an annual license
renewal fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) for each license, subject to the
limitations in A.R.S. § 42-5005. Such annual renewal fee shall be due and
payable on January 1 of each year and shall be considered delinquent if not
paid and received on or before the last business day of January.
   (b)   The transaction privilege and use tax license to engage in the
business activity of residential real property rental, leasing, and licensing
for use shall be valid only upon receipt of a non-refundable license fee of
zero dollars ($0.00). The transaction privilege and use tax license shall be
valid only for the calendar year in which it is issued unless renewed each year
by filing the appropriate application for license renewal and paying an annual
license renewal fee of zero dollars ($0.00) for each license, subject to the
limitations in A.R.S. § 42-5005. Such fee shall be due and payable on January 1
of each year and shall be considered delinquent if not paid and received on or
before the last business day of January.
   (c)   The transaction privilege and use tax license to engage in the
business activity of commercial real property rental, leasing, and licensing
for use shall be valid only upon receipt of a non-refundable license fee of
twenty dollars ($20.00). The transaction privilege and use tax license shall be
valid only for the calendar year in which it is issued unless renewed each year
by filing the appropriate application for license renewal and paying an annual
license renewal fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) for each license, subject to the
limitations in A.R.S. § 42-5005. Such fee shall be due and payable on January 1
of each year and shall be considered delinquent if not paid and received on or
before the last business day of January.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 11219, § 1, 12-9-14, eff. 1-1-15)
Sec. 19-330. Licensing: Duration; transferability; display; penalties; penalty
waiver; relicensing; fees collectible as if taxes.
   (a)   The transaction privilege and use tax license shall be valid only for
the calendar year in which it is issued unless renewed each year by filing the
appropriate application for license renewal and paying the applicable license
renewal fee for each license, subject to the limitations in A.R.S. § 42-5005.
Such fee shall be due and payable on January 1 of each year and shall be
considered delinquent if not paid and received on or before the last business
day of January. Application and payment of the annual fee must be received in
the tax collector's office to be deemed paid and received.
   (b)   The transaction privilege and use tax license shall be nontransferable
between owners or locations, and shall be on display to the public in the
licensee's place of business.
   (c)   Any person required to be licensed under this chapter who fails to
obtain a license on or before conducting any business activity requiring such
license shall be subject to the license fees due for each year in business plus
a penalty in the amount of fifty percent (50%) of the applicable fee for each
period of time for which such fee would have been imposed, from and after the
date on which such activity commenced until paid. This penalty shall be in
addition to any other penalty imposed under this chapter and must be paid prior
to the issuance of any license. License fee penalties may be waived by the tax
collector subject to the same terms as the waiver of tax penalties as provided
for in section
19-540.
   (d)   Any licensee who fails to renew his or her license on or before the
due date shall be deemed to be operating without a license following such due
date, and shall be subject to all penalties imposed under this chapter against
persons required to be licensed and operating without a license. The non-
licensed status may be removed by payment of the annual license fee for each
year or portion of a year he or she operated without a license, plus a license
fee penalty of fifty percent (50%) of the license fee due for each year.
License fee penalties may be waived by the tax collector subject to the same
terms as the waiver of tax penalties as provided for in section
19-540.
   (e)   Any licensee who permits his or her license to expire through
cancellation as provided in section
19-340, by his or her request for cancellation, by surrender of the license, or
by the cessation of the business activity for which the license was issued, and
who thereafter applies for a license, shall be granted a new license as a new
applicant and shall pay the current license fee imposed under section
19-320.
   (f)   Any licensee who needs a copy of his transaction privilege and use tax
license which is still in effect shall be charged the current license fee for
each reissuance of a license.
   (g)   Any person conducting a business activity subject to licensing without
obtaining a transaction privilege and use tax license shall be liable to the
city for all applicable fees and penalties and shall be subject to the
provisions of sections
19-580 and
19-590, to the same extent as if such fees and penalties were taxes and
penalties under such sections.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 11219, § 1, 12-9-14, eff. 1-1-15)
Sec. 19-340. Licensing: Cancellation; revocation.
   (a)   Cancellation. The tax collector may cancel the transaction privilege
and use tax license of any licensee as "inactive" if the taxpayer, required to
report monthly, has neither filed any return nor remitted any taxes imposed by
this chapter for a period of six (6) consecutive months; or, if required to
report quarterly, has neither filed any return nor remitted any taxes imposed
by this chapter for two (2) consecutive quarters; or, if required to report
annually, has neither filed any return nor remitted any taxes imposed by this
chapter when such annual report and tax are due to be filed with and remitted
to the tax collector.
   (b)   Revocation. If any licensee fails to pay any tax, interest, penalty,
fee, or sum required to be paid under this chapter, or if such licensee fails
to comply with any other provisions of this chapter, the tax collector may
revoke the transaction privilege and use tax license of said licensee.
   (c)   Notice and hearing. The tax collector shall deliver notice to such
licensee of cancellation or revocation of the transaction privilege and use tax
license. If the licensee requests a hearing within twenty (20) days of receipt
of such notice, he or she shall be granted a hearing before the tax collector.
   (d)   After cancellation or revocation of a taxpayer's license, the taxpayer
shall not be issued a new license until all reports have been filed; all fees,
taxes, interest, and penalties due have been paid; and he or she is in
compliance with all provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 11219, § 1, 12-9-14, eff. 1-1-15)
Sec. 19-350. Operating without a license.
   It shall be unlawful for any person who is required by this chapter to
obtain a transaction privilege and use tax license to engage in or continue in
business without a license. The tax collector shall assess any delinquencies in
tax, interest, and penalties which may apply against such person upon any
transactions subject to the taxes imposed by this chapter.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 8784, § 5, 12-2-96; Ord. No. 11219, § 1,
12-9-14, eff. 1-1-15)
Sec. 19-360. Recordkeeping requirements.
   (a)   It shall be the duty of every person subject to the tax imposed by
this chapter to keep and preserve suitable records and such other books and
accounts as may be necessary to determine the amount of tax for which he or she
is liable under this chapter. The books and records must contain, at a minimum,
such detail and summary information as may be required by this article; or when
records are maintained within an electronic data processing (EDP) system, the
requirements established by the Arizona department of revenue for privilege tax
filings will be accepted. It shall be the duty of every person to keep and
preserve such books and records for a period equal to the applicable limitation
period for assessment of tax, and all such books and records shall be open for
inspection by the tax collector during any business day.
   (b)   The tax collector may direct, by letter, a specific taxpayer to keep
specific other books, records, and documents. Such letter directive shall
apply:
   (1)   Only for future reporting periods, and
   (2)   Only by express determination of the tax collector that such specific
recordkeeping is necessary due to the inability of the taxing jurisdiction to
conduct an adequate examination of the past activities of the taxpayer, which
inability resulted from inaccurate or inadequate books, records, or
documentation maintained by the taxpayer.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 11219, § 1, 12-9-14, eff. 1-1-15)
Sec. 19-362. Recordkeeping: Income.
   The minimum records required for persons having gross income subject to, or
exempt or excluded from, tax by this chapter must show:
   (a)   The gross income of the taxpayer attributable to any activity
occurring in whole or in part in the city.
   (b)   The gross income taxable under this chapter, divided into categories
as stated in the official city tax return.
   (c)   The gross income subject to Arizona transaction privilege taxes,
divided into categories as stated in the official state tax return.
   (d)   The gross income claimed to be exempt, and with respect to each
activity or transaction so claimed:
   (1)   If the transaction is claimed to be exempt as a sale for resale or as
a sale, rental, lease, or license for use of rental equipment:
   (A)   The city privilege license number and state transaction privilege tax
license number of the customer (or the equivalent city, if applicable, and
state tax numbers of the city and state where the customer resides), and
   (B)   The name, business address, and business activity of the customer, and
   (C)   Evidence sufficient to persuade a reasonably prudent businessman that
the transaction is believed to be in good faith a purchase for resale, or a
purchase, rental, lease, or license for use of rental equipment, by the vendee
in the ordinary and regular course of his business activity, as provided by
regulation.
   (2)   If the transaction is claimed to be exempt for any other reason:
   (A)   The name, business address, and business activity of the customer, and
   (B)   Evidence which would establish the applicability of the exemption to a
reasonably prudent businessman acting in good faith. Ordinary business
documentation which would reasonably indicate the applicability of an exemption
shall be sufficient to relieve the person on whom the tax would otherwise be
imposed from liability therein, if he or she acts in good faith as provided by
regulation.
   (e)   With respect to those allowed deductions or exclusions for tax
collected or charges for delivery or other direct customer services, where
applicable, evidence that the deductible income has been separately stated and
shown on the records of the taxpayer and on invoices or receipts provided to
the customer. All other deductions, exemptions, and exclusions shall be
separately shown and substantiated.
   (f)   With respect to special classes and activities, such other books,
records, and documentation as the tax collector, by regulation, shall deem
necessary for specific classes of taxpayer by reason of the specialized
business activity of any such class.
   (g)   In all cases, the books and records of the taxpayer shall indicate
both individual transaction amounts and totals for each reporting period for
each category of taxable, exempt, and excluded income defined by this chapter.
(Ord. No. 11219, § 1, 12-9-14, eff. 1-1-15)
Sec. 19-364. Recordkeeping: Expenditures.
   The minimum records required for persons having expenditures, costs,
purchases and rental or lease or license expenses subject to, or exempt or
excluded from, tax by this chapter are:
   (a)   The total price of all goods acquired for use or storage in the city.
   (b)   The date of acquisition and the name and business address of the
seller or lessor of all goods acquired for use or storage in the city.
   (c)   Documentation of taxes, freight, and direct customer service labor
separately charged and paid for each purchase, rental, lease, or license.
   (d)   The gross price of each acquisition claimed as exempt from tax, and
with respect to each transaction so claimed, sufficient evidence to satisfy the
tax collector that the exemption claimed is applicable.
   (e)   As applicable to each taxpayer, documentation sufficient to the tax
collector, so that he or she may ascertain:
   (1)   All construction expenditures and all privilege and use taxes claimed
paid, relating to owner-builders and speculative builders.
   (2)   Disbursement of collected gratuities and related payroll information
required of restaurants.
   (3)   (Reserved).
   (4)   The validity of any claims of proof of exemption.
   (5)   A claimed alternative prior value for reconstruction.
   (6)   All claimed exemptions to the use tax imposed by Article VI of this
chapter.
   (7)   (Reserved).
   (8)   Payments of tax to the Arizona department of transportation and
computations therefor, when a motor-vehicle transporter claims such the
exemption.
   (9)   (Reserved).
   (f)   Any additional documentation as the tax collector, by regulation,
shall deem necessary for any specific class of taxpayer by reason of the
specialized business activity of specific exemptions afforded to that class of
taxpayer.
   (g)   In all cases, the books and records of the taxpayer shall indicate
both individual transaction amounts and totals for each reporting period for
each category of taxable, exempt, and excluded expenditures as defined by this
chapter.
(Ord. No. 11219, § 1, 12-9-14, eff. 1-1-15)
Sec. 19-366. Recordkeeping: Out-of-city and out-of-state sales.
   (a)   Out-of-city sales. Any person engaging or continuing in a business who
claims out-of-city sales shall maintain and keep accounting records or books
indicating separately the gross income from the sales of tangible personal
property from such out-of-city branches or locations.
   (b)   Out-of-state sales. Persons engaged in a business claiming out-of-
state sales shall maintain accounting records or books indicating for each out-
of-state sale the following documentation:
   (1)   Documentation of location of the buyer at the time of order placement;
and
   (2)   Shipping, delivery, or freight documents showing where the buyer took
delivery; and
   (3)   Documentation of intended location of use or storage of the tangible
personal property sold to such buyer.
(Ord. No. 11219, § 1, 12-9-14, eff. 1-1-15)
Sec. 19-370. Recordkeeping: Claim of exclusion, exemption, deduction, or
credit; documentation; liability.
   (a)   All deductions, exclusions, exemptions and credits provided in this
chapter are conditional upon adequate proof and documentation of such as may be
required under A.R.S. § 42-5022 or by this chapter or regulation.
   (b)   Any person who claims and receives an exemption, deduction, exclusion,
or credit to which he is not entitled under this chapter, shall be subject to,
liable for, and pay the tax on the transaction as if the vendor subject to the
tax had passed the burden of the payment of the tax to the person wrongfully
claiming the exemption. A person who wrongfully claimed such exemption shall be
treated as if he or she is delinquent in the payment of the tax and shall be
subject to interest and penalties upon such delinquency. However, if the tax is
collected from the vendor on such transaction it shall not again be collected
from the person claiming the exemption, or if collected from the person
claiming the exemption it shall not also be collected from the vendor.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 11219, § 1, 12-9-14, eff. 1-1-15)
Sec. 19-372. Proof of exemption: sale for resale; sale, rental, lease, or
license of rental equipment.
   A claim of purchase for resale or of purchase, rental, lease, or license for
rent, lease, or license is valid only if the evidence is sufficient to persuade
a reasonably prudent businessman that the particular item is being acquired for
resale or for rental, lease, or license in the ordinary course of business. The
fact that the acquiring person possesses a privilege license number, and makes
a verbal claim of "sale for resale or lease" or "lease for re-lease" does not
meet this burden and is insufficient to justify an exemption. The "reasonable
evidence" must be evidence which exists objectively, and not merely in the mind
of the vendor, that the property being acquired is normally sold, rented,
leased, or licensed by the acquiring person in the ordinary course of business.
Failure to obtain such reasonable evidence at the time of the transaction will
be a basis for disallowance of any claimed deduction on returns filed for such
transactions.
(Ord. No. 11219, § 1, 12-9-14, eff. 1-1-15)
Sec. 19-380. Inadequate or unsuitable records.
   In the event the records provided by the taxpayer are considered by the tax
collector to be inadequate or unsuitable to determine the amount of the tax for
which such taxpayer is liable under the provisions of this chapter, it is the
responsibility of the taxpayer either:
   (a)   To provide such other records required by this chapter or regulation;
or
   (b)   To correct or to reconstruct his or her records, to the satisfaction
of the tax collector.
(Ord. No. 11219, § 1, 12-9-14, eff. 1-1-15)
DIVISION 4.
PRIVILEGE TAXES
   Editor’s note – Ordinance No. 11518 put into effect tax increases required
by Proposition 203; however, they have no legal effect unless approved by the
Arizona Model City Tax Code Commission. Code sections affected are: 19-410(d),
19-415(d), 19-416(d), 19-417(d), 19-425(c), 19-427(e), 19-430(a), 19-432(d),
19-432(d), 19-435(g), 19-445(t), 19-450(d), 19-455(g), 19-460(i), 19-470(h),
19-475(d), 19-480(l), and 19-610(g).
Sec. 19-400. Imposition of privilege taxes; presumption.
   (a)   Taxes Levied. There are hereby levied and imposed, subject to all
other provisions of this article, the following privilege taxes for the purpose
of raising revenue to be used in defraying the necessary expenses of the city,
such taxes to be collected by the tax collector:
   (1)   A privilege tax upon persons on account of their business activities,
to the extent provided elsewhere in this division, to be measured by the gross
income of persons, whether derived from residents of the city or not, or
whether derived from within the city or from without.
   (2)   Reserved.
   (b)   Taxes Imposed by this Article are in Addition to Others. Except as
specifically designated elsewhere in this article, each of the taxes imposed by
this article shall be in addition to all other licenses, fees and taxes levied
by law, including other taxes imposed by this article.
   (c)   Presumption. For the purpose of proper administration of this article
and to prevent evasion of the taxes imposed by this article, it shall be
presumed that all gross income is subject to the tax until the contrary is
established by the taxpayer.
   (d)   Limitation of Exemptions, Deductions and Credits Allowed Against the
Measure of Taxes Imposed by this Article. All exemptions, deductions and
credits set forth in this article shall be limited to the specific activity or
transaction described and not extended to include any other activity or
transaction subject to the tax.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87)
Sec. 19-405. Advertising. (Regs. 405.1, 405.2)
   (a)   The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to zero percent (0%) of the
gross income from the business activity upon every person engaging or
continuing in the business of "local advertising" by billboards, direct mail,
radio, television, or by any other means. However, commission and fees retained
by an advertising agency shall not be includable in gross income from "local
advertising". All delivery or disseminating of information directly to the
public or any portion thereof for a consideration shall be considered "local
advertising", except the following:
   (1)   The advertising of a product or service which is sold or provided both
within and without the state by more than one "commonly designated business
entity" within the state, and in which the advertisement names either no
"commonly designated business entity" within the state or more than one
"commonly designated business entity". "Commonly designated business entity"
means any person selling or providing any product or service to its customers
under a common business name or style, even though there may be more than one
(1) legal entity conducting business functions using the same or substantially
the same business name or style by virtue of a franchise, license, or similar
agreement.
   (2)   Advertising of a facility or of a service or activity in which neither
the facility nor a business site carrying on such service or activity is
located within the state.
   (3)   The advertising of a product which may only be purchased from an out-
of-state supplier.
   (4)   Political advertising for United States Presidential and Vice
Presidential candidates only.
   (5)   Advertising by means of product purchase coupons redeemable at any
retail establishment carrying such product but not product coupons redeemable
only at a single commonly designated business entity.
   (6)   Advertising transportation services where a substantial portion of the
transportation activity of the business entity advertised involves interstate
or foreign carriage.
   (b)   Reserved.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 7436, § 1, 6-18-90; Ord. No. 10949, § 3,
12-13-11)
Sec. 19-407. Reserved.
(Ord. No. 6938, § 8, 4-25-88)
Sec. 19-410. Amusements, exhibitions, and similar activities.
   (a)   The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to two and six-tenths (2.6)
percent of the gross income from the business activity upon every person
engaging or continuing in the business of providing amusement that begins in
the city or takes place entirely within the city, which includes the following
type or nature of businesses:
   (1)   Operating or conducting theaters, movies, operas, shows of any type or
nature, exhibitions, concerts, carnivals, circuses, amusement parks,
menageries, fairs, races, contests, games, billiard or pool parlors, bowling
alleys, skating rinks, tennis courts, golf courses, video games, pinball
machines, public dances, dancehalls, sports events, jukeboxes, batting and
driving ranges, animal rides, or any other business charging admission for
exhibition, amusement, or entertainment.
   (2)   Health spas, fitness centers, dance studios, or other persons who
charge for the use of premises for sports, athletic, other health-related
activities or instruction, whether on a per-event use, or for long-term usage,
such as membership fees.
   (b)   Deductions or exemptions. The gross proceeds of sales or gross income
derived from the following sources is exempt from the tax imposed by this
section:
   (1)   Reserved.
   (2)   Amounts retained by the Arizona Exposition and State Fair Board from
ride ticket sales at the annual Arizona State Fair.
   (3)   Income received from a hotel business subject to tax under section
19-444, if all of the following apply:
      (A)   The hotel business receives gross income from a customer for the
specific business activity otherwise subject to amusement tax.
      (B)   The consideration received by the hotel business is equal to or
greater than the amount to be deducted under this subsection.
      (C)   The hotel business has provided an exemption certificate to the
person engaging in business under this section.
   (4)   Income that is specifically included as the gross income of a business
activity upon which another section of this article imposes a tax, that is
separately stated to the customer and is taxable to the person engaged in that
classification not to exceed consideration paid to the person conducting the
activity.
   (5)   Income from arranging transportation connected to amusement activity
that is separately stated to the customer, not to exceed consideration paid to
the transportation business.
   (6)   Exhibition events in this state sponsored, conducted, or operated by a
nonprofit organization that is exempt from taxation under Section 501(c)(3),
501(c)(4) or 501(c)(6) of the Internal Revenue Code if the organization is
associated with a major league baseball team or a national touring professional
golfing association and no part of the organization's net earnings inures to
the benefit of any private shareholder or individual. This paragraph does not
apply to an organization that is owned, managed or controlled, in whole or in
part, by a major league baseball team, or its owners, officers, employees or
agents, or by a major league baseball association or professional golfing
association, or its owners, officers, employees or agents, unless the
organization conducted or operated exhibition events in this state before
January 1, 2018 that were exempt from state transaction privilege tax under
A.R.S. Section 42-5073.
   (7)   Until March 1, 2017, the gross proceeds of sales or gross income
derived from entry fees paid by participants for events that consist of a run,
walk, swim or bicycle ride or a similar event, or any combination of these
events.
   (8)   The gross proceeds of sales or gross income derived from entry fees
paid by participants for events that are operated or conducted by nonprofit
organizations that are exempt from taxation under Section 501(c)(3) of the
Internal Revenue Code and of which no part of the organization's net earnings
inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual, if the event
consists of a run, walk, swim or bicycle ride or a similar event, or any
combination of these events.
   (9)   Income from separately charged individual instruction. For the
purposes of this paragraph "individual instruction" means exclusive personal
attention of the provider for the entire duration of the separately charged
period of instruction, training, coaching, or similar activity.
   (c)   The tax imposed by this section shall not include arranging an
amusement activity as a service to a person’s customers if that person is not
otherwise engaged in the business of operating or conducting an amusement
themselves or through others. This exception does not apply to businesses that
operate or conduct amusements pursuant to customer orders and send the billings
and receive the payments associated with that activity, including when the
amusement is performed by third party independent contractors. For the purposes
of this paragraph, ‘arranging’ includes billing for or collecting amusement
charges from a person’s customers on behalf of the persons providing the
amusement.
   (d)   Notwithstanding the tax rate identified elsewhere in this section, an
additional tax in an amount equal to one-tenth of one (0.1) percent of the
gross income from any business activity taxable under this section is imposed
pursuant to Chapter IV, Section 5 of the Charter of the City of Tucson.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 8440, § 8, 1-23-95; Ord. No. 10361, § 3,
12-19-06; Ord. No. 10685, § 3, 6-16-09, eff. 7-1-09; Ord. No. 11479, § 1, 8-8-
17; Ord. No. 11485, eff. 8-8-17; Ord. No. 11518, eff. 1-23-18; Ord. No. 11936,
§ 2, 7-12-22)
   Editor’s note – Section 16 of Ord. No. 10361, adopted Dec. 19, 2006,
provides for an effective date on and after Jan. 1, 2007.
   Section 3 of Ord. No. 11936, adopted July 12, 2022, provides for an
effective date of Jan. 1, 2018, for subsection (b)(5); January 1, 2010, for
subsection (b)(6); and August 6, 2016, for subsection (b)(7).
Sec. 19-415. Construction contracting: Construction contractors.
   (a)   Tax rate. The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to two and six-
tenths (2.6) percent of the gross income from the business upon every
construction contractor engaging or continuing in the business activity of
construction contracting within the city.
   (1)   However, gross income from construction contracting shall not include
charges related to groundwater measuring devices required by A.R.S. Section 45-
604.
   (2)   (Reserved).
   (3)   Gross income from construction contracting shall not include gross
income from the sale of manufactured buildings taxable under section
19-427.
   (4)   For taxable periods beginning from and after July 1, 2008, the portion
of gross proceeds of sales or gross income attributable to the actual direct
costs of providing architectural or engineering services that are incorporated
in a contract is not subject to tax under this section. For the purposes of
this subsection, "direct costs" means the portion of the actual costs that are
directly expended in providing architectural or engineering services.
   (5)   Handyman exclusion. This classification does not include gross income
from any work or operation performed by a person that is not required to be
licensed by the registrar of contractors pursuant to A.R.S. Section 32-1121.
   (b)    Deductions and exemptions.
   (1)   Gross income derived from acting as a "subcontractor" shall be exempt
from the tax imposed by this section.
   (2)   All construction contracting gross income subject to the tax and not
deductible herein shall be allowed a deduction of thirty-five (35) percent.
   (3)   The gross proceeds of sales or gross income attributable to the
purchase of machinery, equipment or other tangible personal property that is
exempt from or deductible from privilege or use tax under:
   a.   Section
19-465, subsections (7) and (16);
   b.   Section
19-660, subsections (7) and (16);*
shall be exempt or deductible, respectively, from the tax imposed by this
section.
   (4)   The gross proceeds of sales or gross income that is derived from a
contract entered into for the installation, assembly, repair or maintenance of
income-producing capital equipment, as defined in section
19-110, that is deducted from the retail classification pursuant to section
19-465(7) that does not become a permanent attachment to a building, highway,
road, railroad, excavation or manufactured building or other structure,
project, development or improvement shall be exempt from the tax imposed by
this section. If the ownership of the realty is separate from the ownership of
the income-producing capital equipment, the determination as to permanent
attachment shall be made as if the ownership was the same. The deduction
provided in this paragraph does not include gross proceeds of sales or gross
income from that portion of any contracting activity which consists of the
development of, or modification to, real property in order to facilitate the
installation, assembly, repair, maintenance or removal of the income-producing
capital equipment. For purposes of this paragraph, "permanent attachment" means
at least one (1) of the following:
   a.   To be incorporated into real property.
   b.   To become so affixed to real property that it becomes part of the real
property.
   c.   To be so attached to real property that removal would cause substantial
damage to the real property from which it is removed.
   (5)   The gross proceeds of sales or gross income received from a contract
for the construction of an environmentally controlled facility for the raising
of poultry for the production of eggs and the sorting, or cooling and packaging
of eggs shall be exempt from the tax imposed under this section.
   (6)   The gross proceeds of sales or gross income that is derived from the
installation, assembly, repair or maintenance of cleanrooms that are deducted
from the tax base of the retail classification pursuant to section
19-465, subsection (7) shall be exempt from the tax imposed under this section.
   (7)   The gross proceeds of sales or gross income that is derived from a
contract entered into with a person who is engaged in the commercial production
of livestock, livestock products or agricultural, horticultural, viticultural
or floricultural crops or products in this state for the construction,
alteration, repair, improvement, movement, wrecking or demolition or addition
to or subtraction from any building, highway, road, excavation, manufactured
building or other structure, project, development or improvement used directly
and primarily to prevent, monitor, control or reduce air, water or land
pollution shall be exempt from the tax imposed under this section.
   (8)   The gross proceeds of sales or gross income received from a post
construction contract to perform post-construction treatment of real property
for termite and general pest control, including wood destroying organisms,
shall be exempt from tax imposed under this section.
   (9)   Through December 31, 2009, the gross proceeds of sales or gross income
received from a contract for constructing any lake facility development in a
commercial enhancement reuse district that is designated pursuant to A.R.S.
Section 9-499.08 if the contractor maintains the following records in a form
satisfactory to the Arizona Department of Revenue and to the city:
   (A)   The certificate of qualification of the lake facility development
issued by the city pursuant to A.R.S. Section 9-499.08, Subsection d.
   (B)   All state and local transaction privilege tax returns for the period
of time during which the contractor received gross proceeds of sales or gross
income from a contract to construct a lake facility development in a designated
commercial enhancement reuse district, showing the amount exempted from state
and local taxation.
   (C)   Any other information considered to be necessary.
   (10)   Any amount attributable to development fees that are incurred in
relation to the construction, development or improvement of real property and
paid by the taxpayer as defined in the model city tax code or by a contractor
providing services to the taxpayer. For the purposes of this paragraph:
      (A)   The attributable amount shall not exceed the value of the
development fees actually imposed.
      (B)   The attributable amount is equal to the total amount of development
fees paid by the taxpayer or by a contractor providing services to the taxpayer
and the total development fees credited in exchange for the construction of,
contribution to or dedication of real property for providing public
infrastructure, public safety or other public services necessary to the
development. The real property must be the subject of the development fees.
      (C)   “Development fees” means fees imposed to offset capital costs of
providing public infrastructure, public safety or other public services to a
development and authorized pursuant to A.R.S. section 9-463.05, A.R.S. section
11-1102 or A.R.S. title 48 regardless of the jurisdiction to which the fees are
paid.
   (11)   For taxable periods beginning from and after July 1, 2008, and ending
before January 1, 2017, the gross proceeds of sales or gross income derived
from a contract to provide and install a solar energy device. The contractor
shall register with the Arizona Department of Revenue as a solar energy
contractor. By registering, the contractor acknowledges that it will make its
books and records relating to sales of solar energy devices available to the
Department of Revenue and the city, as applicable, for examination.
   (12)   The gross proceeds of sales or gross income derived from a contract
with the owner of real property or improvements to real property for the
maintenance, repair, replacement, or alteration of existing property is not
subject to tax under this section if the contract does not include modification
activities, except as specified in this paragraph. The gross proceeds of sales
or gross income derived from a de minimis amount of modification activity does
not subject the contract or any part of the contract to tax under this section.
for the purposes of this paragraph:
      a.   Any term not defined in this paragraph that is defined in A.R.S.
Section 42-5075 has the same meaning prescribed in A.R.S. Section 42-5075.
      b.   Tangible personal property that is incorporated or fabricated into a
project described in this subsection may be subject to the amount prescribed in
section
19-415.1.
      c.   Each contract is independent of any other contract, except that any
change order that directly relates to the scope of work of the original
contract shall be treated the same as the original contract under this Article,
regardless of the amount of modification activities included in the change
order. If a change order does not directly relate to the scope of work of the
original contract, the change order shall be treated as a new contract, with
the tax treatment of any subsequent change order to follow the tax treatment of
the contract to which the scope of work of the subsequent change order directly
relates.
      d.   This paragraph does not apply to a contract that primarily involves
surface or subsurface improvements to land and that is subject to A.R.S. Title
28, Chapter 19, 20 or 22 or A.R.S. Title 34, Chapter 2 or 6 even if the
contract also includes vertical improvements. If a city or town imposes a tax
on contracts that are subject to procurement processes under those provisions,
the city or town shall include in the request for proposals a notice to bidders
when those projects are subject to the tax. This subdivision does not apply to
contracts with:
         1.   Community facilities districts, fire districts, county television
improvement districts, community park maintenance districts, cotton pest
control districts, hospital districts, pest abatement districts, health service
districts, agricultural improvement districts, county free library districts,
county jail districts, county stadium districts, special health care districts,
public health services districts, theme park districts, regional attraction
districts or revitalization districts.
         2.   Any special taxing district not specified in item 1 of this
subdivision if the district does not substantially engage in the modification,
maintenance, repair, replacement, or alteration of surface or subsurface
improvements to land.
   (13)   The gross proceeds of sales or gross income derived from a contract
entered into for the construction of a mixed waste processing facility that is
located on a municipal solid waste landfill and that is constructed for the
purpose of recycling solid waste or producing renewable energy from landfill
waste. For the purposes of this paragraph:
      a.   "Mixed waste processing facility" means a solid waste facility that
is owned, operated, or used for the treatment, processing or disposal of solid
waste, recyclable solid waste, conditionally exempt small quantity generator
waste or household hazardous waste. For the purposes of this subdivision,
"conditionally exempt small quantity generator waste", "household hazardous
waste" and "solid waste facility" have the same meanings prescribed in A.R.S.
Section 49-701, except that solid waste facility does include a site that
stores, treats, or processes paper, glass, wood, cardboard, household textiles,
scrap metal, plastic, vegetative waste, aluminum, steel or other recyclable
material.
      b.   "Municipal solid waste landfill" has the same meaning prescribed in
A.R.S. Section 49-701.
      c.   "Recycling" means collecting, separating, cleansing, treating, and
reconstituting recyclable solid waste that would otherwise become solid waste,
but does not include incineration or other similar processes.
      d.   "Renewable energy" has the same meaning prescribed in A.R.S. Section
41-1511.
   (c)   Subcontractor means a construction contractor performing work for
either:
   (1)   A construction contractor who has provided the subcontractor with a
written declaration that he is liable for the tax for the project and has
provided the subcontractor his city privilege license number.
   (2)   An owner-builder who has provided the subcontractor with a written
declaration that:
   a.   The owner-builder is improving the property for sale; and
   b.   The owner-builder is liable for the tax for such construction
contracting activity; and
   c.   The owner-builder has provided the contractor his city privilege
license number.
   (3)   A person selling new manufactured buildings who has provided the
subcontractor with a written declaration that he is liable for the tax for the
site preparation and set-up; and provided the subcontractor his city privilege
license number.
"Subcontractor" also includes a construction contractor performing work for
another subcontractor as defined above.
   (d)   Notwithstanding the tax rate identified elsewhere in this section, an
additional tax in an amount equal to one-tenth of one (0.1) percent of the
gross income from any business activity taxable under this section is imposed
pursuant to Chapter IV, Section 5 of the Charter of the City of Tucson.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 7446, § 2.4, 7-2-90; Ord. No. 8440, § 9,
1-23-95; Ord. No. 9322, § 2, 11-22-99; Ord. No. 9652, § 1, 1-14-02; Ord. No.
10040, § 2, 9-20-04; Ord. No. 10361, § 4, 12-19-06; Ord. No. 10524, § 2, 5-13-
08, eff. 7-1-08; Ord. No. 10754, § 1, 1-20-10, eff. 9-1-06; Ord. No. 10911, §
2, 8-9-11, eff. 7-29-10; Ord. No. 11479, § 1, 8-8-17; Ord. No. 11485, eff. 8-8-
17; Ord. No. 11518, eff. 1-23-18; Ord. No. 11936, § 4, 7-12-22)
   Editor’s note – Section 4 of Ord. No. 11936, adopted July 12, 2022, provides
for an effective date of Jan. 1, 2015.
Sec. 19-415.1.   Liability for MRRA amounts equal to retail transaction
privilege tax due.
   (a)   A person that is either a prime contractor subject to tax under
section
19-415 or a subcontractor working under the control of such a prime contractor,
that purchases tangible personal property, the purchase price of which was
excluded from the tax base under the retail classification under section
19-465(11) or was excluded from the use tax under section
19-660(11) at the time of purchase, and that incorporates or fabricates the
tangible personal property into a project described in section
19-415(b)(12) and A.R.S. Section 42-5075, subsection O is liable for an amount
equal to any tax that a seller would have been required to pay under Section
19-460 and A.R.S. Title 42, Chapter 5 as follows:
   1.   The amount of liability shall be calculated and reported based on the
location of the project and the taxes imposed under Section
19-460 and A.R.S. Title 42, Chapter 5.
   2.   All deductions, exemptions, and exclusions for the cost of tangible
personal property provided in section
19-415 apply to the tangible personal property incorporated or fabricated into
the project.
   3.   This subsection does not apply to tangible personal property that is
incorporated or fabricated into any project under a contract that would
otherwise be excluded from the tax base under section
19-415, without regard to section
19-415(b)(12).
   4.   The amount of liability shall be reported within the reporting period
that includes the month in which the person incorporates or fabricates the
tangible personal property into the project.
   5.   The person is not liable for the amount if the contractor who hired the
person executes and provides to the person a certificate stating that the
contractor providing the certificate is liable for any amount due under this
subsection. The Department of Revenue shall prescribe the form of the
certificate. If the person has reason to believe that the information contained
on the certificate is erroneous or incomplete, the city may disregard the
certificate. The contractor providing the certificate is liable for the amount
that otherwise would be due from the person under this subsection.
   (b)   A person that purchased tangible personal property, the purchase price
of which was excluded from the tax base under section
19-465(k) or was excluded from the use tax under section 19-660(k) at the time
of purchase, whose transaction privilege tax license has been canceled and that
subsequently uses, consumes, sells or discards the tangible personal property
is liable for an amount of tax determined under this subsection. For the
purposes of this subsection:
   1.   If the tangible personal property is incorporated or fabricated into a
project described in section
19-415(b)(12) and A.R.S. section 42-5075, subsection O, or otherwise used or
consumed by the person, the amount of liability shall be calculated and
reported based on the person's purchase price of the tangible personal
property, the location of the project, use or consumption and the taxes imposed
under section 19-460 and A.R.S. Title 42, Chapter 5.
   2.   If the tangible personal property is sold in a manner that is not
subject to tax under this article or is discarded, the amount shall be
calculated and reported based on the payment received by the person, the
location of the person's principal place of business in this state and the
taxes imposed under section
19-460 and A.R.S. Title 42, Chapter 5.
   3.   The person is not liable under this subsection for any amount if the
person discards the tangible personal property and does not receive payment of
any kind.
   4.   The amount of liability shall be reported on or before the business day
preceding the last business day of the month following the month in which the
person uses the tangible personal property in a manner described in paragraph 1
or 2 of this subsection. No amount is due under this subsection at any time
that the person stores the tangible personal property without using it in a
manner described in paragraph 1 or 2 of this subsection.
   5.   All deductions, exemptions, and exclusions for the cost of tangible
personal property provided in section
19-415 apply to the tangible personal property incorporated or fabricated into
a project described in section
19-415(b)(12) and A.R.S. Section 42-5075, subsection O.
   6.   This subsection does not apply to tangible personal property that is
incorporated or fabricated into any project under a contract that would
otherwise be excluded from the tax base under section
19-415 and A.R.S. Section 42-5075, without regard to section
19-415(B)(12) and A.R.S. Section 42-5075, subsection O.
   7.   The person is not liable for the amount if the contractor who hired the
person executes and provides to the person a certificate stating that the
contractor providing the certificate is liable for any amount due under this
subsection for tangible personal property incorporated or fabricated into a
project described in A.R.S. Section 42-5075, subsection O. The Department shall
prescribe the form of the certificate. If the person has reason to believe that
the information contained on the certificate is erroneous or incomplete, the
Department may disregard the certificate. The contractor providing the
certificate is liable for the amount that otherwise would be due from the
person under this subsection.
   (c)   A person that fails to report or pay any amount due under subsection a
or b of this section is liable for interest in a manner consistent with A.R.S.
Section 42-1123 and penalties in a manner consistent with A.R.S. Section 42-
1125.
   (d)   If a person has paid an amount described in this section on tangible
personal property that the person reasonably believed to be described under
section
19-415(B)(12) A.R.S. Section 42-5075, subsection O and a final determination is
made that section
19-415(B)(12) and A.R.S. Section 42-5075, subsection O does not apply, the
person is entitled to an offset for the amount paid under this section against
the amount of tax liability assessed under this article.
(Ord. No. 11936, § 5, 7-12-22)
   Editor’s note – Section 5 of Ord. No. 11936, adopted July 12, 2022, provides
for an effective date of Jan. 1, 2015.
Sec. 19-416. Construction contracting: Speculative builders. (Regs. 416.1,
416.2)
   (a)   Tax rate. The tax shall be equal to two and six-tenths (2.6) percent
of the gross income from the business activity upon every person engaging or
continuing in business as a speculative builder within the city.
   (1)   The gross income of a speculative builder considered taxable shall
include the total selling price from the sale of improved real property at the
time of closing of escrow or transfer of title.
   (2)   “Improved real property” means any real property:
      a.   Upon which a new structure has been substantially completed; or
      b.   Where improvements have been made to land containing no structure
(such as paving or landscaping); or
      c.   Which has been reconstructed as provided by section
19-416.2; or
      d.   Where water, power, and streets have been constructed to the
property line.
   For the purpose of paragraph a, once a structure has been deemed
"substantially complete" subsequent improvements to the structure shall not be
considered for the purpose of determining the date on which a sale transaction
would be taxable under this section.
   (3)   “Sale of improved real property” includes any form of transaction,
whether characterized as a lease or otherwise, which in substance is a transfer
of title of, or equitable ownership in, improved real property and includes any
lease of the property for a term of thirty (30) years or more (with all options
for renewal being included as a part of the term). In the case of multiple unit
projects, “sale” refers to the sale of the entire project or to the sale of any
individual parcel or unit.
   (4)   "Partially improved real property", as used in this section, means any
improved real property, as defined in subsection (a)(2) above, being developed
for sale, where the improvement to such property is not substantially complete
at the time of the sale.
   (b)   Exclusions.
   (1)   In cases involving reconstruction contracting, the speculative builder
may exclude from gross income the prior value allowed for reconstruction
contracting in determining his taxable gross income, as provided by section
19-416.2.
   (2)   Neither the cost nor the fair market value of the land which
constitutes part of the improved real property sold may be excluded or deducted
from gross income subject to the tax imposed by this section.
   (3)   Reserved.
   (4)   A speculative builder may exclude gross income from the sale of
partially improved real property as defined in (a)(4) above to another
speculative builder only if all of the following conditions are satisfied:
      a.   The speculative builder purchasing the partially improved real
property has a valid municipal privilege tax license for construction
contracting as a speculative builder; and
      b.   At the time of the transaction, the purchaser provides the seller
with a properly completed written declaration that the purchaser assumes
liability for and will pay all privilege taxes which would otherwise be due the
city at the time of sale of the partially improved real property; and
      c.   The seller also:
         1.   Maintains proper records of such transactions in a manner similar
to the requirements provided in this chapter relating to sales for resale; and
         2.   Retains a copy of the written declaration provided by the buyer
for the transaction; and
         3.   Is properly licensed with the city as a speculative builder.
   (5)   For taxable periods beginning from and after July 1, 2008, the portion
of gross proceeds of sales or gross income attributable to the actual direct
costs of providing architectural or engineering services that are incorporated
in a contract is not subject to tax under this section. For the purposes of
this subsection, “direct costs” means the portion of the actual costs that are
directly expended in providing architectural or engineering services.
   (c)   Occurrence of liability. Tax liability for speculative builders occurs
at close of escrow or transfer of title, whichever occurs earlier, and is
subject to the following provisions, relating to exemptions, deductions and tax
credits:
   (1)   Exemptions.
      a.   The gross proceeds of sales or gross income attributable to the
purchase of machinery, equipment or other tangible personal property that is
exempt from or deductible from privilege or use tax under:
         1.   Section
19-465, subsections (7) and (16).
         2.   Section
19-660, subsections (7) and (16).*
         shall be exempt or deductible, respectively, from the tax imposed by
this section.
      b.   The gross proceeds of sales or gross income received from a contract
for the construction of an environmentally controlled facility for the raising
of poultry for the production of eggs and the sorting, or cooling and packaging
of eggs shall be exempt from the tax imposed under this section.
      c.   The gross proceeds of sales or gross income that is derived from the
installation, assembly, repair or maintenance of cleanrooms that are deducted
from the tax base of the retail classification pursuant to section 19-465,
subsection (7) shall be exempt from the tax imposed under this section.
      d.   The gross proceeds of sales or gross income that is derived from a
contract entered into with a person who is engaged in the commercial production
of livestock, livestock products or agricultural, horticultural, viticultural
or floricultural crops or products in this state for the construction,
alteration, repair, improvement, movement, wrecking or demolition or addition
to or subtraction from any building, highway, road, excavation, manufactured
building or other structure, project, development or improvement used directly
and primarily to prevent, monitor, control or reduce air, water or land
pollution shall be exempt from the tax imposed under this section.
      e.   Any amount attributable to development fees that are incurred in
relation to the construction, development or improvement of real property and
paid by the taxpayer as defined in the model city tax code or by a contractor
providing services to the taxpayer shall be exempt from the tax imposed under
this section. For the purposes of this paragraph:
         1.   The attributable amount shall not exceed the value of the
development fees actually imposed.
         2.   The attributable amount is equal to the total amount of
development fees paid by the taxpayer or by a contractor providing services to
the taxpayer and the total development fees credited in exchange for the
construction of, contribution to or dedication of real property for providing
public infrastructure, public safety or other public services necessary to the
development. The real property must be the subject of the development fees.
         3.   “Development fees” means fees imposed to offset capital costs of
providing public infrastructure, public safety or other public services to a
development and authorized pursuant to A.R.S. section 9-463.05, A.R.S. section
11-1102 or A.R.S. title 48 regardless of the jurisdiction to which the fees are
paid.
      f.   The gross proceeds of sales or gross income that is derived from the
value of existing tenant leases in place at the time of the sale shall be
exempt from tax imposed under this section. The value of the in-place leases
shall be determined as of the close of escrow or transfer of title as follows:
         1.   For a residential lease the value of the in-place lease is the
total value of all expected lease receipts through the end of the current lease
term multiplied by a factor of 1.5. Expected lease receipts includes non-
refundable deposits and excludes all refundable deposits regardless of whether
the refundable deposit may be forfeited.
         2.   For a commercial lease the value of the in-place lease is the
present value of the expected lease receipts through the end of the current
lease term or first option of either party to terminate the lease, whichever is
less. The discount rate used to calculate the present value shall be the 100%
Mid-term Applicable Federal Rate published by the Internal Revenue Service
associated with the payment terms of the lease related to the month preceding
the close of escrow plus three (3) percentage points.
         A transaction, whether characterized as a lease or otherwise, which in
substance is a transfer of title of or equitable ownership in improved real
property, including any lease of the property for a term of thirty (30) years
or more (with all options for renewal being included as a part of the term) is
deemed to be a sale of improved real property pursuant to subsection (a)(3) of
this section and is not considered an in-place lease.
   (2)   Deductions.
      a.   All state and county taxes associated with the project and reported
and paid to the Department of Revenue by a contractor constructing the
improvements on the property shall be deducted from the selling price.
      b.   All amounts subject to the tax shall be allowed a deduction in the
amount of thirty-five (35) percent.
      c.   The gross proceeds of sales or gross income that is derived from a
contract entered into for the installation, assembly, repair or maintenance of
income-producing capital equipment, as defined in section
19-110, that is deducted from the retail classification pursuant to section
19-465(7), that does not become a permanent attachment to a building, highway,
road, railroad, excavation or manufactured building or other structure,
project, development or improvement shall be exempt from the tax imposed by
this section. If the ownership of the realty is separate from the ownership of
the income- producing capital equipment, the determination as to permanent
attachment shall be made as if the ownership was the same. The deduction
provided in this paragraph does not include gross proceeds of sales or gross
income from that portion of any contracting activity which consists of the
development of, or modification to, real property in order to facilitate the
installation, assembly, repair, maintenance or removal of the income- producing
capital equipment. For purposes of this paragraph, “permanent attachment” means
at least one (1) of the following:
         1.   To be incorporated into real property.
         2.   To become so affixed to real property that it becomes part of the
real property.
         3.   To be so attached to real property that removal would cause
substantial damage to the real property from which it is removed.
      d.   For taxable periods beginning from and after July 1, 2008, and
ending before January 1, 2017, the gross proceeds of sales or gross income
derived from a contract to provide and install a solar energy device. The
contractor shall register with the Department of Revenue as a solar energy
contractor. By registering, the contractor acknowledges that it will make its
books and records relating to sales of solar energy devices available to the
Department of Revenue and the city, as applicable, for examination.
   (3)   Tax credits. The following tax credits are available to owner-builders
or speculative builders, not to exceed the tax liability against which such
credits apply, provided such credits are documented to the satisfaction of the
tax collector:
      a.   A tax credit equal to the amount of city privilege or use tax, or
the equivalent excise tax, paid directly to a taxing jurisdiction or as a
separately itemized charge paid directly to the vendor with respect to the
tangible personal property incorporated into the said structure or improvement
to real property undertaken by the owner-builder or speculative builder.
      b.   A tax credit equal to the amount of privilege taxes paid to this
city, or charged separately to the speculative builder, by a construction
contractor, on the gross income derived by said person from the construction of
any improvement to the real property.
      c.   A tax credit equal to the amount of privilege taxes paid to this
city by any speculative builder on the gross income derived by said person from
the sale of improved real property pursuant to subsections (a)(2)(B) or (a)(2)
(D) of this section against the gross income of any speculative builder from
the sale of improved real property pursuant to subsection (a)(2)(A).
      d.   No credits provided herein may be claimed until such time that the
gross income against which said credits apply is reported.
   (d)   Notwithstanding the tax rate identified elsewhere in this section, an
additional tax in an amount equal to one-tenth of one (0.1) percent of the
gross income from any business activity taxable under this section is imposed
pursuant to
Chapter IV, Section 5 of the Charter of the City of Tucson.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 6938, § 9, 4-25-88; Ord. No. 7446, §
2.6, 7-2-90; Ord. No. 9322, § 3, 11-22-99; Ord. No. 9652, § 2, 1-14-02; Ord.
No. 10040, § 1, 9-20-04; Ord. No. 10361, § 5, 12-19-06; Ord. No. 10524, § 3, 5-
13-08, eff. 7-1-08; Ord. No. 10754, § 2, 1-20-10, eff. 9-1-06; Ord. No. 10911,
§ 3, 8-9-11, eff. 7-29-10; Ord. No. 11479, § 1, 8-8-17; Ord. No. 11485, eff. 8-
8-17; Ord. No. 11518, eff. 1-23-18; Ord. No. 11936, § 6, 7-12-22)
   Editor’s note – Section 6 of Ord. No. 11936, adopted July 12, 2022, provides
for an effective date of April 1, 2019.
Sec. 19-416.1.   Speculative builders: homeowner's bona fide non-business sale
of a family residence.
   (a)   A sale of a home, regardless of the stage of completion of such home
shall be considered a "homeowner's bona fide non-business sale" and not subject
to the tax on speculative builders if:
   (1)   The property was actually used as the principal place of family
residence or vacation residence by the immediate family of the seller for the
six (6) months next prior to the offer for sale; and
   (2)   The seller has not sold more than two (2) such residences (or, if the
residence is a vacation residence, two (2) such vacation residences) within the
thirty-six (36) months immediately prior to the offer for sale; and
   (3)   The seller has not licensed, leased, or rented the sold premises for
any period within twenty-four (24) months prior to the offer for sale.
   (b)   In the event that a homeowner of a family residence contracts with a
licensed construction contractor for improvements to a residence, the
construction contracting on a family residence shall be presumed to be for an
owner's bona fide non-business purpose and all construction contractors shall
be required to report and pay the tax imposed on all such improvements.
   (c)   Purchases by a homeowner of tangible personal property for inclusion
in any construction, alteration, or repair of his residence shall be subject to
tax as retail sales to the ultimate consumer.
   (d)   "Owner", "homeowner", and "seller" as used in this section shall only
mean an individual or qualified trust, and no other entity, association, or
representative shall qualify; except that an administrator, executor, personal
representative, or guardian in guardianship or probate proceedings, for the
estate of a deceased or incompetent person or a minor, may claim "homeowner"
status for such person if such person would have otherwise qualified with
respect to the specific property involved.
   (e)   "Qualified trust" as used in this section means any legal trust where
a beneficiary of the trust is an individual that has been the resident of the
property and that individual meets the criteria listed in subsection (a) of
this section.
(Ord. No. 11936, § 7, 7-12-22)
   Editor’s note – Section 7 of Ord. No. 11936, adopted July 12, 2022, provides
for an effective date from and after April 1, 2019.
Sec. 19-416.2.   Reconstruction contracting.
   (a)   "Reconstruction (of real property)" shall mean the subdividing of real
property and, in addition, all construction contracting activities performed
upon said real property; provided, however, that each of the following
conditions are met:
   (1)   A structure existed on said real property prior to the reconstruction
activity; and
   (2)   The "prior value" of said structure exceeds fifteen percent (15%) of
the "prior value" of the integrated property (land, improvements, and
structure); and
   (3)   The total cost of all construction contracting activities performed on
said real property in the twenty-four (24) month period prior to the sale of
any part of the real property exceeds fifteen percent (15%) of the "prior
value" of the real property; and
   (4)   The structure which existed on the real property prior to the
reconstruction activity still exists in some form upon the property, and is
included, in whole or in part, in the property sold.
   (b)   Except as provided in subsection (c) below, "prior value" means the
value of the total integrated property, with improvements, as existing
immediately prior to any reconstruction activity. Where, according to Title 42
of the Arizona Revised Statutes, a property's full cash value for secondary tax
purposes is intended to represent the property's fair market value, "prior
value" shall be the property's full cash value for secondary property tax
purposes as determined by the County Assessor in the year immediately preceding
the year in which the reconstruction improvement(s) are or could have been
included in the County Assessor's valuation. If the County Assessor's valuation
is contested or appealed, the final determination at either the administrative
or judicial level shall apply. Where, according to Title 42 of the Arizona
Revised Statutes, a property's full cash value for secondary property tax
purposes is not intended to represent the property's fair market value, "prior
value" shall be the property's fair market value prior to the reconstruction
improvement(s).
   (c)   "Alternative prior value" shall mean that as an alternative to the
"prior value" defined above, the taxpayer may use his actual cost of the
reconstructed property prior to reconstruction, provided that evidence of such
cost is presented to the Tax Collector and is determined by the Tax Collector,
in his sole discretion, to be satisfactory. Such evidence shall consist, at a
minimum, of proof of the actual, arms-length acquisition price, accompanied by
a full appraisal of all property involved which appraisal shall have been
performed by a real estate broker or MAI appraiser specifically for the purpose
of assisting in the acquisition and further shall have been performed on behalf
of the seller or a lending institution which has lent at least sixty-five
percent (65%) of the acquisition price. (Only long-term lending, not interim or
construction financing, will be considered.) This alternative value shall be
used only if the property was acquired by the reconstruction taxpayer not more
than thirty-six (36) months prior to a "sale" as defined below.
   (d)   A "sale" for the purpose of determining "alternative prior value" or
"reconstruction" only shall be deemed to have occurred as of the date of the
execution of a contract of sale or a deed (joint tenancy or warranty) whichever
is earlier, to a purchaser or grantee of any single residential or other
occupancy unit. In addition to the foregoing, a lease with option to purchase a
single residential unit shall be considered a "sale" at the date of execution
of such lease if said option is exercisable by the lessee in not later than
nine (9) months. Further in the case of cooperative apartments, the sale date
shall be the date of execution of the contract selling (subject or not to
encumbrances, liens or security interests) of a share, or a sufficient number
of shares which entitle the purchaser to the occupancy of a residential unit.
In all cases a person shall include a husband and wife as a community, or any
co-occupants of a single unit as joint tenants.
(Ord. No. 11936, § 8, 7-12-22)
   Editor’s note – Section 8 of Ord. No. 11936, adopted July 12, 2022, provides
for an effective date from and after April 1, 2019.
Sec. 19-417. Construction contracting: Owner-builders who are not speculative
builders.
   (a)   At the expiration of twenty-four (24) months after improvement to the
property is substantially complete, the tax liability for an owner-builder who
is not a speculative builder shall be at an amount equal to two and six-tenths
(2.6) percent of:
   (1)   The gross income from the activity of construction contracting upon
the real property in question which was realized by those construction
contractors to whom the owner- builder provided written declaration that they
were not responsible for the taxes as prescribed in subsection
19-415(c)(2); and
   (2)   The purchase of tangible personal property for incorporation into any
improvement to real property, computed on the sales price.
   (b)   For taxable periods beginning from and after July 1, 2008, the portion
of gross proceeds of sales or gross income attributable to the actual direct
costs of providing architectural or engineering services that are incorporated
in a contract is not subject to tax under this section. For the purposes of
this subsection, "direct costs" means the portion of the actual costs that are
directly expended in providing architectural or engineering services.
   (c)   The tax liability of this section is subject to the following
provisions, relating to exemptions, deductions and tax credits:
   (1)   Exemptions.
   a.   The gross proceeds of sales or gross income attributable to the
purchase of machinery, equipment or other tangible personal property that is
exempt from or deductible from privilege or use tax under:
   1.   Section
19-465, subsections (7) and (16).
   2.   Section
19-660, subsections (7) and (16).*
shall be exempt or deductible, respectively, from the tax imposed by this
section.
   b.   The gross proceeds of sales or gross income received from a contract
for the construction of an environmentally controlled facility for the raising
of poultry for the production of eggs and the sorting, or cooling and packaging
of eggs shall be exempt from the tax imposed under this section.
   c.   The gross proceeds of sales or gross income that is derived from the
installation, assembly, repair or maintenance of cleanrooms that are deducted
from the tax base of the retail classification pursuant to section
19-465, subsection (7) shall be exempt from the tax imposed under this section.
   d.   The gross proceeds of sales or gross income that is derived from a
contract entered into with a person who is engaged in the commercial production
of livestock, livestock products or agricultural, horticultural, viticultural
or floricultural crops or products in this state for the construction,
alteration, repair, improvement, movement, wrecking or demolition or addition
to or subtraction from any building, highway, road, excavation, manufactured
building or other structure, project, development or improvement used directly
and primarily to prevent, monitor, control or reduce air, water or land
pollution shall be exempt from the tax imposed under this section.
   e.   Any amount attributable to development fees that are incurred in
relation to the construction, development or improvement of real property and
paid by the taxpayer as defined in the model city tax code or by a contractor
providing services to the taxpayer shall be exempt from the tax imposed under
this section. For the purposes of this paragraph:
   1.   The attributable amount shall not exceed the value of the development
fees actually imposed.
   2.   The attributable amount is equal to the total amount of development
fees paid by the taxpayer or by a contractor providing services to the taxpayer
and the total development fees credited in exchange for the construction of,
contribution to or dedication of real property for providing public
infrastructure, public safety or other public services necessary to the
development. The real property must be the subject of the development fees.
   3.   “Development fees” means fees imposed to offset capital costs of
providing public infrastructure, public safety or other public services to a
development and authorized pursuant to A.R.S. section 9-463.05, A.R.S. section
11-1102 or A.R.S. title 48 regardless of the jurisdiction to which the fees are
paid.
   (2)   Deductions.
   a.   All amounts subject to the tax shall be allowed a deduction in the
amount of thirty-five (35) percent.
   b.   The gross proceeds of sales or gross income that is derived from a
contract entered into for the installation, assembly, repair or maintenance of
income-producing capital equipment, as defined in section
19-110, that is deducted from the retail classification pursuant to section
19-465(7), that does not become a permanent attachment to a building, highway,
road, railroad, excavation or manufactured building or other structure,
project, development or improvement shall be exempt from the tax imposed by
this section. If the ownership of the realty is separate from the ownership of
the income-producing capital equipment, the determination as to permanent
attachment shall be made as if the ownership was the same. The deduction
provided in this paragraph does not include gross proceeds of sales or gross
income from that portion of any contracting activity which consists of the
development of, or modification to, real property in order to facilitate the
installation, assembly, repair, maintenance or removal of the income-producing
capital equipment. For purposes of this paragraph, "permanent attachment" means
at least one (1) of the following:
   1.   To be incorporated into real property.
   2.   To become so affixed to real property that it becomes part of the real
property.
   3.   To be so attached to real property that removal would cause substantial
damage to the real property from which it is removed.
   c.   For taxable periods beginning from and after July 1, 2008, and ending
before January 1, 2017, the gross proceeds of sales or gross income derived
from a contract to provide and install a solar energy device. The contractor
shall register with the Arizona Department of Revenue as a solar energy
contractor. By registering, the contractor acknowledges that it will make its
books and records relating to sales of solar energy devices available to the
Department of Revenue and the city, as applicable, for examination.
   (3)   Tax credits. The following tax credits are available to owner-builders
and speculative builder, not to exceed the tax liability against which such
credits apply, provided such credits are documented to the satisfaction of the
tax collector:
   a.   A tax credit equal to the amount of city privilege or use tax, or the
equivalent excise tax, paid directly to a taxing jurisdiction or as a
separately itemized charge paid directly to the vendor with respect to the
tangible personal property incorporated into the said structure or improvement
to real property undertaken by the owner-builder or speculative builder.
   b.   A tax credit equal to the amount of privilege taxes paid to this city,
or charged separately to the speculative builder, by a construction contractor,
on the gross income derived by said person from the construction of any
improvement to the real property.
   c.   No credits provided herein may be claimed until such time that the
gross income against which said credits apply is reported.
   (d)   The limitation period for the assessment of taxes imposed by this
section is measured based upon when such liability is reportable, that is, in
the reporting period that encompasses the twenty-fifth month after said unit or
project was substantially complete. Interest and penalties, as provided in
section
19-540, will be based on reportable date.
   (e)   Reserved.
   (f)   Notwithstanding the tax rate identified elsewhere in this section, an
additional tax in an amount equal to one-tenth of one (0.1) percent of the
gross income from any business activity taxable under this section is imposed
pursuant to Chapter IV, Section 5 of the Charter of the City of Tucson.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 9322, § 4, 11-22-99; Ord. No. 9652, § 3,
1-14-02; Ord. No. 10040, § 1, 9-20-04; Ord. No. 10361, § 6, 12-19-06; Ord. No.
10524, § 4, 5-13-08, eff. 7-1-08; Ord. No. 10754, § 3, 1-20-10, eff. 9-1-06;
Ord. No. 10911, § 4, 8-9-11, eff. 7-29-10; Ord. No. 11479, § 1, 8-8-17; Ord.
No. 11485, eff. 8-8-17; Ord. No. 11518, eff. 1-23-18)
Sec. 19-418. Reserved.
   Editors Note: Ord. No. 9322, § 5, adopted Nov. 22, 1999, repealed §
19-418, which pertained to construction contracting: deductions and tax credits
available to speculative builders and owner-builders. It should be noted that §
16 of Ord. No. 9322, adopted Nov. 22, 1999 provided that the repeal of section
19-418 is retroactive to January 1, 1999. See the Code Comparative Table.
Sec. 19-420. Reserved.
Sec. 19-425. Job printing.
   (a)   The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to two and six-tenths (2.6)
percent of the gross income from the business activity upon every person
engaging or continuing in the business of job printing, which includes
engraving of printing plates, embossing, copying, micrographics, and photo
reproduction.
   (b)   The tax imposed by this section shall not apply to:
   (1)   Job printing purchased for the purpose of resale by the purchaser in
the form supplied by the job printer.
   (2)   Out-of-city sales.
   (3)   Out-of-state sales.
   (4)   Job printing of newspapers, magazines, or other periodicals or
publications for a person who is subject to the tax imposed by subsection
19-435(a) or an equivalent excise tax; provided further, that the person is
properly licensed by the taxing jurisdiction at the location of publication.
   (5)   Sales of job printing to a qualifying hospital, qualifying community
health center or a qualifying health care organization, except when the
property sold is for use in activities resulting in gross income from unrelated
business income as that term is defined in 26 U.S.C. Section 512.
   (6)   Reserved.
   (7)   Sales of postage and freight except that the amount deducted shall not
exceed the actual postage and freight expense that is paid to the United States
Postal Service or a commercial delivery service and that is separately itemized
by the taxpayer on the customer's invoice and in the taxpayer's records.
   (c)   Notwithstanding the tax rate identified elsewhere in this section, an
additional tax in an amount equal to one-tenth of one (0.1) percent of the
gross income from any business activity taxable under this section is imposed
pursuant to
Chapter IV, Section 5 of the Charter of the City of Tucson.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 6938, § 10, 4-25-88; Ord. No. 8440, §
10, 1-23-95; Ord. No. 9069, § 1(5), 6-15-98; Ord. No. 11183, § 14, 6-17-14,
eff. 9-21-06; Ord. No. 11479, § 1, 8-8-17; Ord. No. 11485, eff. 8-8-17; Ord.
No. 11518, eff. 1-23-18)
Sec. 19-427. Manufactured buildings.
   (a)   The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to two and six-tenths (2.6)
percent of the gross income, including site preparation, moving to the site,
and/or setup, upon every person engaging or continuing in the business activity
of selling manufactured buildings within the city. Such business activity is
deemed to occur at the business location of the seller where the purchaser
first entered into the contract to purchase the manufactured building.
   (b)   The sales of used manufactured buildings are not taxable.
   (c)   The sale prices of furniture, furnishings, fixtures, appliances, and
attachments that are not incorporated as component parts of or attached to a
manufactured building are exempt from the tax imposed by this section. The
sales of such items are subject to the tax under section
19-460.
   (d)   Under this section, a trade-in will not be allowed for the purpose of
reducing the tax liability.
   (e)   Notwithstanding the tax rate identified elsewhere in this section, an
additional tax in an amount equal to one-tenth of one (0.1) percent of the
gross income from any business activity taxable under this section is imposed
pursuant to
Chapter IV, Section 5 of the Charter of the City of Tucson.
(Ord. No. 8440, § 11, 1-23-95; Ord. No. 11479, § 1, 8-8-17; Ord. No. 11485,
eff. 8-8-17; Ord. No. 11518, eff. 1-23-18)
Sec. 19-430. Timbering and other extraction.
   (a)   The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to two and six-tenths (2.6)
percent of the gross income from the business activity upon every person
engaging or continuing in the following businesses:
   (1)   Felling, producing, or preparing timber or any product of the forest
for sale, profit, or commercial use.
   (2)   Extracting, refining, or producing any oil or natural gas for sale,
profit, or commercial use.
   (b)   The rate specified in subsection (a) above shall be applied to the
value of the entire product extracted, refined, produced, or prepared for sale,
profit, or commercial use, when such activity occurs within the city,
regardless of the place of sale of the product or the fact that delivery may be
made to a point without the city or without the state.
   (c)   If any person engaging in any business classified in this section
ships or transports products, or any part thereof, out of the state without
making sale of such products, or ships his products outside of the state in an
unfinished condition, the value of the products or articles in the condition or
form in which they existed when transported out-of-state and before they enter
interstate commerce shall be the basis for assessment of the tax imposed by
this section.
   (d)   Reserved.
   (e)   Notwithstanding the tax rate identified elsewhere in this section, an
additional tax in an amount equal to one-tenth of one (0.1) percent of the
gross income from any business activity taxable under this section is imposed
pursuant to
Chapter IV, Section 5 of the Charter of the City of Tucson.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 8440, § 12, 1-23-95; Ord. No. 11479, §
1, 8-8-17; Ord. No. 11485, eff. 8-8-17; Ord. No. 11518, eff. 1-23-18)
Sec. 19-432. Mining.
   (a)   The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to one-tenth(1/10) of one (1)
percent not to exceed one-tenth(1/10) of one (1) percent, of the gross income
from the business activity upon every person engaging or continuing in the
business of mining, smelting, or producing for sale, profit, or commercial use
any copper, gold, silver, or other mineral product, compound, or combination of
mineral products, but not including the extraction, removal, or production of
sand, gravel, or rock from the ground for sale, profit, or commercial use.
   (b)   The rate specified in subsection (a) above shall be applied to the
value of the entire product mined, smelted or produced for sale, profit, or
commercial use, when such activity occurs within the city, regardless of the
place of sale of the product or the fact that delivery may be made to a point
without the city or without the state.
   (c)   If any person engaging in any business classified in this section
ships or transports products, or any part thereof, out of the state without
making sale of such products, or ships his products outside of the state in an
unfinished condition, the value of the products or articles in the condition or
form in which they existed when transported out-of-state and before they enter
interstate commerce shall be the basis for assessment of the tax imposed by
this section.
   (d)   Notwithstanding the tax rate identified elsewhere in this section, an
additional tax in an amount equal to one-tenth of one (0.1) percent of the
gross income from any business activity taxable under this section is imposed
pursuant to Chapter IV, Section 5 of the Charter of the City of Tucson.
(Ord. No. 8440, § 13, 1-23-95; Ord. No. 11485, eff. 8-8-17)
Sec. 19-435. Publishing and periodicals distribution. (Reg. 435.1)
   (a)   Tax Rate. The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to two and six-
tenths (2.6) percent of the gross income from the business activity upon every
person engaging or continuing in the business activity of:
   (1)   Publication of newspapers, magazines or other periodicals when
published within the city measured by the gross income derived from notices,
subscriptions and local advertising as defined in section
19-405. In cases where the location of publication is both within and without
this state, gross income subject to the tax shall refer only to gross income
derived from residents of this state or generated by permanent business
locations within this state.
   (2)   Distribution or delivery within the city of newspapers, magazines or
other periodicals not published within the city, measured by the gross income
derived from subscriptions.
   (b)   Location of Publication. Location of publication is determined by:
   (1)   Location of the editorial offices of the publisher, when the physical
printing is not performed by the publisher; or
   (2)   Location of either the editorial offices or the printing facilities,
if the publisher performs his own physical printing.
   (c)   Subscription Income. Subscription income shall include all circulation
revenue of the publisher except amounts retained by or credited to carriers or
other vendors as compensation for delivery within the state by such carriers or
vendors, and further except sales of published items, directly or through
distributors, for the purpose of resale, to retailers subject to the privilege
tax on such resale.
   (d)   Circulation. Circulation, for the purpose of measurement of gross
income subject to the tax, shall be considered to occur at the place of
delivery of the published items to the subscriber or intended reader
irrespective of the location of the physical facilities or personnel of the
publisher. However, delivery by the United States mails shall be considered to
have occurred at the location of publication.
   (e)   Allocation of Taxes Between Cities and Towns. In cases where
publication or distribution occurs in more than one (1) city or town, the
measurement of gross income subject to tax by the city shall include:
   (1)   That portion of the gross income from publication which reflects the
ratio of circulation within this city to circulation in all incorporated cities
and towns in this state having substantially similar provisions; plus
   (2)   Only when publication occurs within the city, that portion of the
remaining gross income from publication which reflects the ratio of circulation
within this city to the total circulation of all incorporated cities or towns
in this state within which cities the taxpayer maintains a location of
publication.
   (f)   The tax imposed by this section shall not apply to sales of
newspapers, magazines or other periodicals to a qualifying hospital, qualifying
community health center or a qualifying health care organization, except when
the property sold is for use in activities resulting in gross income from
unrelated business income as that term is defined in 26 U.S.C. Section 512.
   (g)   Notwithstanding the tax rate identified elsewhere in this section, an
additional tax in an amount equal to one-tenth of one (0.1) percent of the
gross income from any business activity taxable under this section is imposed
pursuant to Chapter IV, Section 5 of the Charter of the City of Tucson.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 6938, § 11, 4-25-88; Ord. No. 9069, § 1
(6), 6-15-98; Ord. No. 11479, § 1, 8-8-17; Ord. No. 11485, eff. 8-8-17; Ord.
No. 11518, eff. 1-23-18)
Sec. 19-444. Hotels.
   (a)   The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to zero (0) percent of the
gross income from the business activity upon every person engaging or
continuing in the business of operating a hotel charging for lodging and/or
lodging space furnished to any:
   (1)   Person.
   (b)   Exclusions. The tax imposed by this section shall not include:
   (1)   Income derived from incarcerating or detaining prisoners who are under
the jurisdiction of the United States, this state or any other state or a
political subdivision of this state or of any other state in a privately
operated prison, jail or detention facility.
   (2)   Gross proceeds of sales or gross income that is properly included in
another business activity under this article and that is taxable to the person
engaged in that business activity, but the gross proceeds of sales or gross
income to be deducted shall not exceed the consideration paid to the person
conducting the activity.
   (3)   Gross proceeds of sales or gross income from transactions or
activities that are not limited to transients and that would not be taxable if
engaged in by a person not subject to tax under this article.
   (4)   Gross proceeds of sales or gross income from transactions or
activities that are not limited to transients and that would not be taxable if
engaged in by a person subject to taxation under section
19-410 or section
19-475 due to an exclusion, exemption or deduction.
   (5)   Gross proceeds of sales or gross income from commissions received from
a person providing services or property to the customers of the hotel. However,
such commissions may be subject to tax under section
19-445 or section
19-450 as rental, leasing or licensing for use of real or tangible personal
property.
   (6)   Income from providing telephone, fax, or Internet services to
customers at an additional charge that is separately stated to the customer and
is separately maintained in the hotel's books and records. However, such gross
proceeds of sales or gross income may be subject to tax under section
19-470 as telecommunication services.
(Ord. No. 7446, § 2.7, 7-2-90; Ord. No. 9322, § 6, 11-22-99; Ord. No. 10361, §
7, 12-19-06, eff. 1-1-07)
Sec. 19-445. Rental, leasing, and licensing for use of real property.
   (a)   The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to two and six-tenths (2.6)
percent of the gross income from the business activity upon every person
engaging or continuing in the business of leasing or renting real property
located within the city for a consideration, to
the tenant in actual possession, or the licensing for use of real property to
the final licensee located within the city for a consideration including any
improvements, rights, or interest in such property; provided further that:
   (1)   Payments made by the lessee to, or on behalf of, the lessor for
property taxes, repairs, or improvements are considered to be part of the
taxable gross income.
   (2)   Charges for such items as telecommunications, utilities, pet fees, or
maintenance are considered to be part of the taxable gross income.
   (3)   However, if the lessor engages in telecommunication activity, as
evidenced by installing individual metering equipment and by billing each
tenant based upon actual usage, such activity is taxable under section
19-470.
   (b)   If individual utility meters have been installed for each tenant and
the lessor separately charges each single tenant for the exact billing from the
utility company, such charges are exempt.
   (c)   Charges by a qualifying hospital, qualifying community health center
or a qualifying health care organization to patients of such facilities for use
of rooms or other real property during the course of their treatment by such
facilities are exempt.
   (d)   Charges for joint pole usage by a person engaged in the business of
providing or furnishing utility or telecommunication services or that is a
cable operator, or charges for joint pole usage to a person engaged in the
business of providing or furnishing utility or telecommunication services or
that is a cable operator are exempt from the tax imposed by this section.
"Cable operator" has the same meaning as prescribed by A.R.S. Section 9-505.
   (e)   Exempt from the tax imposed by this section is gross income derived
from the rental, leasing, or licensing for use of real property to a qualifying
hospital, qualifying community health center or a qualifying health care
organization, except when the property so rented, leased, or licensed is for
use in activities resulting in gross income from unrelated business income as
that term is defined in 26 U.S.C. Section 512.
   (f)   A person who has less than three (3) apartments, houses, trailer
spaces, or other lodging spaces rented, leased or licensed or available for
rent, lease, or license within the state and no units of commercial property
for rent, lease, or license within the state, is not deemed to be in the rental
business, and is therefore exempt from the tax imposed by this section on such
income. However, a person who has one (1) or more units of commercial property
is subject to the tax imposed by this section on rental, lease and license
income from all such lodging spaces and commercial units of real estate even
though said person may have fewer than three (3) lodging spaces.
   (g)   (Reserved).
   (h)   The tax prescribed by this section shall not include gross income from
the rental, leasing, or licensing of lodging or lodging space to an individual
who resides therein.
   (i)   Exempt from the tax imposed by this section is the gross income from
payments made pursuant to a life care contract by a resident to a provider that
holds a permit to enter into life care contracts issued by the Arizona
Department of Insurance. For the purposes of this paragraph, "life care
contract," "provider," and "resident" have the same meanings prescribed in
A.R.S. Section 20-1801.
   (j)   Exempt from the tax imposed by this section is gross income derived
from the activities taxable under section
19-444 of this Code.
   (k)   Leasing or renting real property or the right to use real property at
exhibition events in this state sponsored, operated or conducted by a nonprofit
organization that is exempt from taxation under Section 501(c)(3), 501(c)(4) or
501(c)(6) of the Internal Revenue Code if the organization is associated with
major league baseball teams or a national touring professional golfing
association and no part of the organization's net earnings inures to the
benefit of any private shareholder or individual. This paragraph does not apply
to an organization that is owned, managed or controlled, in whole or in part,
by a major league baseball team, or its owners, officers, employees or agents,
or by a major league baseball association or professional golfing association,
or its owners, officers, employees or agents, unless the organization conducted
or operated exhibition events in this state before January 1, 2018 that were
exempt from taxation under A.R.S. Section 42-5073.
   (l)   (Reserved).
   (m)   (Reserved).
   (n)   Notwithstanding the provisions of section
19-200(b), the fair market value of one (1) apartment, in an apartment complex
provided rent free to an employee of the apartment complex is not subject to
the tax imposed by this section. For an apartment complex with more than fifty
(50) units, an additional apartment provided rent free to an employee for every
additional fifty (50) units is not subject to the tax imposed by this section.
   (o)   Income derived from incarcerating or detaining prisoners who are under
the jurisdiction of the United States, this state or any other state or a
political subdivision of this state or of any other state in a privately
operated prison, jail or detention facility is exempt from the tax imposed by
this section.
   (p)   Charges by any hospital, any licensed nursing care institution, or any
kidney dialysis facility to patients of such facilities for the use of rooms or
other real property during the course of their treatment by such facilities are
exempt.
   (q)   Charges to patients receiving “personal care” or “directed care”, by
any licensed assisted living facility, licensed assisted living center or
licensed assisted living home as defined and licensed pursuant to Chapter 4
Title 36 Arizona Revised Statutes and Title 9 of the Arizona Administrative
Code are exempt.
   (r)   Income received from the rental of any “low-income unit” as
established under Section 42 of the Internal Revenue Code (IRC), including the
low-income housing credit provided by IRC Section 42, to the extent that the
collection of tax on rental income causes the “gross rent” defined by IRC
Section 42 to exceed the income limitation for the low-income unit is exempt.
This exemption also applies to income received from the rental of individual
rental units subject to statutory or regulatory “low-income unit” rent
restrictions similar to IRC Section 42 to the extent that the collection of tax
from the tenant causes the rental receipts to exceed a rent restriction for the
low-income unit. This subsection also applies to rent received by a person
other than the owner or lessor of the low-income unit, including a broker. This
subsection does not apply unless a taxpayer maintains the documentation to
support the qualification of a unit as a low-income unit, the “gross rent”
limitation for the unit, and the rent received from that unit.
   (s)   The gross proceeds of a commercial lease of real property between
affiliated companies, businesses, persons or reciprocal insurers are exempt.
For the purposes of this paragraph:
   (1)   “Affiliated companies, businesses, persons or reciprocal insurers”
means the lessor holds a controlling interest in the lessee, the lessee holds a
controlling interest in the lessor, an affiliated entity holds a controlling
interest in both the lessor and the lessee or an unrelated person holds a
controlling interest in both the lessor and lessee.
   (2)   “Controlling interest” means direct or indirect ownership of at least
eighty percent (80%) of the voting shares of a corporation or of the interests
in a company, business, or person other than a corporation.
   (3)   “Reciprocal insurer” has the same meaning as prescribed in A.R.S. §
20-762.
   (t)   Notwithstanding the tax rate identified elsewhere in this section, an
additional tax in an amount equal to one-tenth of one (0.1) percent of the
gross income from any business activity taxable under this section is imposed
pursuant to Chapter IV, Section 5 of the Charter of the City of Tucson.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 7446, § 7.2, 7-2-90; Ord. No. 8440, §
14, 1-23-95; Ord. No. 9069, § 1(7), 6-15-98; Ord. No. 9322, § 7, 11-22-99; Ord.
No. 9652, § 4, 1-14-02; Ord. No. 10287, § 5, 6-13-06; Ord. No. 10911, § 5, 8-9-
11, eff. 7-29-10; Ord. No. 11183, § 13, 6-17-14, eff. 7-20-11; Ord. No. 11479,
§ 1, 8-8-17; Ord. No. 11485, eff. 8-8-17; Ord. No. 11518, eff. 1-23-18; Ord.
No. 11936, § 9, 7-12-22)
   Editor’s note – Section 9 of Ord. No. 11936, adopted July 12, 2022, provides
for an effective date of January 1, 2018, except that change in subsection (i)
has an effective date of January 1, 2012.
Sec. 19-446. Reserved.
(Ord. No. 6938, § 12, 4-25-88)
Sec. 19-447. Reserved.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87)
Sec. 19-450. Rental, leasing, and licensing for use of tangible personal
property.
   (a)   Tax rate. The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to two and six-
tenths (2.6) percent of the gross income from the business activity upon every
person engaging or continuing in the business of leasing, licensing for use, or
renting tangible personal property for a consideration, including that which is
semi-permanently or permanently installed within the city as provided by
regulation.
   (b)   Special provisions relating to long-term motor vehicle leases. A lease
transaction involving a motor vehicle for a minimum period of twenty-four (24)
months shall be considered to have occurred at the location of the motor
vehicle dealership, rather than the location of the place of business of the
lessor, even if the lessor's interest in the lease and its proceeds are sold,
transferred, or otherwise assigned to a lease financing institution; provided
further that the city or town where such motor vehicle dealership is located
levies a privilege tax or an equivalent excise tax upon the transaction.
   (c)   Exemptions. Gross income derived from the following transactions shall
be exempt from privilege taxes imposed by this section:
   (1)   Rental, leasing, or licensing for use of tangible personal property to
persons engaged or continuing in the business of leasing, licensing for use, or
rental of such property.
   (2)   Rental, leasing, or licensing for use of tangible personal property
that is semi- permanently or permanently installed within another city or town
that levies an equivalent excise tax on the transaction.
   (3)   Rental, leasing, or licensing for use of film, tape, or slides to a
theater or other person taxed under section
19-410, or to a radio station, television station, or subscription television
system.
   (4)   Rental, leasing, or licensing for use of the following:
   a.   Prosthetics.
   b.   Income-producing capital equipment.
   c.   Mining and metallurgical supplies.
These exemptions include the rental, leasing, or licensing for use of tangible
personal property which, if it had been purchased instead of leased, rented, or
licensed by the lessee or licensee, would qualify as income-producing capital
equipment or mining and metallurgical supplies.
   (5)   Rental, leasing, or licensing for use of tangible personal property to
a qualifying hospital, qualifying community health center or a qualifying
health care organization, except when the property so rented, leased, or
licensed is for use in activities resulting in gross income from unrelated
business income as that term is defined in 26 U.S.C. Section 512 or rental,
leasing, or licensing for use of tangible personal property in this state by a
nonprofit charitable organization that has qualified under Section 501(c)(3) of
the United States Internal Revenue Code and that engages in and uses such
property exclusively for training, job placement or rehabilitation programs or
testing for mentally or physically handicapped persons.
   (6)   Separately billed charges for delivery, installation, repair, and/or
maintenance as provided by regulation.
   (7)   Charges for joint pole usage by a person engaged in the business of
providing or furnishing utility or telecommunication services or that is a
cable operator, or charges for joint pole usage to a person engaged in the
business of providing or furnishing utility or telecommunication services or
that is a cable operator. "Cable operator" has the same meaning as prescribed
by A.R.S. Section 9-505.
   (8)   The gross income from coin-operated washing, drying, and dry cleaning
machines, or from coin-operated car washing machines. This exemption shall not
apply to suppliers or distributors renting, leasing, or licensing for use of
such equipment to persons engaged in the operation of coin-operated washing,
drying, dry cleaning, or car washing establishments.
   (9)   Rental, leasing, or licensing of aircraft that would qualify as
aircraft acquired for use outside the state, as prescribed by regulation, if
such rental, leasing, or licensing had been a sale.
   (10)   Rental, leasing or licensing for use of an alternative fuel vehicle
if such vehicle was manufactured as a diesel fuel vehicle and converted to
operate on alternative fuel and equipment that is installed in a conventional
diesel fuel motor vehicle to convert the vehicle to operate on an alternative
fuel, as defined in A.R.S. Section 1-215.
   (11)   Rental, leasing, and licensing for use of solar energy devices, for
taxable periods beginning from and after July 1, 2008. The lessor shall
register with the department of revenue as a solar energy retailer. By
registering, the lessor acknowledges that it will make its books and records
relating to leases of solar energy devices available to the department of
revenue and city, as applicable, for examination.
   (12)   Leasing or renting certified ignition interlock devices installed
pursuant to the requirements prescribed by A.R.S. § 28-1461. For the purposes
of this paragraph, "certified ignition interlock device" has the same meaning
prescribed in A.R.S. § 28-1301.
   (d)   Notwithstanding the tax rate identified elsewhere in this section, an
additional tax in an amount equal to one-tenth of one (0.1) percent of the
gross income from any business activity taxable under this section is imposed
pursuant to Chapter IV, Section 5 of the Charter of the City of Tucson.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 8440, § 15, 1-23-95; Ord. No. 9069, § 1
(8), 6-15-98; Ord. No. 9322, § 8, 11-22-99; Ord. No. 9652, § 5, 1-14-02; Ord.
No. 10361, § 8, 12-19-06; Ord. No. 10754, § 4, 1-20-10, eff. 7-1-08; Ord. No.
11183, § 15, 6-17-14, eff. 9-1-04; Ord. No. 11479, § 1, 8-8-17; Ord. No. 11485,
eff. 8-8-17; Ord. No. 11518, eff. 1-23-18; Ord. No. 11936, § 10, 7-12-22)
   Editor’s note – Section 10 of Ord. No. 11936, adopted July 12, 2022,
provides for an effective date of August 1, 2015.
Sec. 19-452. Reserved.
(Ord. No. 7446, § 2.10, 7-2-90)
Sec. 19-455. Restaurants and bars.
   (a)   The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to two and six-tenths (2.6)
percent of the gross income from the business activity upon every person
engaging or continuing in the business of preparing or serving food or beverage
in a bar, cocktail lounge, restaurant, or similar establishment where articles
of food or drink are prepared or served for consumption on or off the premises,
including also the activity of catering. Cover charges and minimum charges must
be included in the gross income of this business activity. (Reg. 445.1)
   (b)   Caterers and other taxpayers subject to the tax who deliver food and/
or serve such food off the premises shall also be allowed to exclude separately
charged delivery, setup, and cleanup charges, provided that the charges are
also maintained separately in the books and records. When a taxpayer delivers
food and/or serves such food off the premises, his regular business location
shall still be deemed the location of the transaction for the purposes of the
tax imposed by this section.
   (c)   The tax imposed by this section shall not apply to sales to a
qualifying hospital, qualifying community health center or a qualifying health
care organization, except when sold for use in activities resulting in gross
income from unrelated business income as that term is defined in 26 U.S.C.
Section 512.
   (d)   The tax imposed by this section shall not apply to sales of food,
beverages, condiments and accessories used for serving food and beverages to a
commercial airline, as defined in A.R.S. § 42-5061, that serves the food and
beverages to its passengers, without additional charge, for consumption in
flight.
   (e)   The tax imposed by this section shall not apply to sales of prepared
food, beverages, condiments or accessories to a public educational entity,
pursuant to any of the provisions of Title 15, Arizona Revised Statutes, to the
extent such items are to be prepared or served to individuals for consumption
on the premises of a public educational entity during school hours.
   (f)   The tax imposed by this section shall not apply to sales of low or
reduced cost articles of food or drink to eligible elderly or homeless persons
or persons with a disability by a business subject to tax under A.R.S. Section
42-5074 that contracts with the Department of Economic Security and that is
approved by the Food and Nutrition Service of the United States Department of
Agriculture pursuant to the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
established by the Food and Nutrition Act of 2008 (P.L. 110-246; 122 stat.
1651; 7 United States Code Sections 2011 through 2036a), if the purchases are
made with the benefits issued pursuant to the supplemental nutrition assistance
program.
   (g)   The tax imposed by this section shall not apply to sales by a
nonprofit organization that is exempt from taxation under Section 501(C)(3),
501(C)(4) or 501(C)(6) of the Internal Revenue Code if the organization is
associated with a major league baseball team or a national touring professional
golfing association and no part of the organization's net earnings inures to
the benefit of any private shareholder or individual. This paragraph does not
apply to an organization that is owned, managed or controlled, in whole or in
part, by a major league baseball team, or its owners, officers, employees or
agents, or by a major league baseball association or professional golfing
association, or its owners, officers, employees or agents, unless the
organization conducted or operated exhibition events in this state before
January 1, 2018 that were exempt from taxation under A.R.S. Section 42-5073.
   (h)   If a city, town or other taxing jurisdiction imposes a transaction
privilege, sales, use, franchise or other similar tax or fee, however
denominated, on the sale of food items intended for human consumption as
defined by rule adopted pursuant to A.R.S. Section 42-5106 or items prescribed
by A.R.S. Section 42-5106, subsection d for consumption on the premises, the
tax must be applied uniformly with respect to all food items, and an additional
tax or fee differential may not be assessed or applied with respect to any
specific food item.
   (i)   For the purposes of this section, “accessories” means paper plates,
plastic eating utensils, napkins, paper cups, drinking straws, paper sacks or
other disposable containers, or other items which facilitate the consumption of
the food.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 6938, § 13, 4-25-88; Ord. No. 9069, § 1
(9), 6-15-98; Ord. No. 10361, § 9, 12-19-06; Ord. No. 11479, § 1, 8-8-17; Ord.
No. 11485, eff. 8-8-17; Ord. No. 11518, eff. 1-23-18; Ord. No. 11936, § 11, 7-
12-22)
   Editor’s note – Section 11 of Ord. No. 11936, adopted July 12, 2022,
provides for an effective date of December 14, 2018, for subsection (d);
January 1, 2015, for subsection (f); January 1, 2018, for subsection (g);
August 3, 2018, for subsection (h).
Sec. 19-460. Retail sales: Measure of tax; burden of proof; exclusions.
   (a)   Tax Rate. The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to two and six-
tenths (2.6) percent of the gross income from the business activity upon every
person engaging or continuing in the business of selling tangible personal
property at retail. (Regs. 460.2, 460.3, 460.6)
   (b)   Burden of Proof. The burden of proving that a sale of tangible
personal property is not a taxable retail sale shall be upon the person who
made the sale.
   (c)   Exclusions. For the purposes of this article, sales of tangible
personal property shall not include:
   (1)   Sales of stocks, bonds, options or other similar materials.
   (2)   Sales of lottery tickets or shares pursuant to A.R.S. article I,
chapter 5, title 5.
   (3)   Sales of platinum, bullion or monetized bullion, except minted or
manufactured coins transferred or acquired primarily for their numismatic value
as prescribed by regulation. (Reg. 460.5)
   (4)   Gross income derived from the transfer of tangible personal property
which is specifically included as the gross income of a business activity upon
which another section of this division imposes a tax shall be considered gross
income of that business activity and are not includable as gross income subject
to the tax imposed by this section. (Reg. 460.1)
   (5)   Sales by professional or personal service occupations where such sales
are inconsequential elements of the service provided. (Reg. 460.4)
   (6)   Sales of cash equivalents. The gross proceeds of sales or gross income
derived from the redemption of any cash equivalent by the holder as means of
payment for goods or services that are taxable under this article is subject to
the tax. "Cash equivalents" means items or intangibles, whether or not
negotiable, that are sold to one or more persons, through which a value
denominated in money is purchased in advance and may be redeemed in full or in
part for tangible personal property, intangibles or services. Cash equivalents
include gift cards, stored value cards, gift certificates, vouchers, traveler's
checks, money orders or other instruments, orders or electronic mechanisms,
such as an electronic code, personal identification number or digital payment
mechanism, or any other prepaid intangible right to acquire tangible personal
property, intangibles or services in the future, whether from the seller of the
cash equivalent or from another person. Cash equivalents do not include either
of the following:
      a.   Items or intangibles that are sold to one (1) or more persons,
through which a value is not denominated in money.
      b.   Prepaid calling cards or prepaid authorization numbers for
telecommunications services made taxable by subsection (g) of this section.
   (d)   Reserved.
   (e)   When this city and another Arizona city or town with an equivalent
excise tax could claim nexus for taxing a retail sale, the city or town where
the permanent business location of the seller at which the order was received
shall be deemed to have precedence; and for the purposes of this article, such
city or town has sole and exclusive right to such tax.
   (f)   The appropriate tax liability for any retail sale where the order is
received at a permanent business location of the seller located in this city or
in an Arizona city or town that levies an equivalent excise tax shall be at the
tax rate of the city or town of such seller's location.
   (g)   Retail sales of prepaid calling cards or prepaid authorization numbers
for telecommunications services, including sales of reauthorization of a
prepaid card or authorization number, are subject to tax under this section.
   (h)   Reserved.
   (i)   Notwithstanding the tax rate identified elsewhere in this section, an
additional tax in an amount equal to one-tenth of one (0.1) percent of the
gross income from any business activity taxable under this section is imposed
pursuant to Chapter IV, Section 5 of the Charter of the City of Tucson.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 8784, § 6, 12-2-96; Ord. No. 9322, § 9,
11-22-99; Ord. No. 11183, § 16, 6-17-14, eff. 10-1-07; Ord. No. 11479, § 1, 8-
8-17; Ord. No. 11485, eff. 8-8-17; Ord. No. 11518, eff. 1-23-18)
Sec. 19-462. Retail sales: Food for home consumption.
   (a)   The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to zero percent (0%) of the
gross income from the business activity upon every person engaging or
continuing in the business of selling food for home consumption at retail.
   (b)   For the purposes of this section only, the following definitions shall
be applicable:
   (1)   Eligible grocery business means an establishment that is deemed
eligible to participate in the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
established by the Food and Nutrition Act of 2008 (P.L. 110-246; 122 stat.
1651; 7 United States Code Sections 2011 through 2036a) by the United States
Department of Agriculture Food and Nutrition Service or an establishment that
proves to the satisfaction of the Department of Revenue that, based on the
nature of the establishment's food sales, could be eligible to participate in
the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program established by the Food and
Nutrition Act of 2008.
   (2)   Facilities for the consumption of food means tables, chairs, benches,
booths, stools, counters, and similar conveniences, trays, glasses, dishes, or
other tableware and parking areas for the convenience of in-car consumption of
food in or on the premises on which the retailer conducts business.
   (3)   Food for consumption on the premises means any of the following:
   a.   "Hot prepared food" as defined below [in paragraph (4)].
   b.   Hot or cold sandwiches.
   c.   Food served by an attendant to be eaten at tables, chairs, benches,
booths, stools, counters, and similar conveniences, and within parking areas
for the convenience of in-car consumption of food.
   d.   Food served with trays, glasses, dishes, or other tableware.
   e.   Beverages sold in cups, glasses, or open containers.
   f.   Food sold by caterers.
   g.   Food sold within the premises of theaters, movies, operas, shows of any
type or nature, exhibitions, concerts, carnivals, circuses, amusement parks,
fairs, races, contests, games, athletic events, rodeos, billiard and pool
parlors, bowling alleys, public dances, dance halls, boxing, wrestling and
other matches, and any business which charges admission, entrance, or cover
fees for exhibition, amusement, entertainment, or instruction.
   h.   Any items contained in subsections (b)(3)a. through (b)(3)g. above even
though they are sold on a take-out or to go basis, and whether or not the item
is packaged, wrapped, or is actually taken from the premises.
   (4)   Hot prepared food means those products, items, or ingredients of food
which are prepared and intended for consumption in a heated condition. "Hot
prepared food" includes a combination of hot and cold food items or ingredients
if a single price has been established.
   (5)   Premises means the total space and facilities in or on which a vendor
conducts business and which are owned or controlled, in whole or in part, by a
vendor or which are made available for the use of customers of the vendor or
group of vendors, including any building or part of a building, parking lot, or
grounds.
   (6)   Food for home consumption means all food, except food for consumption
on the premises, if sold by any of the following:
   a.   An eligible grocery business.
   b.   A person who conducts a business whose primary business is not the sale
of food but who sells food which is displayed, packaged, and sold in a similar
manner as an eligible grocery business.
   c.   A person who sells food and does not provide or make available any
facilities for the consumption of food on the premises.
   d.   A person who conducts a delicatessen business either from a counter
which is separate from the place and cash register where taxable sales are made
or from a counter which has two (2) cash registers and which are used to record
taxable and tax exempt sales, or a retailer who conducts a delicatessen
business who uses a cash register which has at least two tax (2) computing keys
which are used to record taxable and tax exempt sales.
   e.   Vending machines and other types of automatic retailers.
   f.   A person's sales of food, drink and condiment for consumption within
the premises of any prison, jail or other institution under the jurisdiction of
the state department of corrections, the department of public safety, the
department of juvenile corrections or a county sheriff.
   (c)   Income derived from the following sources is exempt from the tax
imposed by this section:
   (1)   Sales of food for home consumption to a person regularly engaged in
the business of selling such property.
   (2)   Out-of-city sales of out-of-state sales.
   (3)   Charges for delivery or other "direct customer services" as prescribed
by regulation.
   (4)   Food purchased under the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
(SNAP) established by the Food and Nutrition Act of 2008 (P.L. 110-246; 122
stat. 1651; 7 United States Code Sections 2011 through 2036a) by the United
States Department of Agriculture Food and Nutrition Service but only to the
extent that SNAP benefits using an electronic benefits transfer (EBT) card or
other method of conveying SNAP benefits was actually used to purchase such
food.
   (5)   Sales of food products by producers as provided for by A.R.S. §§ 3-
561, 3-562 and 3-563.
   (6)   Sales of food, beverages, condiments and accessories to a public
educational entity, pursuant to any of the provisions of A.R.S. Title 15,
including a regularly organized private or parochial school that offers an
educational program for grade twelve (12) or under which may be attended in
substitution for a public school pursuant to A.R.S. § 15-802; to the extent
such items are to be prepared or served to individuals for consumption on the
premises of a public educational entity during school hours. For the purposes
of this subsection, "accessories" means paper plates, plastic eating utensils,
napkins, paper cups, drinking straws, paper sacks or other disposable
containers, or other items which facilitate the consumption of the food.
   (7)   Sales of food, beverages, condiments and accessories to a nonprofit
charitable organization that has qualified as an exempt organization under 26
U.S.C § 501(c)(3) and regularly serves meals to the needy and indigent on a
continuing basis at no cost. For the purposes of this subsection, "accessories"
means paper plates, plastic eating utensils, napkins, paper cups, drinking
straws, paper sacks or other disposable containers, or other items which
facilitate the consumption of the food.
   (d)   Reporting. Such persons who sell food for home consumption shall, in
conjunction with the return required pursuant to section
19-520, report to the tax collector in a manner prescribed by the tax collector
all sales of food for home consumption exempted from taxes imposed by this
article.
   (e)   Recordkeeping.
   (1)   Retailers shall maintain accurate, verifiable, and complete records of
all purchases and sales of tangible personal property in order to verify
exemptions from taxes imposed by this article. A retailer may use any method of
reporting that properly reflects all purchases and sales of food for home
consumption, as well as all purchases and sales of items subject to taxes
imposed by this article, provided that such records are maintained in
accordance with division 3, and regulations of the tax collector.
         Any person who fails to maintain records as provided herein shall be
deemed to have had no sales of food for home consumption, and if upon request
by the tax collector, a person cannot demonstrate to the tax collector that
such records and reports do properly reflect all sales of food for home
consumption, the tax collector may recompute the amount of tax to be paid as
provided in sections
19-370 and
19-545(b).
   (f)   If a city, town or other taxing jurisdiction imposes a transaction
privilege, sales, use, franchise or other similar tax or fee, however
denominated, on the sale of food items intended for human consumption as
defined by rule adopted pursuant to A.R.S. Section 42-5106 or items prescribed
by A.R.S. Section 42-5106, subsection d for home consumption, the tax must be
applied uniformly with respect to all food, and an additional tax or fee
differential may not be assessed or applied with respect to any specific food
item.
(Ord. No. 11183, § 8, 6-17-14, eff. 1-1-13; Ord. No. 11936, § 12, 7-12-22)
   Editor’s note – Section 12 of Ord. No. 11936, adopted July 12, 2022,
provides for an effective date of Jan. 1, 2015, except new subsection (f), eff.
August 3, 2018.
Sec. 19-465. Retail sales: Exemptions.
   Income derived from the following sources is exempt from the tax imposed by
section
19-460:
   (1)   Sales of tangible personal property to a person regularly engaged in
the business of selling such property.
   (2)   Out-of-city sales or out-of-state sales.
   (3)   Charges for delivery, installation, or other direct customer services
as prescribed by regulation.
   (4)   Charges for repair services as prescribed by regulation, when
separately charged and separately maintained in the books and records of the
taxpayer.
   (5)   Sales of warranty, maintenance, and service contracts, when separately
charged and separately maintained in the books and records of the taxpayer.
   (6)   Sales of prosthetics.
   (7)   Sales of income-producing capital equipment.
   (8)   Sales of rental equipment and rental supplies.
   (9)   Sales of mining and metallurgical supplies.
   (10)   Sales of motor vehicle fuel and use fuel which are subject to a tax
imposed under the provisions of Article I or II, Chapter 16, Title 28, Arizona
Revised Statutes; or sales of use fuel to a holder of a valid single trip use
fuel tax permit issued under A.R.S. Section 28-5739, or sales of natural gas or
liquefied petroleum gas used to propel a motor vehicle.
   (11)   Sales of tangible personal property to:
      a.   A construction contractor who holds a valid Privilege Tax License
for engaging or continuing in the business of construction contracting where
the tangible personal property sold is incorporated into any structure or
improvement to real property as part of construction contracting activity.
      b.   A person that is not subject to tax under Section 415(b)(12) and
that has been provided a copy of a certificate under A.R.S. Section 42-5009,
subsection L, if the property so sold is incorporated or fabricated by the
person into the real property, structure, project, development, or improvement
described in the certificate.
   (12)   Sales of motor vehicles to nonresidents of this state for use outside
this state if the vendor ships or delivers the motor vehicle to a destination
outside this state.
   (13)   Sales of tangible personal property which directly enters into and
becomes an ingredient or component part of a product sold in the regular course
of the business of job printing, manufacturing, or publication of newspapers,
magazines, or other periodicals. Tangible personal property which is consumed
or used up in a manufacturing, job printing, publishing, or production process
is not an ingredient nor component part of a product.
   (14)   Sales made directly to the federal government to the extent of:
   a.   One hundred (100) percent of the gross income derived from retail sales
made by a manufacturer, modifier, assembler, or repairer.
   b.   Fifty (50) percent of the gross income derived from retail sales made
by any other person.
   (15)   Sales to hotels, bars, restaurants, dining cars, lunchrooms,
boardinghouses, or similar establishments of articles consumed as food, drink,
or condiment, whether simple, mixed, or compounded, where such articles are
customarily prepared or served to patrons for consumption on or off the
premises, where the purchaser is properly licensed and paying a tax under
section
19-455 or the equivalent excise tax upon such income.
   (16)   Sales of tangible personal property to a qualifying hospital,
qualifying community health center or a qualifying health care organization,
except when the property sold is for use in activities resulting in gross
income from unrelated business income as that term is defined in 26 U.S.C.
Section 512 or sales of tangible personal property purchased in this State by a
nonprofit charitable organization that has qualified under Section 501(c)(3) of
the United States Internal Revenue Code and that engages in and uses such
property exclusively for training, job placement or rehabilitation programs or
testing for mentally or physically handicapped persons.
   (17)   (Reserved).
   (18)   Sales of the following to persons engaging or continuing in the
business of farming, ranching, or feeding livestock, poultry or ratites:
   a.   Seed, fertilizer, fungicides, seed treating chemicals, and other
similar chemicals.
   b.   Feed for livestock, poultry or ratites, including salt, vitamins, and
other additives to such feed.
   c.   Livestock, poultry or ratites purchased or raised for slaughter, but
not including livestock purchased or raised for production or use, such as
milch cows, breeding bulls, laying hens, riding or work horses.
   d.   Neat animals, horses, asses, sheep, swine, or goats for the purpose of
becoming breeding or production stock, including sales of breedings or
ownership shares in such animals.
   This exemption shall not be construed to include machinery, equipment,
fuels, lubricants, pharmaceuticals, repair and replacement parts, or other
items used or consumed in the running, maintenance, or repair of machinery,
equipment, buildings, or structures used or consumed in the business of
farming, ranching, or feeding of livestock, poultry or ratites.
   (19)   Sales of groundwater measuring devices required by A.R.S. Section 45-
604.
   (20)   Sales of paintings, sculptures or similar works of fine art, provided
that such works of fine art are sold by the original artist; and provided
further that sales of "art creations", such as jewelry, macrame, glasswork,
pottery, woodwork, metalwork, furniture, and clothing, when such "art
creations" have a dual purpose, both aesthetic and utilitarian, are not exempt,
whether sold by the artist or by another.
   (21)   Sales of aircraft acquired for use outside the state, as prescribed
by regulation.
   (22)   Sales of food products by producers as provided for by A.R.S.
Sections 3-561, 3-562 and 3-563. This includes sales made directly by owners,
proprietors or tenants of agricultural lands or farms who sell livestock or
poultry feed that is grown or raised on their lands to any of the following:
      a.   Persons who feed their own livestock or poultry.
      b.   Persons who are engaged in the business of producing livestock or
poultry commercially.
      c.   Persons who are engaged in the business of feeding livestock or
poultry commercially or who board livestock noncommercially.
   (23)   (Reserved).
   (24)   Sales of food and drink to a person who is engaged in business that
is classified under the restaurant classification and that provides such food
and drink without monetary charge to its employees for their own consumption on
the premises during such employees’ hours of employment.
   (25)   Sales of tangible personal property by a nonprofit organization that
is exempt from taxation under Section 501(c)(3), 501(c)(4) or 42 501(c)(6) of
the Internal Revenue Code if the organization is associated with a major league
baseball team or a national touring professional golfing association and no
part of the organization's net earnings inures to the benefit of any private
shareholder or individual. This paragraph does not apply to an organization
that is owned, managed or controlled, in whole or in part, by a major league
baseball team, or its owners, officers, employees or agents, or by a major
league baseball association or professional golfing association, or its owners,
officers, employees or agents, unless the organization conducted or operated
exhibition events in this state before January 1, 2018 that were exempt from
taxation under A.R.S. Section 42-5073.
   (26)   (Reserved).
   (27)   The sale of tangible personal property used in remediation
contracting as defined in section
19-100 and regulation
19-100.5.
   (28)   Sales of materials that are purchased by or for publicly funded
libraries including school district libraries, charter school libraries,
community college libraries, state university libraries or federal, state,
county or municipal libraries for use by the public as follows:
      a.   Printed or photographic materials.
      b.   Electronic or digital media materials.
   (29)   Sales of food, beverages, condiments, and accessories used for
serving food and beverages to a commercial airline, as defined in A.R.S. § 42-
5061, that serves the food and beverages to its passengers, without additional
charge, for consumption in flight. For the purposes of this subsection,
‘accessories’ means paper plates, plastic eating utensils, napkins, paper cups,
drinking straws, paper sacks or other disposable containers, or other items
which facilitate the consumption of the food.
   (30)   In computing the tax base in the case of the sale or transfer of
wireless telecommunication equipment as an inducement to a customer to enter
into or continue a contract for telecommunication services that are taxable
under section
19-470, gross proceeds of sales or gross income does not include any sales
commissions or other compensation received by the retailer as a result of the
customer entering into or continuing a contract for the telecommunications
services.
   (31)   For the purposes of this section, a sale of wireless
telecommunication equipment to a person who holds the equipment for sale or
transfer to a customer as an inducement to enter into or continue a contract
for telecommunication services that are taxable under section 19-470 is
considered to be a sale for resale in the regular course of business.
   (32)   Sales of alternative fuel as defined in A.R.S. § 1-215, to a used oil
fuel burner who has received a department of environmental quality permit to
burn used oil or used oil fuel under A.R.S. § 49-426 or § 49-480.
   (33)   Sales of food, beverages, condiments and accessories to a public
educational entity pur-suant to any of the provisions of A.R.S. Title 15,
including a regularly organized private or parochial school that offers an
educational program for grade twelve (12) or under which may be attended in
substitution for a public school pursuant to A.R.S. § 15-802; to the extent
such items are to be prepared or served to individuals for consumption on the
premises of a public educational entity during school hours. For the purposes
of this subsection, “accessories” means paper plates, plastic eating utensils,
napkins, paper cups, drinking straws, paper sacks or other disposable
containers, or other items which facilitate the consumption of the food.
   (34)   Sales of personal hygiene items to a person engaged in the business
of and subject to tax under section
19-444 of this code if the tangible personal property is furnished without
additional charge to and intended to be consumed by the person during his
occupancy.
   (35)   For the purposes of this section, the diversion of gas from a
pipeline by a person engaged in the business of operating a natural or
artificial gas pipeline, for the sole purpose of fueling compressor equipment
to pressurize the pipeline, is not a sale of the gas to the operator of the
pipeline.
   (36)   Sales of food, beverages, condiments and accessories to a nonprofit
charitable organization that has qualified as an exempt organization under 26
U.S.C. Section 501(c)(3) and regularly serves meals to the needy and indigent
on a continuing basis at no cost. For the purposes of this subsection,
“accessories” means paper plates, plastic eating utensils, napkins, paper cups,
drinking straws, paper sacks or other disposable containers, or other items
which facilitate the consumption of the food.
   (37)   Sales of motor vehicles that use alternative fuel if such vehicle was
manufactured as a diesel fuel vehicle and converted to operate on alternative
fuel and sales of equipment that is installed in a conventional diesel fuel
motor vehicle to convert the vehicle to operate on an alternative fuel, as
defined in A.R.S. § 1-215.
   (38)   Sales of solar energy devices for taxable periods beginning from and
after July 1, 2008. The retailer shall register with the Department of Revenue
as a solar energy retailer. By registering, the retailer acknowledges that it
will make its books and records relating to sales of solar energy devices
available to the Department of Revenue and city, as applicable, for
examination.
   (39)   Sales or other transfers of renewable energy credits or any other
unit created to track energy derived from renewable energy resources. For the
purposes of this paragraph, “renewable energy credit” means a unit created
administratively by the Corporation Commission or governing body of a public
power utility to track kilowatt hours of electricity derived from a renewable
energy resource or the kilowatt hour equivalent of conventional energy
resources displaced by distributed renewable energy resources.
   (40)   Sales of magazines or other periodicals or other publications by this
state to encourage tourist travel.
   (41)   Sales of paper machine clothing, such as forming fabrics and dryer
felts, sold to a paper manufacturer and directly used or consumed in paper
manufacturing.
   (42)   Sales of overhead materials or other tangible personal property that
is used in performing a contract between the United States Government and a
manufacturer, modifier, assembler or repairer, including property used in
performing a subcontract with a government contractor who is a manufacturer,
modifier, assembler or repairer, to which title passes to the government under
the terms of the contractor or subcontract.
   (43)   Sales of coal, petroleum, coke, natural gas, virgin fuel oil and
electricity sold to a qualified environmental technology manufacturer, producer
or processor as defined in A.R.S. § 41-1514.02 and directly used or consumed in
the generation or provision of on-site power or energy solely for environmental
technology manufacturing, producing or processing or environmental protection.
This paragraph shall apply for twenty (20) full consecutive calendar or fiscal
years from the date the first paper manufacturing machine is placed in service.
In the case of an environmental technology manufacturer, producer or processor
who does not manufacture paper, the time period shall begin with the date the
first manufacturing, processing or production equipment is placed in service.
   (44)   Sales or gross income derived from sales of machinery, equipment,
materials and other tangible personal property used directly and predominantly
to construct a qualified environmental technology manufacturing, producing or
processing facility as described in A.R.S. § 41-1514.02. This subsection
applies for ten (10) full consecutive calendar or fiscal years after the start
of initial construction.
   (45)   The transfer of title or possession of coal back and forth between an
owner or operator of a power plant and a person who is responsible for refining
coal if both of the following apply:
      a.   The transfer of title or possession of the coal is for the purpose
of refining the coal; and
      b.   The title or possession of the coal is transferred back to the owner
or operator of the power plant after completion of the coal refining process.
For the purposes of this subdivision, "coal refining process" means the
application of a coal additive system that aids the reduction of power plant
emissions during the combustion of coal and the treatment of flue gas.
   (46)   (Reserved).
   (47)   Computer data center equipment sold to the owner, operator or
qualified colocation tenant of a computer data center that is certified by the
Arizona Commerce Authority under A.R.S. Section 41-1519 or an authorized agent
of the owner, operator or qualified colocation tenant during the qualification
period for use in the qualified computer data center. For the purposes of this
paragraph, "computer data center", "computer data center equipment",
"qualification period" and "qualified colocation tenant" have the same meanings
prescribed in A.R.S. Section 41-1519.
   (48)   The sale, manufacture, wholesale or distribution to or among any
wholesalers, distributors or retailers, of food items intended for human
consumption as defined by rule adopted pursuant to A.R.S. Section 42-5106 or
items prescribed by A.R.S. Section 42-5106, subsection D for home consumption
or for consumption on the premises.
   (49)   The sale of any container or packaging used exclusively for
transporting, protecting or consuming food items intended for human consumption
as defined by rule adopted pursuant to A.R.S. Section 42-5106 or items
prescribed by A.R.S. Section 42-5106, subsection D for home consumption or for
consumption on the premises.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 8440, § 16, 1-23-95; Ord. No. 8784, § 7,
12-2-96; Ord. No. 8958, § 6, 9-22-97; Ord. No. 9004, § 1(2), 1-5-98; Ord. No.
9069, § 1(10), 6-15-98; Ord. No. 9322, § 10, 11-22-99; Ord. No. 9652, § 6, 1-
14-02; Ord. No. 10361, § 10, 12-19-06; Ord. No. 10524, § 5, 5-13-08, eff. 7-1-
08; Ord. No. 11183, § 3, 6-17-14, eff. 1-1-13*; Ord. No. 11936, § 13, 7-12-22)
   *Editor’s note – Ord. No. 11183, § 18, adopted June 17, 2014, provides that
the amendments made to Sec. 19-465(40) shall be effective from and after
January 1, 2007.
   Section 13 of Ord. No. 11936, adopted July 12, 2022, provides for the
following effective dates per subsection: (11) January 1, 2015; (22) August 6,
2016; (25) January 1, 2018; (45) July 24, 2014; (46) September 1, 2016; (47)
September 12, 2013; (48) August 3, 2018; (49) August 3, 2018.
Sec. 19-470. Telecommunication services.
   (a)   Tax rate. The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to two and six-
tenths (2.6) percent of the gross income from the business activity upon every
person engaging or continuing in the business of providing telecommunication
services to consumers within this city.
   (1)   Telecommunication services shall include:
      a.   Two-way voice, sound, and/or video communication over a
communications channel.
      b.   One-way voice, sound, and/or video transmission or relay over a
communications channel.
      c.   Facsimile transmissions.
      d.   Providing relay or repeater service.
      e.   Providing computer interface services over a communications channel.
      f.   Time-sharing activities with a computer accomplished through the use
of a communications channel.
   (2)   Gross income from the business activity of providing telecommunication
services to consumers within this city shall include:
      a.   All fees for connection to a telecommunication system.
      b.   Toll charges, charges for transmissions, and charges for other
telecommunications services; provided that such charges relate to transmissions
originating in the city and terminating in this state.
      c.   Fees charged for access to or subscription to or membership in a
telecommunication system or network.
      d.   Charges for telephone, fax, or Internet access services provided at
an additional charge by a hotel business subject to taxation under section
19-444.
   (3)   Gross income from the business activity of providing telecommunication
services to consumers within this city shall not include:
      a.   Charges for installation, maintenance, and repair of
telecommunication equipment which are subject to the provisions of sections
19-415,
19-416, or
19-417 (construction contracting); 19-445 (real property rental);
19-450 (tangible personal property rental); or
19-460 (retail sales); depending upon the nature of the work performed.
      b.   Separately billed advertising charges which are subject to the
provisions of section
19-405 (advertising) or
19-435 (publishing).
   (4)    Mobile equipment. In cases where the customer is being provided
telecommunication services to receiving/ transmission equipment designed to be
mobile in nature (for example, mobile telephones, portable hand-held two-way
radios, paging devices, etc.), the provider shall, for the purposes of the tax
imposed by this section, determine whether such provider's customers are
"within this city" by the billing address of the customer, provided that such
address is a permanent residence or business location of the consumer within
the State.
   (b)   Resale telecommunication services. Gross income from sales of
telecommunication services to another provider of telecommunication services
for the purpose of providing the purchaser’s customers with such service shall
be exempt from the tax imposed by this section; provided, however, that such
purchaser is properly licensed by the city to engage in such business.
   (c)   Interstate transmissions. Charges by a provider of telecommunication
services for transmissions originating in the city and terminating outside the
state are exempt from the tax imposed by this section.
   (d)   (Reserved).
   (e)   (Reserved).
   (f)   Prepaid calling cards. Telecommunications services purchased with a
prepaid calling card that are taxable under section
19-460 are exempt from the tax imposed under this section.
   (g)   Internet access services. The gross income subject to tax under this
section shall not include sales of internet access services to the person’s
subscribers and customers. For the purposes of this subsection:
   (1)   “Internet” means the computer and telecommunications facilities that
comprise the interconnected worldwide network of networks that employ the
transmission control protocol or internet protocol, or any predecessor or
successor protocol, to communicate information of all kinds by wire or radio.
   (2)   “Internet access” means a service that enables users to access
content, information, electronic mail or other services over the internet.
Internet access does not include telecommunication services provided by a
common carrier.
   (h)   Alarm monitoring services. The gross income subject to tax under this
Section shall not include sales of monitoring services relating to an alarm
system as defined in A.R.S. Section 32-101.
   (i)   Over-The-Top services. The gross income subject to tax under this
section shall not include sales of over-the-top services. For the purposes of
this paragraph "over-the-top services" means audio or video programming
services that are received by the purchaser by means of an internet connection,
regardless of the technology used, that include linear or live programming and
that are generally considered comparable to programming provided by a radio or
television broadcast station and includes related on demand programming
provided at no additional charge, regardless of whether the services are
provided independently or packaged with other audio or video programming.
   (j)   Notwithstanding the tax rate identified elsewhere in this section, an
additional tax in an amount equal to one-tenth of one (0.1) percent of the
gross income from any business activity taxable under this section is imposed
pursuant to
Chapter IV, Section 5 of the Charter of the City of Tucson.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 8783, § 1, 12-2-96; Ord. No. 9322, § 11,
11-22-99; Ord. No. 9652, § 7, 1-14-02; Ord. No. 10361, § 11, 12-19-06, eff. 1-
1-07; Ord. No. 11479, § 1, 8-8-17; Ord. No. 11485, eff. 8-8-17; Ord. No. 11518,
eff. 1-23-18; Ord. No. 11936, § 14, 7-12-22)
   Editor’s note – Section 14 of Ord. No. 11936, adopted July 12, 2022,
provides for an effective date of July 24, 2014, for subsections (a)(2) and
(h), and the remainder having an effective date of July 1, 2019.
Sec. 19-475. Transporting for hire. (Reg. 475.1)
   (a)   The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to two and six-tenths (2.6)
percent of the gross income from the business activity upon every person
engaging or continuing in the business of providing the following forms of
transportation for hire from this city to another point within the state:
   (1)   Transporting of persons or property by railroad; provided, however,
that the tax imposed by this subsection shall not apply to transporting freight
or property for hire by a railroad operating exclusively in this state if the
transportation comprises a portion of a single shipment of freight or property,
involving more than one railroad, either from a point in this state to a point
outside this state or from a point outside this state to a point in this state,
for purposes of this paragraph, “a single shipment” means the transportation
that begins at the point at which one of the railroads first takes possession
of the freight or property and continues until the point at which one (1) of
the railroads relinquishes possession of the freight or property to a party
other than one (1) of the railroads.
   (2)   Transporting of oil or natural or artificial gas through pipe or
conduit.
   (3)   Transporting of property by aircraft.
   (4)   Transporting of persons or property by motor vehicle, including towing
and the operation of private car companies, as such are defined in Article VII,
Chapter 14, Title 42, Arizona Revised Statutes; provided, however, that the tax
imposed by this subsection shall not apply to:
      a.   Gross income subject to the tax imposed by Article IV, Chapter 16,
A.R.S. Title 28.
      b.   Gross income derived from the operation of a governmentally adopted
and controlled program to provide urban mass transportation.
      c.   Reserved.
      d.   Reserved.
   (b)   Deductions or exemptions. The gross proceeds of sales or gross income
derived from the following sources is exempt from the tax imposed by this
section:
   (1)   Income that is specifically included as the gross income of a business
activity upon which another section of Article II imposes a tax, that is
separately stated to the customer and is taxable to the person engaged in that
classification not to exceed consideration paid to the person conducting the
activity.
   (2)   Income from arranging amusement or transportation when the amusement
or transportation is conducted by another person not to exceed consideration
paid to the amusement or transportation business.
   (3)   Any amount attributable to fees collected by transportation network
companies issued a permit pursuant to A.R.S. Section 28-9552.
   (4)   Transporting for hire persons by transportation network company
drivers on transactions involving transportation network services as defined in
A.R.S. Section 28-9551.
   (5)   Transporting for hire persons by vehicle for hire companies issued a
permit pursuant to A.R.S. Section 28-9503.
   (6)   Transporting for hire persons by vehicle for hire drivers on
transactions involving vehicle for hire services as defined in A.R.S. Section
28-9501.
   (c)   The tax imposed by this section shall not include arranging
transportation as a convenience to a person’s customers if that person is not
otherwise engaged in the business of transporting persons, freight or property
for hire. This exception does not apply to businesses that dispatch vehicles
pursuant to customer orders and send the billings and receive the payments
associated with that activity, including when the transportation is performed
by third party independent contractors. For the purposes of this Subsection,
‘arranging’ includes billing for or collecting transportation charges from a
person’s customers on behalf of the persons providing the transportation.
   (d)   Notwithstanding the tax rate identified elsewhere in this section, an
additional tax in an amount equal to one-tenth of one (0.1) percent of the
gross income from any business activity taxable under this section is imposed
pursuant to Chapter IV, Section 5 of the Charter of the City of Tucson.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 8958, § 6, 9-22-97; Ord. No. 9322, § 12,
11-22-99; Ord. No. 10361, § 12, 12-19-06, eff. 1-1-07; Ord. No. 11479, § 1, 8-
8-17; Ord. No. 11485, eff. 8-8-17; Ord. No. 11518, eff. 1-23-18; Ord. No.
11936, § 15, 7-12-22)
   Editor’s note – Section 15 of Ord. No. 11936, adopted July 12, 2022,
provides for an effective date of Sept. 1, 2016.
Sec. 19-480. Utility services.
   (a)   Tax Rate. The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to two and six-
tenths (2.6) percent of the gross income from the business activity upon every
person engaging or continuing in the business of producing, providing or
furnishing utility services, including electricity, electric lights, current,
power, gas (natural or artificial), or water to:
   (1)   Consumers or ratepayers who reside within the city.
   (2)   Consumers or ratepayers of this city, whether within the city or
without, to the extent that this city provides such persons utility services,
excluding consumers or ratepayers who are residents of another city or town
which levies an equivalent excise tax upon this city for providing such utility
services to such persons.
   (b)   Exclusion of Certain Sales of Natural Gas to a Public Utility.
Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) above, the gross income
derived from the sale of natural gas to a public utility for the purpose of
generation of power to be transferred by the utility to its ratepayers shall be
considered a retail sale of tangible personal property subject to sections
19-460 and
19-465, and not considered gross income taxable under this section.
   (c)   Resale Utility Services. Sales of utility services to another provider
of the same utility services for the purpose of providing such utility services
either to another properly licensed utility provider or directly to such
purchaser's customers or ratepayers shall be exempt and deductible from the
gross income subject to the tax imposed by this section, provided that the
purchaser is properly licensed by all applicable taxing jurisdictions to engage
or continue in the business of providing utility services, and further that the
seller maintains proper documentation, in a manner similar to that for sales
for resale, of such transactions.
   (d)   Reserved.
   (e)   Exclusion of Sales of Utility Services to Nonprofit Primary Health
Care Facilities. The tax imposed by this section shall not apply to sales of
utility services to a qualifying hospital, qualifying community health center
or a qualifying health care organization, except when sold for use in
activities resulting in gross income from unrelated business income as that
term is defined in 26 U.S.C. Section 512.
   (f)   [Exclusion of Sales of Natural Gas or Liquefied Petroleum Gas.] The
tax imposed by this section shall not apply to sales of natural gas or
liquefied petroleum gas used to propel a motor vehicle.
   (g)   [Exceptions to Tax.] The tax imposed by this section shall not apply
to:
   (1)   Revenues received by a municipally owned utility in the form of fees
charged to persons constructing residential, commercial or industrial
developments or connecting residential, commercial or industrial developments
to a municipal utility system or systems if the fees are segregated and used
only for capital expansion, system enlargement or debt service of the utility
system or systems.
   (2)   Revenues received by any person or persons owning a utility system in
the form of reimbursement or contribution compensation for property and
equipment installed to provide utility access to, on or across the land of an
actual utility consumer if the property and equipment become the property of
the utility. This exclusion shall not exceed the value of such property and
equipment.
   (h)   [Alternative Fuel.] The tax imposed by this section shall not apply to
sales of alternative fuel as defined in A.R.S. § 1-215, to a used oil fuel
burner who has received a department of environmental quality permit to burn
used oil or used oil fuel under A.R.S. Section 49-426 or Section 49-480.
   (i)   The tax imposed by this section shall not apply to sales or other
transfers of renewable energy credits or any other unit created to track energy
derived from renewable energy resources. For the purposes of this paragraph,
"renewable energy credit" means a unit created administratively by the
Corporation Commission or governing body of a public power utility to track
kilowatt hours of electricity derived from a renewable energy resource or the
kilowatt hour equivalent of conventional energy resources displaced by
distributed renewable energy resources.
   (j)   The tax imposed by this section shall not apply to the portions of
gross proceeds of sales or gross income attributable to transfers of
electricity by any retail electric customer owning a solar photovoltaic energy
generating system to an electric distribution system, if the electricity
transferred is generated by the customer's system.
   (k)   Reserved.
   (l)   Notwithstanding the tax rate identified elsewhere in this section, an
additional tax in an amount equal to one-tenth of one (0.1) percent of the
gross income from any business activity taxable under this section is imposed
pursuant to Chapter IV, Section 5 of the Charter of the City of Tucson.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 6938, § 14, 4-25-88; Ord. No. 8784, § 8,
12-2-96; Ord. No. 9069, § 1(11), 6-15-98; Ord. No. 11183, § 4, 6-17-14, eff. 1-
1-07; Ord. No. 11219, § 3, 12-9-14, eff. 1-1-15; Ord. No. 11479, § 1, 8-8-17;
Ord. No. 11485, eff. 8-8-17; Ord. No. 11518, eff. 1-23-18)
Sec. 19-485. Wastewater removal services.
   (a)   The tax rate shall be an amount equal to zero percent (0%) of the
gross income from the business activity upon every person engaging or
continuing in the business of providing wastewater removal services by means of
sewer lines or similar pipelines to:
   (1)   Consumers or ratepayers who reside within the city.
   (2)   Consumers or ratepayers of this city, whether within the city or
without, to the extent that this city provides such persons wastewater removal
services, excluding consumers or ratepayers who are residents of another city
or town which levies an equivalent excise tax upon this city for providing such
wastewater removal services to such persons.
   (b)   The tax imposed by this section shall not apply to gross income
relating to the providing of wastewater removal services from a qualifying
hospital, qualifying community health center or a qualifying health care
organization.
(Ord. No. 11183, § 11, 6-17-14, eff. 1-1-13)
DIVISION 5.
ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 19-500. Administration of this article; rule making.
   (a)   The administration of this article is vested in the tax collector,
except as otherwise specifically provided, and all payments shall be made to
the tax collector.
   (b)   The tax collector shall prescribe the forms and procedures necessary
for the administration of the taxes imposed by this article.
   (c)   Except as provided in this section, no rule or regulation shall be
adopted until approved by formal action of the city council.
   (d)   (Reserved).
   (e)   The unified audit committee shall publish uniform guidelines that
interpret the Model City Tax Code and that apply to all cities and towns that
have adopted the Model City Tax Code as provided by A.R.S. Section 42-6005.
   (1)   Prior to finalization of uniform guidelines that interpret the Model
City Tax Code, the unified audit committee shall disseminate draft guidelines
for public comment.
   (2)   Pursuant to A.R.S. Section 42-6005(d), when the state statutes and the
Model City Tax Code are the same and where the Arizona department of revenue
has issued written guidance, the department's interpretation is binding on
cities and towns.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 8440, § 17, 1-23-95; Ord. No. 8784, § 9,
12-2-96; Ord. No. 9652, § 8, 1-14-02)
   Editors Note: It should be noted that the provisions of Ord. No. 9641 become
effective retroactive to January 1, 2002.
Sec. 19-510. Divulging of information prohibited; exceptions allowing
disclosure.
   (a)   Except as specifically provided, it shall be unlawful for any official
or employee of the city to make known information obtained pursuant to this
article concerning the business financial affairs or operations of any person.
   (b)   The city council may authorize an examination of any return or audit
of a specific taxpayer made pursuant to this article by authorized agents of
the federal government, the State of Arizona, or any political subdivisions.
   (c)   The tax collector may provide to an Arizona county, city, or town any
information concerning any taxes imposed in this article relative to the taxing
ordinances of that county, city, or town.
   (d)   Successors, receivers, trustees, personal representatives, executors,
guardians, administrators, and assignees, if directly interested, may be given
information by the tax collector as to the items included in the measure and
amounts of any unpaid tax, interest, and penalties required to be paid.
   (e)   Upon a written direction by the city attorney or other legal advisor
to the city designated by the city council, officials or employees of the city
may divulge the amount and source of income, profits, leases, or expenditures
disclosed in any return or report, and the amount of such delinquent and unpaid
tax, penalty, or interest, to a private collection agency having a written
collection agreement with the city.
   (f)   The tax collector shall provide information to appropriate
representatives of any Arizona city or town to comply with the provisions of
A.R.S. Section 42-6003, A.R.S. Section 42-6005, and A.R.S. Section 42-6056.
   (g)   The tax collector may provide information to authorized agents of any
other Arizona governmental agency involving the allocation of taxes imposed by
section
19-435 upon publishing and distribution of periodicals.
   (h)   The tax collector may provide information regarding the enforcement
and collection of taxes imposed by this article to any governmental agency with
which the city has an agreement.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 9569, § 1, 6-18-01)
Sec. 19-515. Duties of the taxpayer problem resolution officer.
   (a)   The taxpayer problem resolution officer shall assist taxpayers in:
   (1)   Obtaining easily understandable tax information and information on
audits, corrections and appeals procedures of the city.
   (2)   Answering questions regarding preparing and filing the returns
required under this article.
   (3)   Locating documents filed with or payments submitted to the tax
collector by the taxpayer.
   (b)   The taxpayer problem resolution officer shall also:
   (1)   Receive and evaluate complaints of improper, abusive or inefficient
service by the tax collector or any of his designees, employees or agents and
recommend to the city manager or, for a city without a city manager, the chief
administrative officer appropriate action to correct such service.
   (2)   Identify policies and practices of the tax collector or any of his
designees, employees or agents that might be barriers to the equitable
treatment of taxpayers and recommend alternatives to the city manager or, for a
city without a city manager, the chief administrative officer.
   (3)   Provide expeditious service to taxpayers whose problems are not
resolved through normal channels.
   (4)   Negotiate with the tax collector, his designees, employees or agents
to resolve the most complex and sensitive taxpayer problems.
   (5)   Take action to stop or prohibit the tax collector from taking an
action against a taxpayer.
   (6)   Participate and present taxpayers' interests and concerns in meetings
formulating the city's policies and procedures under and interpretation of this
article.
   (7)   Compile data each year on the number and type of taxpayer complaints
and evaluate the actions taken to resolve those complaints.
   (8)   Survey taxpayers each year to obtain their evaluation of the quality
of service provided by the tax collector, his designees, employees and agents.
   (9)   Perform other functions which relate to taxpayer assistance as
prescribed by the city manager or, for a city without a city manager, the chief
administrative officer.
   (c)   Actions taken by the taxpayer problem resolution officer may be
reviewed and/or modified only by the city manager or, for a city without a city
manager, the chief administrative officer upon request of the tax collector or
a taxpayer.
   (d)   The mayor and council of the city shall be provided with a report
quarterly which identifies:
   (1)   Any complaints of improper, abusive or inefficient service received by
the taxpayer problem resolution officer since the date of the last report.
   (2)   Any recommendations made, action taken or surveys obtained by the
taxpayer problem resolution officer pursuant to subsection (b)(1)--(9) above,
since the date of the last report.
(Ord. No. 8784, § 10, 12-2-96)
Sec. 19-516. Taxpayer assistance orders.
   (a)   The taxpayer problem resolution officer, with or without a formal
written request from a taxpayer, may issue a taxpayer assistance order that
suspends or stays an action or proposed action by the tax collector if, in the
problem resolution officer's determination, a taxpayer is suffering or will
suffer a significant hardship due to the manner in which the tax collector is
administering the tax laws.
   (b)   A taxpayer assistance order may require the tax collector to release
any lien perfected under this chapter, or cease any action or refrain from
taking any action to enforce against the taxpayer any section of this chapter
pending resolution of the issue giving rise to the taxpayer assistance order.
   (c)   The taxpayer problem resolution officer, city manager or, for a city
without a city manager, the chief administrative officer may modify, reverse or
rescind a taxpayer assistance order. A taxpayer assistance order is binding on
the tax collector until it is reversed or rescinded.
   (d)   The running of the applicable statute of limitations for any action
that is the subject of a taxpayer assistance order is suspended from the date
the taxpayer applies for the order or the date the order is issued, whichever
is earlier, until the order's expiration date, modification date or recision
date, if any. Interest that would otherwise accrue on an outstanding tax
obligation is not affected by the issuance of a taxpayer assistance order.
   (e)   A taxpayer assistance order may not be used:
   (1)   To contest the merits of a tax liability.
   (2)   To substitute for informal protest procedures or administrative or
judicial proceedings to review a deficiency assessment, collection action or
denial of a refund claim.
(Ord. No. 8784, § 11, 12-2-96)
Sec. 19-517. Basis for evaluating employee performance.
   (a)   The tax collector shall solicit evaluations from taxpayers and include
such evaluations in the performance appraisals of his employees, where
applicable.
   (b)   The tax collector shall not evaluate an employee on the basis of taxes
assessed or collected by that employee.
(Ord. No. 8784, § 12, 12-2-96)
Sec. 19-520. Reporting and payment of tax.
   (a)   Returns. The returns required under this article shall be made upon
forms prescribed or approved by the tax collector, and shall be considered
filed only when the accuracy of the return has been attested to, by signature
upon the form, by an authorized agent of the taxpayer, and when such form has
been received by the tax collector. (Reg. 520.1).
   (b)   Payment. If payment is made in any form other than United States legal
tender, the tax obligation shall not be satisfied until the payment has been
honored in funds.
   (c)   Requirement of Security. If a taxpayer has remitted payment in the
form of a check or other form of draw upon a bank or third party and such
remittance has not been honored in funds, the tax collector may demand security
for future payments.
   (d)   Method of Reporting. Each taxpayer shall elect to report on either a
cash receipts basis or an accrual basis and shall indicate the choice on the
privilege license application. A taxpayer shall not change his reporting method
without receiving prior written approval by the tax collector. (Reg. 520.2)
   (1)   Taxpayers must report all gross income subject to the tax using the
same basis of reporting.
   (2)   Taxes imposed upon construction contracting shall be reported as
follows:
   a.   Construction contractors shall report on either a progressive billing
("accrual") basis or cash receipts basis.
   b.   Speculative builders shall report the gross income derived from sale of
improved real property at close of escrow or at transfer of title or
possession, whichever occurs earlier.
   c.   Owner-builders who are not speculative builders shall report taxable
amounts as provided in section
19-417.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87)
Sec. 19-530. When tax due; when delinquent; verification of return; extensions.
   (a)   When Tax Due. Except as provided elsewhere in this section, the taxes
shall be due and payable monthly on or before the twentieth day of the month
next succeeding the month in which the tax accrues.
   (1)   Quarterly returns. The tax collector may authorize a taxpayer whose
reporting history indicates an estimated annual city privilege and use tax
liability on taxable gross income in excess of five thousand dollars
($5,000.00) but less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) to file returns
on a calendar-quarterly basis. The taxes for each calendar quarter shall be due
and payable on or before the twentieth day of the month next succeeding the end
of each calendar quarter.
   (2)   Annual returns. The tax collector may authorize a taxpayer whose
reporting history indicates an estimated annual city privilege and use tax
liability on taxable gross income of not more than five thousand dollars
($5,000.00) to file returns for such taxes on a calendar-annual basis. The
taxes for each calendar year shall be due and payable on or before the
twentieth day of January of the following year.
   (b)   Any person who is engaged in or conducting business in two (2) or more
locations or under two (2) or more business names shall file the return
required under this chapter by electronic means.
   (c)   The Department, for any taxpayer whose estimated annual liability for
taxes imposed or administered by A.R.S. Title 42, Chapter 5, Article 1 or
A.R.S. Title 42, Chapter 6 is between two thousand dollars ($2,000) and eight
thousand dollars ($8,000), shall authorize such taxpayer to pay such taxes on a
quarterly basis. The Department, for any taxpayer whose estimated annual
liability for taxes imposed or administered by A.R.S. Title 42, Chapter 5,
Article 1 or A.R.S. Title 42, Chapter 6 is less than two thousand dollars
($2,000) shall authorize such taxpayer to pay such taxes on an annual basis.
   (d)   Delinquency Date. The taxes levied under this article will be
considered delinquent in accordance with A.R.S. Section 42-5014, as follows:
   (1)   For taxpayers that are required or elect to file and pay
electronically in any month, if not received by the department on or before the
last business day of the month.
   (2)   For all other taxpayers, if not received by the department on or
before the business day preceding the last business day of the month.
   (e)   Jeopardy reporting. If the tax collector determines that the
collection of any tax due to the city is in jeopardy, the tax collector may
direct the taxpayer to file his return and remit the tax on a weekly, daily or
transaction-by-transaction basis. Such return and remittance shall be due upon
the date fixed by the tax collector, and the delinquency date shall be the
following day.
   (f)   Extensions. The tax collector may extend the time for filing a return,
for good cause shown, and only when requested in writing and received by the
tax collector prior to the tax due date. However, the time for filing such
return shall not be extended beyond the last business day of the month next
succeeding the due date of such return. In such cases, only the penalties for
late filing and late payment may be waived by the tax collector for filing and
payment within the extension period. Notwithstanding the granting of an
extension, the interest payable for late payment of taxes shall be paid for the
period commencing upon the original delinquency date and ending on the date the
tax is paid. The interest may not be waived by the tax collector.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 7446, § 2.12, 7-2-90; Ord. No. 8440, §
18, 1-23-95; Ord. No. 11936, § 16, 7-12-22)
   Editor’s note – Section 16 of Ord. No. 11936, adopted July 12, 2022,
provides for an effective date of Jan. 1, 2015.
Sec. 19-540. Interest and civil penalties.
   (a)   Any taxpayer who failed to pay any of the taxes imposed by this
chapter which were due or found to be due before the delinquency date shall be
subject to and shall pay interest upon such tax until paid. From and after
October 1, 2005, the interest rate shall be determined in the same manner and
at the same times as prescribed by Section 6621 of the United States Internal
Revenue Code and compounded annually under the method described in subsection
(1) below. The rate of interest for both overpayments and underpayments for all
taxpayers is the federal short-term rate, determined pursuant to Section 6621
(B) of the Internal Revenue Code, plus three (3) percentage points. The
interest rate prior to October 1, 2005, shall be one (1) percent per month.
Said interest may be neither waived by the tax collector nor abated by the
hearing officer except as it might relate to a tax abated as provided by
section
19-570.
   (1)   On January 1 of each year, any interest outstanding as of that date
that was accrued from and after October 1, 2005, is thereafter considered a
part of the principal amount of the tax and accrues interest pursuant to this
section.
   (2)   Interest accrued prior to October 1, 2005, shall not be added to the
principal.
   (b)   In addition to interest assessed under subsection (a) above, any
taxpayer who failed to pay any of the taxes imposed by this article which were
due or found to be due before the delinquency date shall be subject to and
shall pay any or all of the following civil penalties, in addition to any other
penalties prescribed by this article:
   (1)   A taxpayer who fails to timely file a return for a tax imposed by this
article shall pay a penalty of five (5) percent of the tax for each month or
fraction of a month elapsing between the delinquency date of the return and the
date on which it is filed, unless the taxpayer shows that the failure to timely
file is due to reasonable cause and not due to willful neglect. This penalty
shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the tax due.
   (2)   A taxpayer who fails to pay the tax within the time prescribed shall
pay a penalty of ten (10) percent of the unpaid tax, unless the taxpayer shows
that the failure to timely pay is due to reasonable cause and not due to
willful neglect. If the taxpayer is also subject to a penalty under subsection
(b)(1) above for the same tax period, the total penalties under subsection (b)
(1) and this subsection shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the tax
due.
   (3)   A taxpayer who fails or refuses to file a return within thirty (30)
days of having received a written notice and demand from the tax collector
shall pay a penalty of twenty-five (25) percent of the tax, unless the taxpayer
shows that the failure is due to reasonable cause and not due to willful
neglect or the tax collector agrees to a longer time period.
   (4)   If the cause of a tax deficiency is determined by the tax collector to
be due to negligence, but without regard for intent to defraud, the taxpayer
shall pay a penalty of ten (10) percent of the amount of deficiency. If the
taxpayer is also subject to a penalty under subsection (b)(1) or (b)(2) above
for the same tax period, the total penalties imposed under subsection (b)(1),
(b)(2) and this subsection shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the tax
due.
   (5)   If the cause of a tax deficiency is determined by the tax collector to
be due to civil fraud or evasion of the tax, the taxpayer shall pay a penalty
of fifty (50) percent of the amount of deficiency.
   (c)   Penalties and interest imposed by this section are due and payable
upon notice by the tax collector.
   (d)   If, following an audit, penalties attributable to the audit period are
to be assessed pursuant to subsection (b)(1) or (b)(2) above, the tax
collector, before assessing such penalties, must take into consideration any
information or explanations provided by the taxpayer as to why the return was
not timely filed and/or the tax was not timely paid. If such information and/or
explanations are provided by the taxpayer, and the tax collector nevertheless
decides to assess penalties pursuant to subsection (b)(1) or (b)(2) above,
then, at the time the penalties are assessed, the tax collector must provide
the taxpayer with a detailed written explanation of the basis for the tax
collector's determination that the information and/or explanations provided by
the taxpayer did not constitute reasonable cause.
   (e)   The assessment of the penalties prescribed by subsections (b)(3)
through (b)(5) above must be approved on a case-by-case basis by the tax
collector prior to such assessment. In addition, any assessment which includes
penalties based upon subsection (b)(3), (b)(4), or (b)(5) above must be
accompanied by a statement signed by the tax collector setting forth in detail
the basis for the tax collector's determination that the penalties are
warranted under the circumstances.
   (f)   The tax collector shall waive or adjust penalties imposed by
subsections (b)(1) and (b)(2) above upon a finding that:
   (1)   In the past, the taxpayer has consistently filed and paid the taxes
imposed by this article in a timely manner; or
   (2)   The amount of the penalty is greatly disproportionate to the amount of
the tax; or
   (3)   The failure of a taxpayer to file a return and/or pay any tax by the
delinquency date was caused by any of the following circumstances which must
occur prior to the delinquency date of the return or payment in question:
   a.   The return was timely filed but was inadvertently forwarded to another
taxing jurisdiction.
   b.   Erroneous or insufficient information was furnished the taxpayer by the
tax collector or his employee or agent.
   c.   Death or serious illness of the taxpayer, member of his immediate
family, or the preparer of the reports immediately prior to the due date.
   d.   Unavoidable absence of the taxpayer immediately prior to the due date.
   e.   Destruction, by fire or other casualty, of the taxpayer's place of
business or records.
   f.   Prior to the due date, the taxpayer made application for proper forms
which could not be furnished in sufficient time to permit a timely filing.
   g.   The taxpayer was in the process of pursuing an active protest of the
tax in question in another taxing jurisdiction at the time the tax and/or
return was due.
   h.   The taxpayer establishes through competent evidence that the taxpayer
contacted a tax advisor who is competent on the specific tax matter and, after
furnishing necessary and relevant information, the taxpayer was incorrectly
advised that no tax was owed and/or the filing of a return was not required.
   i.   The taxpayer has never been audited by a city for the tax or on the
issue in question and relied, in good faith, on a state exemption or
interpretation.
   j.   The taxpayer can provide some public record (court case, report in a
periodical, professional journal or publication, etc.) stating that the
transaction is not subject to tax.
   k.   The state department of revenue, based upon the same facts and
circumstances, abated penalties for the same filing period.
A taxpayer may also request a waiver or adjustment of penalty for a reason
thought to be equally substantive to those reasons itemized above. All requests
for waiver or adjustment of penalty must be in writing and shall contain all
pertinent facts and other reliable and substantive evidence to support the
request. In all cases, the burden of proof is upon the taxpayer.
   (g)   No request for waiver of penalty under subsection (f) above may be
granted unless written request for waiver is received by the tax collector
within forty-five (45) days following the imposition of penalty. Any taxpayer
aggrieved by the refusal to grant a waiver under subsection (f) above may
appeal under the provisions of section
19-570 provided that a petition of appeal or request for an extension is
submitted to the tax collector within forty-five (45) days of the taxpayer's
receipt of notice by the city that waiver has been denied.
   (h)   For the purpose of this section, "reasonable cause" shall mean that
the taxpayer exercised ordinary business care and prudence, i.e., had a
reasonable basis for believing that the tax did not apply to the business
activity or the storage or use of the taxpayer's tangible personal property in
this city.
   (i)   For the purpose of this section, "negligence" shall be characterized
chiefly by inadvertence, thoughtlessness, inattention, or the like, rather than
an "honest mistake." Examples of negligence include:
   (1)   The taxpayer's failure to maintain records in accordance with division
III of this chapter;
   (2)   Repeated failures to timely file returns; or
   (3)   Gross ignorance of the law.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 6938, § 15, 4-25-88; Ord. No. 8784, §
13, 12-2-96; Ord. No. 10287, § 1, 6-13-06)
Sec. 19-541. Erroneous advice or misleading statements by the tax collector;
abatement of penalties and interest; definition.
   (a)   Notwithstanding section
19-540(a), no interest or penalty may be assessed on an amount assessed as a
deficiency if either:
   (1)   The deficiency assessed is directly attributable to erroneous written
advice furnished to the taxpayer by an employee of the city acting in an
official capacity in response to a specific request from the taxpayer and not
from the taxpayer's failure to provide adequate or accurate information.
   (2)   All of the following are true:
   a.   A tax return form prepared by the tax collector contains a statement
that, if followed by a taxpayer, would cause the taxpayer to misapply this
chapter.
   b.   The taxpayer reasonably relies on the statement.
   c.   The taxpayer's underpayment directly results from this reliance.
   (b)   Each employee of the tax collector, at the time any oral advice is
given to any person, shall inform the person that the tax collector is not
bound by such oral advice.
   (c)   For purposes of this section, "tax return form" includes the
instructions that the tax collector prepares for use with the tax return form.
(Ord. No. 8784, § 14, 12-2-96)
Sec. 19-542. Prospective application of new law or interpretation or
application of law.
   (a)   Unless expressly authorized by law, the tax collector shall not apply
any newly enacted legislation retroactively or in a manner that will penalize a
taxpayer for complying with prior law.
   (b)   If the tax collector adopts a new interpretation or application of any
provision of this chapter or determines that any provision applies to a new or
additional category or type of business and the change in interpretation or
application is not due to a change in the law:
   (1)   The change in interpretation or application applies prospectively only
unless it is favorable to taxpayers.
   (2)   The tax collector shall not assess any tax, penalty or interest
retroactively based on the change in interpretation or application.
   (c)   For purposes of subsection (b), "new interpretation or application"
includes policies and procedures which differ from established interpretations
of this chapter.
   (d)   [Reserved.]
(Ord. No. 9652, § 9, 1-14-02; Ord. No. 10287, § 2, 6-13-06)
Sec. 19-545. Deficiencies; when inaccurate return is filed; when no return is
filed; estimates.
   (a)   Determination of Additional Taxes. If the taxpayer has failed to file
a return, or if the tax collector is not satisfied with the return and payment
of the amount of tax required, and additional taxes are determined by the tax
collector to be due, the tax collector shall deliver written notice of his
determination of a deficiency to the taxpayer; and deficiency, plus penalties
and interest, shall be due and payable forty-five (45) days after receipt of
the notice and demand. Such additional taxes shall bear any applicable civil
penalties and interest as provided in section
19-540, and every such notice of a determination of an additional amount due
shall be assessed within the limitation period provided in section
19-550.
   (1)   When a return is filed. If the tax collector is not satisfied with a
return and payment of the amount of tax required by this article to be paid to
the city, he may examine the return or examine the records of the taxpayer, and
redetermine the amount of tax, penalties and interest required to be paid, for
any periods available to the tax collector under section
19-550, based upon the information contained in the return or records or based
upon any information within his possession or which comes into his possession.
   (2)   When no return is filed. If any person fails to make a return, the tax
collector may make an estimate of the amount of tax due under this article and
compute any applicable penalties and interest due, based upon any information
within his possession or which comes into his possession.
   (b)   Estimates by the Tax Collector. Any estimate made by the tax collector
is to be made on a reasonable basis. The existence of another reasonable basis
of estimation does not, in any way, invalidate the tax collector's estimate. It
is the responsibility of the taxpayer to prove that the tax collector's
estimate is not reasonable and correct, by providing sufficient documentation
of the type and form required by this article or satisfactory to the tax
collector.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87)
Sec. 19-546. Closing agreements in cases of extensive taxpayer misunderstanding
or misapplication; city attorney approval; rules.
   (a)   If the tax collector determines that noncompliance with tax
obligations results from extensive misunderstanding or misapplication of
provisions of this chapter it may enter into closing agreements with those
taxpayers under the following terms and conditions:
   (1)   Extensive misunderstanding or misapplication of the tax laws occurs if
the tax collector determines that more than sixty (60) percent of the persons
in the affected class have failed to properly account for their taxes owing to
the same misunderstanding or misapplication of the tax laws.
   (2)   The tax collector shall publicly declare the nature of the possible
misapplication and the proposed definition of the class of affected taxpayers
and shall conduct a public hearing to hear testimony regarding the extent of
the misapplication and the definition of the affected class.
   (3)   If, after the public hearing, the tax collector determines that a
class of affected taxpayers has failed to comply with their tax obligations
because of extensive misunderstanding or misapplication of the tax laws it
shall issue a tax ruling announcing that finding and publish the ruling in a
newspaper of general circulation in the city and through the next two (2) model
city tax code updates.
   (4)   A closing agreement under this section may abate some or all of the
penalties, interest and tax that taxpayers have failed to remit, or the
agreement may provide for the prospective treatment of the matter as to the
class of affected taxpayers. All taxpayers in the class shall be offered the
opportunity to enter into a similar agreement for the same tax periods.
   (5)   Taxpayers in the affected class who have properly accounted for their
tax obligations for these tax periods shall be offered the opportunity to enter
into an equivalent closing agreement providing for a pro rata credit or refund
of their taxes previously paid.
   (6)   The closing agreement shall require the taxpayers to properly account
for an pay such taxes in the future. If the taxpayer fails to adhere to such a
requirement, the closing agreement is voidable by the tax collector and he may
assess the taxpayer for the delinquent taxes. The tax collector may issue such
a proposed assessment within six (6) months after the date that he declares
that closing agreement void or within the period prescribed by section
19-550 of this chapter.
   (b)   Before entering into closing agreements pursuant to this section, the
tax collector shall secure such approval as required by charter, ordinance or
administrative regulation.
   (c)   After a closing agreement has been signed pursuant to this section, it
is final and conclusive except on a showing of fraud, malfeasance or
misrepresentation of a material fact. The case shall not be reopened as to the
matters agreed upon or the agreement shall not be modified by any officer,
employee or agent of the city. The agreement or any determination, assessment,
collection, payment abatement, refund or credit made pursuant to the agreement
shall not be annulled, modified, set aside or disregarded in any suit, action
or proceeding.
   (d)   The tax collector shall report in writing its activities under this
section to the mayor and city council on or before February 1 of each year.
(Ord. No. 8784, § 15, 12-2-96)
Sec. 19-550. Limitation periods.
   (a)   Limitation When a Return Has Been Filed.
   (1)   Except as provided elsewhere in this section, the tax collector may
assess additional tax due at any time within four (4) years after the date on
which the return is required to be filed, or within four (4) years after the
date on which the return is filed, whichever period expires later.
   (2)   However, if a taxpayer does not report an amount properly reportable
which is in excess of twenty-five (25) percent of the taxable amount stated on
the return, the tax collector, may assess additional tax due at any time within
six (6) years after the date on which the return was filed.
   (3)   Any delay in commencement or completion of any examination by the tax
collector, which is requested or agreed to in writing by the taxpayer, shall be
excluded from the computation of any limitation period prescribed by this
section, and the tax collector shall be entitled to make a determination for
taxes due without exclusion of any such time period, and any limitation period
shall be extended for a length of time equivalent to the period of the agreed
upon delay.
   (4)   Any assessment of additional tax due by the tax collector shall be
deemed to have been made by mailing a copy of a notice of audit assessment by
certified mail to the taxpayer's address of record with the tax collector or by
personal delivery of a copy of a notice of audit assessment to the taxpayer or
his authorized agent.
   (b)   Suspension of Limitation Period. The limitation period on assessment
shall be suspended for any period:
   (1)   The assets of the taxpayer are in the control or custody of the court
in any proceeding before any court of jurisdiction within the United States of
America, and for one hundred eighty (180) calendar days thereafter; or
   (2)   Which the taxpayer and the tax collector agree upon in writing.
   (c)   When No Return Filed; Fraudulent Return. In the case of a fraudulent
return with the intent to evade tax, or the failure or refusal to file a return
for any month, the tax collector may assess the amount of taxes payable for
that month at any time, without any reliance by the taxpayer upon any time
limitation provided elsewhere in this article.
   (d)   Special Provisions Relating to Owner-Builders. The limitation for an
owner- builder subject to the tax as prescribed in section
19-417 shall be based upon the date such tax liability is reportable or was
reported, as provided in section
19-417.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 7446, § 2.13, 7-2-90; Ord. No. 8784, §
16, 12-2-96)
Sec. 19-553. Examination of taxpayer records; joint audits.
   (a)   Waiver of joint audit. A taxpayer that does not authorize a joint
audit to be conducted for a tax jurisdiction is subject to audit by that tax
jurisdiction at any time subject to the limitation provisions provided in
section
19-550.
   (b)   Tax jurisdiction acceptance of joint audit. If the Arizona Department
of Revenue intends to conduct an audit of a taxpayer, the cities or towns for
whom a joint audit is being conducted may accept the audit by the Arizona
Department of Revenue or may elect to have a representative participate,
provided that no more than two city or town representatives in total may
participate.
   (1)   If a city or town does not accept the audit as a joint audit, the city
or town may not conduct an audit of the taxpayer for forty-two months from the
close of the last tax period covered by the audit unless an exception applies
to that taxpayer pursuant to A.R.S. Section 42-2059.
   (2)   If a joint audit is performed by a city or town, the Arizona
Department of Revenue is not prohibited from conducting an audit that does not
violate the provisions of A.R.S. Section 42-2059.
(Ord. No. 9569, § 2, 6-18-01)
Sec. 19-555. Tax collector may examine books and other records; failure to
provide records.
   (a)   The tax collector may require the taxpayer to provide and may examine
any books, records or other documents of any person who, in the opinion of the
tax collector, might be liable for any tax under this article, for any periods
available to him under section
19-550.
   (b)   In order to perform any examination authorized by this article, the
tax collector may issue an administrative request for the attendance of
witnesses or for the production of documents, as provided by regulation.
   (c)   If within sixty (60) days of receiving a written request for
information in the possession of the taxpayer, the taxpayer fails or refuses to
furnish the requested information, the tax collector may, in addition to
penalties prescribed under section
19-540, impose an additional penalty of twenty-five (25) percent of the amount
of any tax deficiency which is attributable to the information which the
taxpayer failed to provide, unless the taxpayer shows that the failure was due
to reasonable cause and not due to willful neglect.
   (d)   The tax collector may use any generally accepted auditing procedures,
including sampling techniques, to determine the correct tax liability of any
taxpayer. The tax collector shall ensure that the procedures used are in
accordance with generally accepted auditing standards.
   (e)   The fact that the taxpayer has not maintained or provided such books
and records which the tax collector considers necessary to determine the tax
liability of any person does not preclude the tax collector from making any
assessment. In such cases, the tax collector is authorized to use estimates,
projections, or samplings, to determine the correct tax. The provisions of
section
19-545(b), concerning estimates, shall apply.
   (f)   The tax collector shall give the taxpayer written notice of his
determination of a deficiency by certified mail, to the taxpayer's address of
record with the tax collector, and the tax deficiency, plus interest and
penalties, is final forty-five (45) days from the date of receipt of the notice
by the taxpayer, unless an appeal is taken pursuant to the provisions of
sections
19-570 through
19-575.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 8440, § 19, 1-23-95; Ord. No. 8784, §
17, 12-2-96)
Sec. 19-556. No additional audits or proposed assessments; exceptions.
   (a)   Once the tax collector completes an examination authorized by section
19-555 and a written notice of the determination of a deficiency has been
issued to the taxpayer pursuant to section
19-545(a) or
19-555(f). The taxpayer's liability for the time period subjected to the
examination is fixed and determined, and no additional audit or examination may
be conducted by the tax collector with respect to such time period except under
the following circumstances.
   (1)   If a taxpayer files a claim for refund under section
19-560, the tax collector may conduct an examination limited to the issues
presented in the refund claim.
   (2)   If the taxpayer failed to disclose material information during the
initial examination, falsified books or records, or otherwise engaged in
conduct which prevented the tax collector from conducting an accurate
examination. The applicability of this subsection, and the tax collector's
right to proceed thereunder, may be raised and contested by the taxpayer in a
subsequent administrative review brought pursuant to section
19-570.
   (b)   An audit or examination conducted by any other taxing jurisdiction
will not preclude the tax collector from conducting an audit or examination for
the same time period.
   (c)   If the tax collector issues a notice of deficiency pursuant to either
section
19-545(a) or section
19-555(f), the tax collector may not increase the proposed deficiency except in
one (1) or more of the following circumstances:
   (1)   The taxpayer made a material misrepresentation of fact.
   (2)   The taxpayer failed to disclose a material fact.
   (3)   The tax collector submitted a written request for information prior to
issuance of the assessment, and the taxpayer, despite possessing or having
access to such information, failed to provide it within sixty (60) days as
required by section
19-555(c).
   (4)   After issuing the notice of determination of deficiency but before the
deficiency became final, the state tax court, court of appeals or supreme court
issued a decision, the applicability of which causes the deficiency initially
proposed to increase.
(Ord. No. 8784, § 18, 12-2-96; Ord. No. 9069, § 1(12), 6-15-98)
Sec. 19-560. Erroneous payment of tax; credits and refunds; limitations.
   (a)   The tax collector may authorize either credits or payments of refunds
for any taxes, penalties or interest paid in excess of the amount actually due.
Any credit authorized by the tax collector shall be canceled from the accounts
of the city if no timely filed request for credit or refund is made by the
claimant claiming same within one (1) year following the date of determination
and notice by the tax collector of the excess payment. For purposes of this
section, "claimant" means a taxpayer that has paid a tax imposed under this
article and has submitted a credit or refund claim under this section. Except
where the taxpayer has granted a customer a power of attorney to pursue a
credit or refund claim on the taxpayer's behalf, claimant does not include any
customer of such taxpayer, whether or not the claimant collected the tax from
customers by separately stated itemization.
   (b)   No credit shall be allowed or refund paid except under one of the
following conditions:
   (1)   As provided in section
19-565.
   (2)   Upon examination of filed returns for any period not excluded by
section
19-550 and not to exceed the tax, penalty, or interest actually paid with such
returns.
   (3)   Upon audit or other examination of the books and records of the
taxpayer but only for periods as provided in section
19-550. In the case of an examination performed at the taxpayer's request,
credit shall be allowed or refund paid only for any taxes, penalties, or
interest actually paid within the limitation period provided in section
19-550, such period to be calculated from the date of receipt of the taxpayer's
request by the tax collector. Requests by taxpayers for audits to authorize
credits shall be honored unless, in the opinion of the tax collector, the
taxpayer has made excessive requests for audits.
   (4)   Upon the claimant's submission of a written claim for credit or refund
of any taxes, penalties, or interest paid to the city by the claimant.
   (c)   A credit or refund claim submitted by a claimant pursuant to
subsection (b)(4) of this section must:
   (1)   Identify the name, address and city tax identification number of the
taxpayer;
   (2)   Identify the dollar amount of the credit or refund requested;
   (3)   Identify the specific tax period involved; and
   (4)   Identify the specific grounds upon which the claim is based.
   (d)   When a written claim for credit or refund is submitted pursuant to
subsection (b)(4) of this section, no credit shall be allowed or refund paid
except for those taxes, penalties, or interest paid in excess of the amount due
within the limitation period provided in section
19-550. The credit or refund limitation period shall be calculated from the
date the tax collector receives the claimant's written claim meeting the
requirements of subsection (c) of this section.
   (e)   The following additional requirements apply to the tax collector and
the claimant for claims for credit or refund submitted pursuant to subsection
(b)(4) of this section:
   (1)   The tax collector shall notify the claimant that the claim for credit
or refund has been received and shall indicate whether the claim meets the
requirements of subsection (c) of this section. If the claim does not meet the
requirements of subsection (c) of this section, the tax collector shall
identify the deficiency in writing. Any claim that does not meet the
requirements of subsection (c) of this section shall not secure the limitation
period pursuant to section
19-550.
   (2)   The tax collector may request, in writing, additional information or
documentation from the claimant to support the requested credit or refund. Such
information or documentation must be reasonably related to the claim and
required to be maintained under this chapter in the normal course of business.
   (A)   The claimant may request in writing one or more extensions to supply
the requested information or documentation. The tax collector may reject an
extension request only by denying the claim in whole or in part, subject to
appeal by the claimant pursuant to section
19-570.
   (B)   Claimant aggrieved by a request for information or documentation under
this subsection may file an appeal in the manner provided for in section
19-570 regarding the scope of the request for information or documentation.
Such petition must be filed no later than the last day by which requested
information or documentation must be provided to the tax collector, including
any extensions. The decision of the Hearing Officer regarding a request for
information or documentation may not be appealed by either party until the
claim has been approved or denied, in whole or in part, under subsection (h) of
this section or through subsections (e)(3) or (e)(4) of this section. A
claimant shall not be barred from raising the issue of the reasonableness of
the tax collector's information or documentation request in an appeal filed
under subsection (h) of this section or through subsections (e)(3) or (e)(4) of
this section through a lack of filing a petition under this subsection.
   (3)   If the tax collector fails to request additional information or
documentation pursuant to this section and fails to issue a determination on
any claim for credit or refund within six (6) months after the claim is filed,
the claimant may consider the claim denied and may file an appeal pursuant to
section
19-570.
   (4)   If the tax collector fails to issue a determination within six (6)
months of receiving all requested additional information or documentation, the
claimant may consider the claim for credit or refund denied and may file an
appeal pursuant to section
19-570.
   (5)   The burden of proof to show that a notice, request, determination, or
other communication was received by the claimant in this section is on the tax
collector and will be satisfied by receipt of notice. The burden of proof to
show that a claim or additional information or documentation was received by
the tax collector is on the claimant and will be satisfied by receipt of
notice.
   (f)   Interest shall be allowed on the overpayment of tax for any credit or
refund authorized pursuant to subsections (b)(3) or (b)(4) of this section at
the rate and in the manner set forth in section
19-540(a) as follows:
   (1)   For credits or refunds authorized pursuant to subsection (b)(3) of
this section, interest shall be calculated from the date the tax collector
receives the claimant's written claim following the date of notice to the
claimant authorizing the credit or refund.
   (2)   For credits or refunds authorized pursuant to subsection (b)(4) of
this section, interest shall be calculated from the date the tax collector
receives the claimant's written claim meeting the requirements of subsection
(c) of this section.
   (g)   The tax collector shall give the claimant a written notice of
determination for a claim made under subsection (b) of this section. If the
determination is a denial of a claim, in whole or in part, the determination
must state that the claim for credit or refund has been denied in whole or in
part, with the reason for denial, and must include the claimant's rights of
appeal pursuant to section
19-570.
   (h)   A determination by the tax collector under this section, whether an
approval of a claim or a denial of a claim, in whole or in part, shall become
final forty-five (45) days from the date of receipt of the notice by the
claimant, unless an appeal is made pursuant to section
19-570. If the claimant is the prevailing party in an appeal of a determination
under this section, section
19-578 shall apply, except that reasonable fees and other costs may be awarded
either by the hearing officer or court and are not subject to the monetary
limitations of subsection
19-578(e) if the tax collector's position was not substantially justified or
was brought for the purpose of harassing the claimant, frustrating the credit
or refund process, or delaying the credit or refund. For the purposes of this
section, "reasonable fees and other costs" means fees and other costs that are
based on prevailing market rates for the kind and quality of the furnished
services, not to exceed the amounts actually paid for expert witnesses, the
cost of any study, analysis, report, test, project, or computer program that is
found to be necessary to prepare the claimant's case and necessary fees for
attorneys or other representatives.
   (i)   The amendments to this section as enacted in Ordinance No. 10287 shall
be effective as follows:
   (1)   For any claim for refund or credit received by the tax collector
before October 1, 2005:
   (A)   The provisions of this section as it existed prior to the adoption of
Ordinance No. 10287 shall apply, except that interest shall be allowed from and
after October 1, 2005, as provided in subsection (f) of this section.
   (B)   Except as noted in subsection (1)(A), the amendments to this section
as enacted in Ordinance No. 10287 shall not be cited or considered in the
construction or the interpretation of the city tax refund or credit provisions,
interest provisions, or appeal provisions in effect prior to October 1, 2005.
   (2)   The provisions of this section enacted by Ordinance No. 10287 shall
apply to all claims for refund or credit, for any periods as determined by
subsections (d) or (e) of this section, received by the tax collector from and
after October 1, 2005, except for claims that, in whole or in part, had been
received by the collector prior to October 1, 2005.
   (j)   Any refund paid under the provisions of this section shall be paid
from the privilege tax revenue accounts.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 8784, § 19, 12-2-96; Ord. No. 10287, §
3, 6-13-06)
Sec. 19-565. Payment of tax by the incorrect taxpayer or to the incorrect
Arizona city or town.
   (a)   When it is determined that taxes have been reported and paid to the
city by the wrong taxpayer, any taxes erroneously paid shall be transferred by
the city to the privilege tax account of the person who actually owes and
should have paid such taxes, provided that the city receives an assignment and
waiver signed by both the person who actually paid the tax and the person who
should have paid the tax.
   (b)   An assignment and waiver provided under this section, must:
   (1)   Identify the name and city privilege license number of the person who
erroneously paid the tax and the person who should have paid the tax.
   (2)   Provide that the person who erroneously paid the tax waives any right
such person may have to a refund of the taxes erroneously paid.
   (3)   Authorize the city treasurer to transfer the erroneously paid tax to
the privilege tax account of the person who should have paid the tax.
   (c)   When it is determined that taxes have been reported and paid to the
wrong Arizona city or town, such taxes shall be remitted to the correct city or
town, provided that the city or town to whom the taxes were erroneously paid
receives an assignment and waiver signed by both the person who actually paid
the tax and the person who should have paid the tax. Where the person who
actually paid the tax and the person who should have paid the tax are one and
the same, no assignment and waiver need be provided. The city shall neither pay
nor charge any interest or penalty on any overpayment or underpayment except
such interest and penalty actually paid by the taxpayer relating to such tax.
   (d)   This section in no way limits or restricts the applicability of any
remedies which may otherwise be available under A.R.S. § 42-6003. The
limitations and procedures set forth in A.R.S. § 42-6003 shall apply to all
payments under this section.
   (e)   When reference is made in this section to this city or an Arizona city
or town, and payments made to or requested from this city or an Arizona city or
town, the provisions shall be applicable to the state department of revenue
when it is acting for or on behalf of this city or an Arizona city or town.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 8784, § 20, 12-2-96; Ord. No. 10361, §
13, 12-19-06)
Sec. 19-567. Reserved
   Editors Note: Ordinance No. 8784, § 21, adopted December 2, 1996, deleted §
19-567 in its entirety. Formerly, such section pertained to allocation of tax
on retail sales when more than one Arizona city or town has nexus and derived
from Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87.
Sec. 19-570. Administrative review; petition for hearing or for
redetermination; finality of order.
For the purposes of this section, municipal tax hearing office means the
administrative offices of the municipal tax hearing officer.
   (a)   Informal conference. A taxpayer shall have the right to discuss any
proposed assessment with the auditor prior to the issuance of any assessment,
but any such informal conference is not required for the taxpayer to file a
petition for administrative review.
   (b)   Administrative review.
   (1)   Filing a petition. Other than in the case of a jeopardy assessment, a
taxpayer may contest the applicability or amount of any tax, penalty, or
interest imposed upon or paid by him pursuant to this article by filing a
petition for a hearing or for redetermination with the tax collector as set
forth below:
   (A)   within forty-five (45) days of receipt by the taxpayer of notice of a
determination by the tax collector that a tax, penalty, or interest amount is
due, or that a request for refund or credit has been denied; or
   (B)   by voluntary payment of any contested amount when accompanied by a
timely filed return and a petition requesting a refund of the protested portion
of said payment; or
   (C)   by petition accompanying a timely filed return contesting an amount
reported but not paid; or
   (D)   by petition requesting review of denial of waiver of penalty as
provided in subsection
19-540(g).
   (2)   Extension to file a petition. In all cases, the taxpayer may request
an extension from the tax collector. Such request must be in writing, state the
reasons for the requested delay, and must be filed with the tax collector
within the period allowed above for originally filing a petition. The tax
collector shall allow a forty-five (45) day extension to file a petition when
such written request has been properly and timely made by the taxpayer. The tax
collector may grant an additional extension and may determine the corresponding
time of any such extension at his sole discretion.
   (3)   Requirements for petition.
   (A)   The petition shall be in writing and shall set forth the reasons why
any correction, abatement, or refund should be granted, and the amount of
reduction or refund requested. The petition may be amended at any time prior to
the time the taxpayer rests his case at the hearing or such time as the hearing
officer allows for submitting of amendments in cases of redeterminations
without hearings. The hearing officer may require that amendments be in
writing, and in that case, he shall provide a reasonable period of time to file
the amendment. The hearing officer shall provide a reasonable period of time
for the tax collector to review and respond to the petition and to any written
amendments.
   (B)   The taxpayer, as part of the petition, may request a hearing which
shall be granted by the hearing officer. If no request for hearing is made the
petition shall be considered to be submitted for decision by the hearing
officer on the matters contained in the petition and in any reply made by the
tax collector.
   (C)   The provisions of this section are exclusive, and no petition seeking
any correction, abatement, or refund shall be considered unless the petition is
timely and properly filed under this section.
   (4)   Transmittal to hearing officer. The city shall designate a hearing
officer, who may be other than an employee of the city. The tax collector, if
designated to receive petitions, shall forward any petition to the municipal
tax hearing office (MTHO) within twenty (20) days after receipt, accompanied by
documentation as to timeliness. In cases where the Hearing Officer determines
that the petition is not timely or not in proper form, he shall notify both the
taxpayer and the tax collector; and in cases of petitions not in proper form
only, the hearing officer shall provide the taxpayer with an extension up to
forty-five (45) days to correct the petition.
   (5)   Hearings shall be conducted by a hearing officer and shall be
continuous until the hearing officer closes the record. The taxpayer may be
heard in person or by his authorized representative at such hearing. Hearings
shall be conducted informally as to the order of proceeding and presentation of
evidence. The hearing officer shall admit evidence over hearsay objections
where the offered evidence has substantial probative value and reliability.
Further, copies of records and documents prepared in the ordinary course of
business may be admitted, without objection as to foundation, but subject to
argument as to weight, admissibility, and authenticity. Summary accounting
records may be admitted subject to satisfactory proof of the reliability of the
summaries. In all cases, the decision of the hearing officer shall be made
solely upon substantial and reliable evidence. All expenses incurred in the
hearing shall be paid by the party incurring the same.
   (6)   Redeterminations upon a "petition for redetermination" shall follow
the same conditions, except that no oral hearing shall be held.
   (7)   Hearing ruling. In either case, the hearing officer shall issue his
ruling not later than forty-five (45) days after the close of the record by the
hearing officer.
   (8)   Notice of refund or adjusted assessment. Within sixty (60) days of the
issuance of the hearing officer's decision, the tax collector shall issue to
the taxpayer either a notice of refund or an adjusted assessment recalculated
to conform to the hearing officer's decision.
   (c)   Stipulations that future tax is also protested. A taxpayer may enter
into a stipulation with the tax collector that future taxes of similar nature
are also at issue in any protest or appeal. However, unless such stipulation is
made, it is presumed that the protest or appeal deals solely and exclusively
with the tax specifically protested and no other. When a taxpayer enters into
such a stipulation with the tax collector that future taxes of similar nature
will be included in any redetermination, hearing, or court case, it is the
burden of that taxpayer to identify, segregate, and keep record of such income
or protested taxable amount in his books and records in the same manner as the
taxpayer is required to segregate exempt income.
   (d)   When an assessment is final.
   (1)   If a request for administrative review and petition for hearing or
redetermination of an assessment made by the tax collector is not filed within
the period required by subsection (b) above, such person shall be deemed to
have waived and abandoned the right to question the amount determined to be due
and any tax, interest, or penalty determined to be due shall be final as
provided in subsections
19-545(a) and
19-555(f).
   (2)   The decision made by the hearing officer upon administrative review by
hearing or redetermination shall become final thirty (30) days after the
taxpayer receives the notice of refund or adjusted assessment required by
subsection (b)(8) above, unless the taxpayer appeals the order or decision in
the manner provided in section
19-575.
   (e)   (Reserved).
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 7446, § 2.14, 7-2-90; Ord. No. 8784, §
22, 12-2-96; Ord. No. 9569, § 3, 6-18-01; Ord. No. 10754, § 5, 1-20-10, eff. 7-
1-08)
Sec. 19-571. Jeopardy assessments. (Reg. 571.1)
   (a)   If the tax collector believes that the collection of any assessment or
deficiency of any amounts imposed by this article will be jeopardized by delay,
he shall deliver to the taxpayer a notice of such finding and demand immediate
payment of the tax or deficiency declared to be in jeopardy, including
interest, penalties and additions.
   (b)   Jeopardy assessments are immediately due and payable, and the tax
collector may immediately begin proceedings for collection. The taxpayer,
however, may stay collection by filing, within ten (10) days after receipt of
notice of jeopardy assessment, or within such additional time as the tax
collector may allow, by bond or collateral in favor of the city in the amount
tax collector declared to be in jeopardy in his notice.
   (c)   "Bond or collateral," as required by this section.
   (1)   Shall mean either:
   a.   A bond issued in favor of the city by a surety company authorized to
transact business in this state and approved by the director of insurance as to
solvency and responsibility; or
   b.   Collateral composed of securities or cash which are deposited with and
kept in the custody of the tax collector.
   (2)   Shall be of such form that it may, at any time without notice, be
applied to any tax, penalties or interest due and payable for the purposes of
this article. Securities held as collateral by the tax collector must be of a
nature that they may be sold at public or private sale without notice to the
taxpayer.
   (d)   If bond or collateral is not filed within the period prescribed by
subsection (b) above, the tax collector may treat the assessment as final for
purposes of any collection proceedings. The taxpayer nevertheless shall be
afforded the appeal rights provided in sections
19-570 and
19-575. The filing of a petition by the taxpayer under section
19-570, however, shall not stay the tax collector's rights to pursue any
collection proceedings.
   (e)   If the taxpayer timely files sufficient bond or collateral, the
jeopardy requirements are deemed satisfied; and the taxpayer may avail himself
of the provisions of section
19-570, including requests for additional time to file a petition.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 6938, § 16, 4-25-88)
Sec. 19-572. Expedited review of jeopardy assessments.
   (a)   Within thirty (30) days after the date on which the tax collector
furnishes the written notice required by section
19-571(a), the taxpayer, pursuant to section
19-570, may request the tax collector to review the action taken, within
fifteen (15) days after the request for review, the tax collector shall
determine whether both the jeopardy determination and the amount assessed are
reasonable.
   (b)   Within thirty (30) days after the tax collector notifies the taxpayer
of the determination he reached pursuant to subsection (a) above, the taxpayer
may bring a civil action in the appropriate court. If the taxpayer so requests,
the city shall stipulate to an accelerated and expedited resolution of the
civil action. If the court determines that either the jeopardy determination or
the amount assessed is unreasonable, the court may order the tax collector to
abate the assessment, to redetermine any part of the amount assessed or to take
such other action as the court finds to be appropriate. A determination made by
the court under this subsection is final except as provided in A.R.S. section
12-170.
(Ord. No. 8784, § 23, 12-2-96)
Sec. 19-575. Judicial review.
   (a)   A taxpayer may seek judicial review of all or any part of a hearing
officer's decision by initiating an action against the city in the appropriate
court of this county. A taxpayer is not required to pay any tax, penalty or
interest upheld by the hearing officer before seeking such judicial review.
   (b)   The tax collector may seek judicial review of all or any part of a
hearing officer's decision by initiating an action in the appropriate court of
this county.
   (c)   An action for judicial review can not be commenced by either the
taxpayer or the tax collector more than thirty (30) days after receipt by the
taxpayer of notice of any refund or assessment recalculated or reduced to
conform to the hearing officer's decision, unless the time to commence such an
action is extended in writing signed by both the taxpayer and the tax
collector. Failure to bring the action within thirty (30) days or such other
time as is agreed upon in writing shall constitute a waiver of any right to
judicial review, except as provided in subsection (f) below.
   (d)   The court shall hear and determine the appeal as a trial de novo;
however, the tax collector cannot raise in the court any grounds or basis for
the assessment not asserted before the hearing officer. Nothing in this
subsection, however, shall preclude the tax collector from responding to any
arguments which are raised by the taxpayer in the appeal.
   (e)   The city has the burden of proof by a preponderance of the evidence in
any court proceeding regarding any factual issue relevant to ascertaining the
tax liability of a taxpayer. This subsection does not abrogate any requirement
of this chapter that requires a taxpayer to substantiate an item of gross
income, exclusion, exemption, deduction, or credit. this subsection applies to
a factual issue if a preponderance of the evidence demonstrates that:
   (1)   The taxpayer asserts a reasonable dispute regarding the issue.
   (2)   The taxpayer has fully cooperated with the tax collector regarding the
issue, including providing within a reasonable period of time, access to and
inspection of all witnesses, information and documents within the taxpayer's
control, as reasonably requested by the tax collector.
   (3)   The taxpayer has kept and maintained records as required by the city.
   (f)   The issuance of an adjusted or corrected assessment or notice of
refund due to the taxpayer, where made by the tax collector pursuant to the
decision of the hearing officer, shall not be deemed an acquiescence by the
city or the tax collector in said decision, nor shall it constitute a bar or
estoppel to the institution of an action or counterclaim by the city to recover
any amounts claimed to be due to it by virtue of the original assessment.
   (g)   After the initiation of any action in the appropriate court by either
party, the opposite party may file such counterclaim as would be allowed
pursuant to the Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 8784, § 24, 12-2-96; Ord. No. 9322, §
13, 11-22-99)
Sec. 19-577. Refunds of taxes paid under protest.
In the event the hearing officer's decision or a final judgment by the court is
rendered in favor of the taxpayer to recover protested taxes, it shall be the
duty of the tax collector, upon receipt of such decision or of a certified copy
of such final judgment, to authorize a warrant in favor of the taxpayer in an
amount equal to the amount of the tax found by such decision or by the final
judgment to have been paid under protest; and such warrant shall include the
amount of interest or other cost that may have been recovered against the city
by the final judgment in such action in the courts, to be paid from the
privilege tax revenue accounts.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87)
Sec. 19-578. Reimbursement of fees and other costs; definitions.
   (a)   A taxpayer who is a prevailing party may be reimbursed for reasonable
fees and other costs related to any administrative proceeding brought by the
taxpayer pursuant to section
19-570(b). for purposes of this section, a taxpayer is considered to be the
prevailing party only if both of the following are true:
   (1)   The tax collector's position was not substantially justified.
   (2)   The taxpayer prevails as to the most significant issue or set of
issues.
   (b)   Reimbursement under this section may be denied if any of the following
circumstances apply:
   (1)   During the course of the proceeding the taxpayer unduly and
unreasonably protracted the final resolution of the matter.
   (2)   The reason that the taxpayer prevailed is due to an intervening change
in the applicable law.
   (c)   The taxpayer shall present an itemization of the reasonable fees and
other costs to the taxpayer problem resolution officer within thirty (30) days
after receipt by the taxpayer of a notice of refund or recalculated assessment
issued by the tax collector pursuant to section
19-570(b)(8). The taxpayer problem resolution officer shall determine the
validity of the fees and other costs within thirty (30) days after receiving
the itemization. The taxpayer problem resolution officer's decision is
considered a final decision. Either the taxpayer or the tax collector may seek
judicial review of the taxpayer problem resolution officer's decision. An
action for judicial review, however, shall not be commenced more than thirty
(30) days after receipt of the resolution officer's decision.
   (d)   In the event judicial review is not sought pursuant to subsection (c)
above, the city shall pay the fees and other costs awarded as provided in this
section within thirty (30) days after demand by a person who has received an
award pursuant to this section.
   (e)   Reimbursement to a taxpayer under this section shall not exceed twenty
thousand dollars ($20,000.00) or actual monies spent, whichever is less. The
reimbursable attorney or representative fees shall not exceed one hundred
dollars ($100.00) per hour or actual monies spent, whichever is less, unless
the taxpayer problem resolution officer determines that an increase in the cost
of living or a special factor such as the limited availability of qualified
attorneys or representatives for the proceeding involved justifies a higher
fee.
   (f)   For purposes of this section "reasonable fees and other costs" means
fees and other costs that are based on prevailing market rates for the kind and
quality of the furnished services, but not exceeding the amounts actually spent
for expert witnesses, the cost of any study, analysis, report, test or project
that is found to be necessary to prepare the party's case and necessary fees
for attorneys or other representatives.
(Ord. No. 8784, § 25, 12-2-96)
Sec. 19-580. Criminal penalties.
   (a)   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly or willfully:
   (1)   Fail or refuse to make any return required by this article.
   (2)   Fail to remit as and when due the full amount of any tax or additional
tax or penalty and interest thereon.
   (3)   Make or cause to be made a false or fraudulent return.
   (4)   Make or cause to be made a false or fraudulent statement in a return,
in written support of a return, or to demonstrate or support entitlement to a
deduction, exclusion, or credit or to entitle the person to an allocation or
apportionment or receipts subject to tax.
   (5)   Fail or refuse to permit any lawful examination of any book, account,
record or other memorandum by the tax collector.
   (6)   Fail or refuse to remit any tax collected by such person from his
customer to the tax collector before the delinquency date next following such
collection.
   (7)   Advertise or hold out to the public in any manner, directly or
indirectly, that any tax imposed by this article, as provided in this article,
is not considered as an element in the price to the consumer.
   (8)   Fail or refuse to obtain a privilege license or to aid or abet another
in any attempt to intentionally refuse to obtain such a license or evade the
license fee.
   (9)   Reproduce, forge, falsify, fraudulently obtain or secure, or aid or
abet another in any attempt to reproduce, forge, falsify, or fraudulently
obtain or secure, an exemption from taxes imposed by this article.
   (b)   The violation of any provision of subsection (a) above shall
constitute a class 2 misdemeanor.
   (c)   In addition to the foregoing penalties, any person who shall knowingly
swear to or verify any false or fraudulent statement, with the intent
aforesaid, shall be guilty of the offense of perjury and on conviction thereof
shall be punished in the manner provided by law.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87)
Sec. 19-590. Civil actions.
   (a)   Liens.
   (1)   Any tax, penalty, or interest imposed under this article which has
become final, as provided in this article, shall become a lien when the city
perfects a notice and claim of lien setting forth the name of the taxpayer; the
amount of the tax, penalty, and interest; the period or periods for which the
same is due; and the date of accrual thereof, the amount of the recording costs
by the county recorder in any county in which the taxpayer owns real property
and the documentation and lien processing fees imposed by the city council and
further stating that the city claims a lien therefor.
   (2)   The notice of claim of lien shall be signed by the revenue
administrator under his official seal or the official seal of the city, and,
with respect to real property, shall be recorded in the office of the county
recorder of any county in which the taxpayer owns real property, and, with
respect to personal property, shall be filed in the office of the secretary of
state. After the notice and claim of lien is recorded or filed, the taxes,
penalties, and interest and recording costs and lien processing fees referred
to above in the amounts specified therein shall be a lien on all real property
of the taxpayer located in such county where recorded, and all tangible
personal property of the taxpayer within the state, superior to all other liens
and assessments recorded or filed subsequent to the recording or filing of the
notice and claim of lien.
   (3)   Every tax and any increases, interest, penalties, and recording costs
and lien processing fees referred to above, shall become from the time the same
is due and payable a personal debt from the person liable to the city, but
shall be payable to and recoverable by the tax collector and which may be
collected in the manner set forth in subsection (b) below.
   (4)   Any lien perfected pursuant to this section shall, upon payment of the
taxes, penalties, interest, recording costs and lien processing fees referred
to above and lien release fees imposed by the county recorder in any county in
which the lien was recorded, thereby be released by the tax collector in the
same manner as mortgages and judgments are released. The tax collector may, at
his sole discretion, release a lien in part, that is, against only specified
property, for partial payment of moneys due the city.
   (b)   Actions To Recover Tax. An action may be brought by the city attorney
or other legal advisor to the city designated by the city council, at the
request of the tax collector, in the name of the city, to recover the amount of
any taxes, penalties interest recording costs, lien processing fees and lien
release fees due under this article; provided that:
   (1)   No action or proceeding may be taken or commenced to collect any taxes
levied by this article until the amount thereof has been established by
assessment, correction, or reassessment; and
   (2)   Such collection effort is made or the proceedings begun:
   a.   Within six (6) years after the assessment of the tax; or
   b.   Prior to the expiration of any period of collection agreed upon in
writing by the tax collector, and the taxpayer before the expiration of such
six-year period, or any extensions thereof; or
   c.   At any time for the collection of tax arising by reason of a tax lien
perfected, recorded, or possessed by the city under this section.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 8440, § 20, 1-23-95)
Sec. 19-595. Collection of taxes when there is succession in and/or cessation
of business.
   (a)   In addition to any remedy provided elsewhere in this Code that may
apply, the tax collector may apply the provisions of subsections (b) through
(d) below concerning the collection of taxes when there is succession in and/or
cessation of business.
   (b)   The taxes imposed by this article are a lien on the property of any
person subject to this article who sells his business or stock of goods, or
quits his business, if the person fails to make a final return and payment of
the tax within fifteen (15) days after selling or quitting his business.
   (c)   Any person who purchases, or who acquires by foreclosure, by sale
under trust deed or warranty deed in lieu of foreclosure, or by any other
method, improved real property or a portion of improved real property for which
the privilege tax imposed by this article has not been paid shall be
responsible for payment of such tax as a speculative builder or owner-builder,
as provided in Sec.
19-416 and Sec.
19-417.
   (1)   Any person who is a creditor or an affiliate of creditor, who acquires
improved real property directly or indirectly from the creditor's debtor by any
means set forth in this subsection, shall pay the tax based on the amount
received by the creditor or its affiliate in a subsequent sale of such improved
real property to a party unrelated to the creditor, regardless of when such
subsequent sale takes place. Such tax shall be due in the month following the
month in which the sale of the improved real property by the creditor or its
affiliate occurs. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the real property meets the
definition of partially improved residential real property in Sec.
19-416(a)(4) and all of the requirements of Sec.
19-416(b)(4) are met by the parties to the subsequent sale transaction, then
the tax shall not apply to the subsequent sale.
   (2)   In the event a creditor or its affiliate uses the acquired improved
real property for any business purpose, other than operating the property in
the manner in which it was operated, or was intended to be operated, before the
acquisition or in any other manner unrelated to selling the property, the tax
shall be due. The gross income upon which the tax shall be determined pursuant
to Sec.
19-416 and Sec.
19-417 shall be the fair market value of the improved real property as of the
date of acquisition. The tax shall be due in the month following the month in
which such first business use occurs. When applicable, the credit bid shall be
deemed to be the fair market value of the property as of the date of
acquisition.
   (3)   Once the subsequent sale by the creditor or its affiliate has occurred
and the creditor or its affiliate has paid the tax due from it pursuant to this
subsection, neither the creditor nor its affiliate, nor any future owner, shall
be liable for any outstanding tax, penalties or interest that may continue to
be due from the debtor based on the transfer from the debtor to the creditor or
its affiliate.
   (4)   If the tax liability imposed by either Sec.
19-416 or Sec.
19-417 on the transfer of the improved real property to the creditor or its
affiliate, or any part thereof, is paid to the tax collector by the debtor
subsequent to payment of the tax by the creditor or its affiliate, the amount
so paid may constitute a credit, as equitably determined by the tax collector
in good faith, against the tax imposed on the creditor or its affiliate by
either paragraph (1) or paragraph (2) of this subsection.
   (5)   Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the contrary, if a
creditor or its affiliate is subject to tax as described in paragraph (1) or
paragraph (2) of this subsection and such creditor or affiliate has not
previously been required to be licensed, such creditor or affiliate shall
become licensed no later than the date on which the tax is due.
   (d)   A person's successors or assignees shall withhold from the purchase
money an amount sufficient to cover the taxes required to be paid, and interest
or penalties due and payable, until the former owner produces a receipt from
the tax collector showing that all city tax has been paid or a certificate
stating that no amount is due as then shown by the records of the tax
collector. The tax collector shall respond to a request from the seller for a
certificate within fifteen (15) days by either providing the certificate or a
written notice stating why the certificate cannot be issued.
   (1)   If a subsequent audit shows a deficiency arising before the sale of
the business, the deficiency is an obligation of the seller and does not
constitute a liability against a buyer who has received a certificate from the
tax collector.
   (2)   If the purchaser of a business or stock of goods fails to obtain a
certificate as provided by this section, he is personally liable for payment of
the amount of taxes required to be paid by the former owner on account of the
business so purchased, with interest and penalties accrued by the former owner
or assignees.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 6938, § 17, 4-25-88; Ord. No. 10911, §
6, 8-9-11, eff. 9-30-09)
Sec. 19-596. Agreement for installment payments of tax.
   (a)   The city may enter into an agreement with a taxpayer to allow the
taxpayer to satisfy a liability for any tax imposted [imposed] by this chapter
by means of installment payments. The tax collector may require a taxpayer who
requests an installment payment agreement to complete a financial report in
such form and manner as the tax collector may prescribe.
   (b)   The tax collector, without notice, may alter, modify or terminate an
installment payment agreement if the taxpayer:
   (1)   Fails to pay an installment at the time the installment payment is due
under the agreement.
   (2)   Fails to pay any other tax liability at the time the liability is due.
   (3)   Fails to file any tax report or return at the time the report or
return is due.
   (4)   Fails to furnish any information requested by the tax collector within
thirty (30) days after receiving a written request for such information.
   (5)   Fails to notify the tax collector of a material improvement in the
taxpayer's financial condition above the income previously reported in the most
recent income statement within thirty (30) days after the material improvement.
   (6)   Provides inaccurate, false or incomplete information to the tax
collector.
   (c)   Notwithstanding any installment payment agreement, the tax collector
may offset any tax refunds against the liabilities provided for in the
installment payment agreement, may file and perfect any tax liens and, in the
event the taxpayer breaches any term or provision of the installment payment
agreement, may engage in collection activities.
   (d)   The tax collector, without notice, may terminate an installment
payment agreement if the tax collector believes that the collection of tax to
which the payment agreement pertains is in jeopardy.
   (e)   If the tax collector determines that the financial condition of a
taxpayer has improved, the tax collector may alter, modify or terminate the
agreement by providing notice to the taxpayer at least thirty (30) days before
the effective date of the action. The notice shall include the reasons why the
tax collector believes the alteration, modification or termination is
appropriate.
   (f)   An installment payment agreement shall remain in effect for the term
of the agreement except as otherwise provided in this section.
   (g)   A taxpayer who is aggrieved by a decision of the tax collector to
refuse to enter into an installment payment agreement or to alter, modify or
terminate an agreement entered into pursuant to this section may petition the
taxpayer problem resolution officer to review that determination. The taxpayer
problem resolution officer may stay such alteration, modification or
termination pending its review and may modify or nullify the determination.
   (h)   The city and the taxpayer may modify any installment payment agreement
at any time by entering into a new or modified agreement.
(Ord. No. 8784, § 26, 12-2-96)
Sec. 19-597. Private taxpayer rulings; request; revocation or modification;
definition.
   (a)   The tax collector shall issue private taxpayer rulings to taxpayers
and potential taxpayers on request. Each request shall be in writing and shall:
   (1)   State the name, address and, if applicable, taxpayer identifying
number of the taxpayer or potential taxpayer who requests the ruling.
   (2)   Describe all facts that are relevant to the requested ruling.
   (3)   State whether, to the best knowledge of the taxpayer or potential
taxpayer, the issue or related issues are being considered by the tax collector
or any other taxing jurisdiction in connection with an active audit, protest or
appeal that involves the taxpayer or potential taxpayer and whether the same
request has been or is being submitted to another taxing jurisdiction for a
ruling.
   (4)   Be signed by the taxpayer or potential taxpayer who makes the request
or by an authorized representative of the taxpayer or potential taxpayer.
   (b)   A private taxpayer ruling may be revoked or modified by either:
   (1)   A change or clarification in the law that was applicable at the time
the ruling was issued, including changes or clarifications caused by
regulations and court decisions.
   (2)   Actual written notice by the tax collector to the last known address
of the taxpayer or potential taxpayer of the revocation or modification of the
private taxpayer ruling.
   (c)   With respect to the taxpayer or prospective taxpayer to whom a private
taxpayer ruling is issued, the revocation or modification of a private taxpayer
ruling shall not be applied retroactively to tax periods or tax years before
the effective date of the revocation or modification and the tax collector
shall not assess any penalty or tax attributable to erroneous advice that is
furnished to the taxpayer or potential taxpayer in the private taxpayer ruling
if:
   (1)   The taxpayer reasonably relied on the private taxpayer ruling.
   (2)   The penalty or tax did not result either from a failure by the
taxpayer to provide adequate or accurate information or from a change in the
information.
   (d)   A private taxpayer ruling may not be relied upon, cited nor introduced
into evidence in any proceeding by any taxpayer other than the taxpayer who
received the ruling.
   (e)   A taxpayer may appeal the propriety of a retroactive application of a
revoked or modified private taxpayer ruling by filing a written petition with
the tax collector pursuant to section
19-570 within forty-five (45) days after receiving written notice of the intent
to retroactively apply a revoked or modified private taxpayer ruling.
   (f)   A private taxpayer ruling constitutes the tax collector's
interpretation of the sections of this chapter only as they apply to the
taxpayer making, and the particular facts contained in, the request.
   (g)   A private taxpayer ruling which addresses a taxpayer's ongoing
business activities will apply only to transactions that occur or tax
liabilities that accrue from and after the date of the taxpayer's ruling
request.
   (h)   The tax collector shall attempt to issue private taxpayer rulings
within forty-five (45) days after receiving the written request and on
receiving the facts that are relevant to the ruling. If the ruling is expected
to be delayed beyond the forty-five (45) days, the tax collector shall notify
the requestor of the delay and the proposed date of issuance.
   (i)   Within thirty (30) days after being issued, the tax collector shall
maintain the private taxpayer ruling as a public record and make it available
at a reasonable cost for public inspection and copying. The text of private
taxpayer rulings are open to public inspection subject to the confidentiality
requirements prescribed by section
19-510.
   (j)   In this section, "private taxpayer ruling" means a written
determination by the tax collector issued pursuant to this section that
interprets and applies one (1) or more sections contained in this article and
any applicable regulations.
   (k)   A private taxpayer ruling issued by the Arizona Department of Revenue
pursuant to A.R.S. § 42-2101 may be relied upon by the taxpayer to whom the
ruling was issued and must be recognized and followed by any city in which such
taxpayer has obtained a privilege license if the city has not issued a ruling
addressing the facts described in the taxpayer's ruling request and the statute
at issue in the taxpayer's ruling request is, in essence, worded and written
the same as the applicable section hereunder.
(Ord. No. 8784, § 27, 12-2-96; Ord. No. 10361, § 14, 12-19-06)
DIVISION 6.
USE TAX
   Editor’s note – Ordinance No. 11518 put into effect tax increases required
by Proposition 203; however, they have no legal effect unless approved by the
Arizona Model City Tax Code Commission. Code sections affected are: 19-410(d),
19-415(d), 19-416(d), 19-417(d), 19-425(c), 19-427(e), 19-430(a), 19-432(d),
19-432(d), 19-435(g), 19-445(t), 19-450(d), 19-455(g), 19-460(i), 19-470(h),
19-475(d), 19-480(l), and 19-610(g).
Sec. 19-600. Use tax: definitions.
For the purposes of this division only, the following definitions shall apply,
in addition to the definitions provided in division 1:
   Acquire (for storage or use) means purchase, rent, lease, or license for
storage or use.
   Retailer also means any person selling, renting, licensing for use, or
leasing tangible personal property under circumstances which would render such
transactions subject to the taxes imposed in division 4, if such transactions
had occurred within this city.
   Storage (within the city) means the keeping or retaining of tangible
personal property at a place within the city for any purpose, except for those
items acquired specifically and solely for the purpose of sale, rental, lease,
or license for use in the regular course of business or for the purpose of
subsequent use solely outside the city.
   Use (of tangible personal property) means consumption or exercise of any
other right or power over tangible personal property incident to the ownership
thereof except the holding for the sale, rental, lease, or license for use of
such property in the regular course of business.
(Ord. No. 9840, § 5, 5-5-03)
Sec. 19-601. Reserved.
   Editors Note: Ord. No. 9840, § 4, adopted May 5, 2003, repealed §
19-601, which pertained to director of finance to keep records and derived from
Ord. No. 6674, § 3, adopted March 23, 1987.
Sec. 19-602. Reserved.
   Editors Note: Ord. No. 9840, § 4, adopted May 5, 2003, repealed §
19-602, which pertained to levying and pledging a portion of excise and
franchise taxes for community center, operations center and bus maintenance
facilities purposes; creating a special fund, not part of the general funds and
derived from Ord. No. 6674, § 3, adopted March 23, 1987.
Sec. 19-610. Use tax: imposition of tax; presumption.
   (a)   There is hereby levied and imposed, subject to all other provisions of
this chapter, an excise tax on the storage or use in the city of tangible
personal property, for the purpose of raising revenue to be used in defraying
the necessary expenses of the city, such taxes to be collected by the tax
collector.
   (b)   The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to two and six-tenths (2.6)
percent of the:
   (1)   Cost of tangible personal property acquired from a retailer, upon
every person storing or using such property in this city.
   (2)   Gross income from the business activity upon every person meeting the
requirements of subsection
19-620(b) or (c) who is engaged or continuing in the business activity of
sales, rentals, leases, or licenses of tangible personal property to persons
within the city for storage or use within the city, to the extent that tax has
been collected upon such transaction.
   (3)   Cost of the tangible personal property provided under the conditions
of a warranty, maintenance, or service contract.
   (4)   Cost of complimentary items provided to patrons without itemized
charge by a restaurant, hotel, or other business.
   (5)   (Reserved).
   (c)   It shall be presumed that all tangible personal property acquired by
any person who at the time of such acquisition resides in the city is acquired
for storage or use in this city, until the contrary is established by the
taxpayer.
   (d)   Exclusions. For the purposes of this division, the acquisition of the
following shall not be deemed to be the purchase, rental, lease, or license of
tangible personal property for storage or use within the city:
   (1)   Stocks, bonds, options, or other similar materials.
   (2)   Lottery tickets or shares sold pursuant to A.R.S. title 5, chapter 5,
article I.
   (3)   Platinum, bullion, or monetized bullion, except minted or manufactured
coins transferred or acquired primarily for their numismatic value as
prescribed by regulation.
   (e)   (Reserved).
   (f)   (Reserved).
   (g)   Notwithstanding the tax rate identified elsewhere in this section, an
additional tax in an amount equal to one-tenth of one (0.1) percent on any
activity or item taxable under this section is imposed pursuant to Chapter IV,
Section 5 of the Charter of the City of Tucson.
(Ord. No. 9840, § 5, 5-5-03; Ord. No. 11479, § 1, 8-8-17; Ord. No. 11485, eff.
8-8-17; Ord. No. 11518, eff. 1-23-18)
Sec. 19-620. Use tax: liability for tax.
The following persons shall be deemed liable for the tax imposed by this
division and such liability shall not be extinguished until the tax has been
paid to this city, except that a receipt from a retailer separately charging
the tax imposed by this chapter is sufficient to relieve the person acquiring
such property from further liability for the tax to which the receipt refers:
   (1)   Any person who acquires tangible personal property from a retailer,
whether or not such retailer is located in this city, when such person stores
or uses said property within the city.
   (2)   Any retailer not located within the city, selling, renting, leasing,
or licensing tangible personal property for storage or use of such property
within the city, may obtain a license from the tax collector and collect the
use tax on such transactions. Such retailer shall be liable for the use tax to
the extent such use tax is collected from his customers.
   (3)   Every agent within the city of any retailer not maintaining an office
or place of business in this city, when such person sells, rents, leases, or
licenses tangible personal property for storage or use in this city shall, at
the time of such transaction, collect and be liable for the tax imposed by this
division upon the storage or use of the property so transferred, unless such
retailer or agent is liable for an equivalent excise tax upon the transaction.
   (4)   Any person who acquires tangible personal property from a retailer
located in the city and such person claims to be exempt from the city privilege
or use tax at the time of the transaction, and upon which no city privilege tax
was charged or paid, when such claim is not sustainable.
   (5)   Every person storing or using tangible personal property under the
conditions of a warranty, maintenance, or service contract.
(Ord. No. 9840, § 5, 5-5-03)
Sec. 19-630. Use tax: record-keeping requirements.
All deductions, exclusions, exemptions, and credits provided in this division
are conditional upon adequate proof of documentation as required by division 3
or elsewhere in this chapter.
(Ord. No. 9840, § 5, 5-5-03)
Sec. 19-640. Use tax: credit for equivalent excise taxes paid another
jurisdiction.
In the event that an equivalent excise tax has been levied and paid upon
tangible personal property which is acquired to be stored or used within this
city, full credit for any and all such taxes so paid shall be allowed by the
tax collector but only to the extent use tax is imposed upon that transaction
by this division.
(Ord. No. 9840, § 5, 5-5-03)
Sec. 19-650. Use tax: exclusion when acquisition subject to use tax is taxed or
taxable elsewhere in this chapter; limitation.
The tax levied by this division does not apply to the storage or use in this
city of tangible personal property acquired in this city, the gross income from
the sale, rental, lease, or license of which were included in the measure of
the tax imposed by division 4 of this chapter; provided, however, that any
person who has acquired tangible personal property from a vendor in this city
without paying the city privilege tax because of a representation to the vendor
that the property was not subject to such tax, when such claim is not
sustainable, may not claim the exclusion from such use tax provided by this
section.
(Ord. No. 9840, § 5, 5-5-03)
Sec. 19-660. Use tax: exemptions.
   The storage or use in this city of the following tangible personal property
is exempt from the use tax imposed by this division:
   (1)   Tangible personal property brought into the city by an individual who
was not a resident of the city at the time the property was acquired for his
own use, if the first actual use of such property was outside the city, unless
such property is used in conducting a business in this city.
   (2)   Tangible personal property, the value of which does not exceed the
amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per item, acquired by an individual
outside the limits of the city for his personal use and enjoyment.
   (3)   Charges for delivery, installation, or other customer services, as
prescribed by regulation.
   (4)   Charges for repair services, as prescribed by regulation.
   (5)   Separately itemized charges for warranty, maintenance, and service
contracts.
   (6)   Prosthetics.
   (7)   Income-producing capital equipment.
   (8)   Rental equipment and rental supplies.
   (9)   Mining and metallurgical supplies.
   (10)   Motor vehicle fuel and use fuel which are used upon the highways of
this state and upon which a tax has been imposed under the provisions of A.R.S.
title 28, chapter 16, article I or II.
   (11)   Tangible personal property purchased by:
      (a)   a construction contractor, but not an owner-builder, when such
person holds a valid privilege license for engaging or continuing in the
business of construction contracting, and where the property acquired is
incorporated into any structure or improvement to real property in fulfillment
of a construction contract.
      (b)   A person that is not subject to tax under Section 415(b)(12) and
that has been provided a copy of a certificate under A.R.S. Section 42-5009,
subsection L, if the property so sold is incorporated or fabricated by the
person into the real property, structure, project, development, or improvement
described in the certificate.
   (12)   Sales of motor vehicles to nonresidents of this state for use outside
this state if the vendor ships or delivers the motor vehicle to a destination
outside this state.
   (13)   Tangible personal property which directly enters into and becomes an
ingredient or component part of a product sold in the regular course of the
business of job printing, manufacturing, or publication of newspapers,
magazines or other periodicals. Tangible personal property which is consumed or
used up in a manufacturing, job printing, publishing, or production process is
not an ingredient nor component part of a product.
   (14)   Rental, leasing, or licensing for use of film, tape, or slides by a
theater or other person taxed under section
19-410, or by a radio station, television station, or subscription television
system.
   (15)   Food served to patrons for a consideration by any person engaged in a
business properly licensed and taxed under section
19-455, but not food consumed by owners, agents, or employees of such business.
   (16)   Tangible personal property acquired by a qualifying hospital,
qualifying community health center or a qualifying health care organization,
except when the property is in fact used in activities resulting in gross
income from unrelated business income as that term is defined in 26 U.S.C.
section 512.
   (17)   (Reserved).
   (18)   The following tangible personal property purchased by persons
engaging or continuing in the business of farming, ranching, or feeding
livestock, poultry or ratites:
      a.   Seed, fertilizer, fungicides, seed treating chemicals, and other
similar chemicals.
      b.   Feed for livestock, poultry or ratites, including salt, vitamins,
and other additives to such feed.
      c.   Livestock, poultry or ratites purchased or raised for slaughter, but
not including livestock purchased or raised for production or use, such as milk
cows, breeding bulls, laying hens, riding or work horses.
      d.   Neat animals, horses, asses, sheep, swine, or goats acquired for the
purpose of becoming breeding or production stock, including the acquisition of
breeding or ownership shares in such animals.
      This exemption shall not be construed to include machinery, equipment,
fuels, lubricants, pharmaceuticals, repair and replacement parts, or other
items used or consumed in the running, maintenance, or repair of machinery,
equipment, buildings, or structures used or consumed in the business of
farming, ranching, or feeding of livestock, poultry or ratites.
   (19)   Groundwater measuring devices required by A.R.S. section 45-604.
   (20)   Paintings, sculptures, or similar works of fine art, provided that
such works of fine art are purchased from the original artist; and provided
further that “art creations”, such as jewelry, macrame, glasswork, pottery,
woodwork, metalwork, furniture, and clothing, when such “art creations” have a
dual purpose, both aesthetic and utilitarian, are not exempt, whether purchased
from the artist or from another.
   (21)   Aircraft acquired for use outside the state, as prescribed by
regulation.
   (22)   Food products sold by food producers as provided for by A.R.S.
Sections 3-561, 3-562, and 3-563.
   (23)   (Reserved).
   (24)   Sales of food and drink to a person who is engaged in business that
is classified under the restaurant classification and that provides such food
and drink without monetary charge to its employees for their own consumption on
the premises during such employees’ hours of employment.
   (25)   (Reserved).
   (26)   (Reserved).
   (27)   Tangible personal property used in remediation contracting as defined
in section
19-100 and regulation
19-100.5.
   (28)   Materials that are purchased by or for publicly funded libraries
including school district libraries, charter school libraries, community
college libraries, state university libraries or federal, state, county or
municipal libraries for use by the public as follows:
      a.   Printed or photographic materials.
      b.   Electronic or digital media materials.
   (29)   Food, beverages, condiments, and accessories used for serving food
and beverages to a commercial airline, as defined in A.R.S. § 42-5061(A)(49),
that serves the food and beverages to its passengers, without additional
charge, for consumption in flight. For the purposes of this subsection,
“accessories” means paper plates, plastic eating utensils, napkins, paper cups,
drinking straws, paper sacks or other disposable containers, or other items
which facilitate the consumption of the food.
   (30)   Wireless telecommunication equipment that is held for sale or
transfer to a customer as an inducement to enter into or continue a contract
for telecommunication services that are taxable under section
19-470.
   (31)   Tangible personal property sold by a nonprofit organization that is
exempt from taxation under Section 501(c)(3), 501(c)(4) or 501(c)(6) of the
Internal Revenue Code if the organization is associated with a major league
baseball team or a national touring professional golfing association and no
part of the organization's net earnings inures to the benefit of any private
shareholder or individual. This paragraph does not apply to an organization
that is owned, managed or controlled, in whole or in part, by a major league
baseball team, or its owners, officers, employees or agents, or by a major
league baseball association or professional golfing association, or its owners,
officers, employees or agents, unless the organization conducted or operated
exhibition events in this state before January 1, 2018 that were exempt from
transaction privilege tax under A.R.S. Section 42-5073.
   (32)   Alternative fuel as defined in A.R.S. section 1-215, by a used oil
fuel burner who has received a Department of Environmental Quality permit to
burn used oil or used oil fuel under A.R.S. section 49-426 or section 49-480.
   (33)   Food, beverages, condiments and accessories purchased by or for a
public educational entity pursuant to any of the provisions of A.R.S. Title 15;
including a regularly organized private or parochial school that offers an
educational program for grade twelve (12) or under which may be attended in
substitution for a public school pursuant to A.R.S. § 15-802; to the extent
such items are to be prepared or served to individuals for consumption on the
premises of a public educational entity during school hours. For the purposes
of this subsection, “accessories” means paper plates, plastic eating utensils,
napkins, paper cups, drinking straws, paper sacks or other disposable
containers, or other items which facilitate the consumption of the food.
   (34)   Personal hygiene items purchased by a person engaged in the business
of and subject to tax under sections
19-66 or
19-444 if the tangible personal property is furnished without additional charge
to and intended to be consumed by the person during his occupancy.
   (35)   The diversion of gas from a pipeline by a person engaged in the
business of operating a natural or artificial gas pipeline, for the sole
purpose of fueling compressor equipment to pressurize the pipeline, is not a
sale of the gas to the operator of the pipeline.
   (36)   Food, beverages, condiments, and accessories purchased by or for a
nonprofit charitable organization that has qualified as an exempt organization
under 26 U.S.C section 501(c)(3) and regularly serves meals to the needy and
indigent on a continuing basis at no cost. For the purposes of this subsection,
“accessories” means paper plates, plastic eating utensils, napkins, paper cups,
drinking straws, paper sacks or other disposable containers, or other items
which facilitate the consumption of the food.
   (37)   Sales of motor vehicles that use alternative fuel if such vehicle was
manufactured as a diesel fuel vehicle and converted to operate on alternative
fuel and equipment that is installed in a conventional diesel fuel motor
vehicle to convert the vehicle to operate on an alternative fuel, as defined in
A.R.S. § 1-215.
   (38)   The storage, use, or consumption of tangible personal property in the
city by a school district or charter school.
   (39)   Renewable energy credits or any other unit created to track energy
derived from renewable energy resources. For the purposes of this paragraph,
“renewable energy credit” means a unit created administratively by the
Corporation Commission or governing body of a public power utility to track
kilowatt hours of electricity derived from a renewable energy resource or the
kilowatt hour equivalent of conventional energy resources displaced by
distributed renewable energy resources.
   (40)   Magazines or other periodicals or other publications by this state to
encourage tourist travel.
   (41)   Paper machine clothing, such as forming fabrics and dryer felts, sold
to a paper manufacturer and directly used or consumed in paper manufacturing.
   (42)   Overhead materials or other tangible personal property that is used
in performing a contract between the United States Government and a
manufacturer, modifier, assembler or repairer, including property used in
performing a subcontract with a government contractor who is a manufacturer,
modifier, assembler or repairer, to which title passes to the government under
the terms of the contractor or subcontract.
   (43)   Coal, petroleum, coke, natural gas, virgin fuel oil and electricity
sold to a qualified environmental technology manufacturer, producer or
processor as defined in A.R.S. § 41-1514.02 and directly used or consumed in
the generation or provision of on-site power or energy solely for environmental
technology manufacturing, producing or processing or environmental protection.
This paragraph shall apply for twenty (20) full consecutive calendar or fiscal
years from the date the first paper manufacturing machine is placed in service.
In the case of an environmental technology manufacturer, producer or processor
who does not manufacture paper, the time period shall begin with the date the
first manufacturing, processing or production equipment is placed in service.
   (44)   Machinery, equipment, materials and other tangible personal property
used directly and predominantly to construct a qualified environmental
technology manufacturing, producing or processing facility as described in
A.R.S. § 41-1514.02. This subsection applies for ten (10) full consecutive
calendar or fiscal years after the start of initial construction.
   (45)   (Reserved).
   (46)   The transfer of title or possession of coal back and forth between an
owner or operator of a power plant and a person who is responsible for refining
coal if both of the following apply:
      A.   The transfer of title or possession of the coal is for the purpose
of refining the coal; and
      B.   The title or possession of the coal is transferred back to the owner
or operator of the power plant after completion of the coal refining process.
For the purposes of this subdivision, "coal refining process" means the
application of a coal additive system that aids the reduction of power plant
emissions during the combustion of coal and the treatment of flue gas.
   (47)   Computer data center equipment purchased by the owner, operator, or
qualified colocation tenant of a computer data center that is certified by the
Arizona Commerce Authority under A.R.S. Section 41-1519 or an authorized agent
of the owner, operator, or qualified colocation tenant during the qualification
period for use in the qualified computer data center. For the purposes of this
paragraph, "computer data center", "computer data center equipment",
"qualification period" and "qualified colocation tenant" have the same meanings
prescribed in A.R.S. Section 41-1519.
   (48)   (Reserved).
   (49)   The purchase manufacture, wholesale, or distribution to or among any
wholesalers, distributors or retailers, of food items intended for human
consumption as defined by rule adopted pursuant to A.R.S. Section 42-5106 or
items prescribed by A.R.S. Section 42-5106, subsection D for home consumption
or for consumption on the premises.
   (50)   The purchase of any container or packaging used exclusively for
transporting, protecting, or consuming food items intended for human
consumption as defined by rule adopted pursuant to A.R.S. Section 42-5106 or
items prescribed by A.R.S. Section 42-5106, subsection D for home consumption
or for consumption on the premises.
(Ord. No. 9840, § 5, 5-5-03; Ord. No. 10361, § 15, 12-19-06; Ord. No. 10911, §
7, 8-9-11, eff. 9-30-09; Ord. No. 11183, § 5, 6-17-14, eff. 1-1-13*; Ord. No.
11936, § 17, 7-12-22)
   *Editor’s note – Ord. No. 11183, § 18, adopted June 17, 2014, provides that
the amendments made to Sec. 19-660(40) shall be effective from and after
January 1, 2007.
   Section 17 of Ord. No. 11936, adopted July 12, 2022, provides for the
following effective dates per subsection: (11) January 1, 2015; (31) January 1,
2018; (46) July 24, 2014; (47) September 12, 2013; (48) December 1, 2017; (49)
August 3, 2018; (50) August 3, 2018.
REGULATIONS-PRIVILEGE AND EXCISE TAXES
Reg. 19-100.1. Brokers.
   (a)   Return required. For the purposes of proper administration of this
article and to prevent evasion of taxes imposed, brokers shall be wherever
necessary treated as taxpayers for all purposes, and shall file a return and
remit the tax imposed on the activity on behalf of the principal. No deduction
shall be allowed for any commissions or fees retained by such broker, except as
provided in section
19-405, relating to advertising commissions.
   (b)   Brokers for Vendors. A broker acting for a seller, lessor or other
similar person deriving gross income in a category upon which this article
imposes a tax shall be liable for such tax, even if his principal would not be
subject to the tax if he conducted such activity in his own behalf, by reason
of the activity being deemed a "casual" one. For example:
   (1)   An auctioneer or other sales agent of tangible personal property is
subject to the tax imposed upon retail sales, even if such sales would be
deemed "casual" if his principal had sold such items himself.
   (2)   A property manager is subject to the tax imposed upon rental, leasing
or licensing of real property, even if such rental, leasing or licensing would
be deemed "casual" if his principal managed such real property himself.
   (c)   Brokers for Vendees. A broker acting solely for a buyer, lessee,
tenant or other similar person who is a party to a transaction which may be
subject to the tax, shall be liable for such tax and for filing a return in
connection with such tax only to the extent his principal is subject to the
tax.
   (d)   Liability of Broker and Principal. The liability of a broker does not
relieve the principal of liability except upon presentation to the tax
collector of proof of payment of the tax, and only to the extent of the correct
payment. The broker shall be relieved of the responsibility to file and pay
taxes upon the filing and correct payment of such taxes by the principal.
   (e)   Reserved.
   (f)   Location of Business. Retail sales by brokers acting for another
person shall be deemed to have occurred at the regular business location of the
broker, in a manner similar to that used to determine "out-of-city sales",
provided an auctioneer is deemed to be engaged in business at the site of each
auction.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 6938, § 19, 4-25-88)
Reg. 19-100.2. Delivery, installation, or other direct customer services.
   (a)   Delivery Charges. Delivery charges exist only when the total charges
to the ultimate customer or consumer include, as separately charged to the
ultimate customer, charges for delivery to the ultimate consumer, whether the
place of delivery is within or without the city, and when the taxpayer's books
and records show the separate delivery charges.
   (1)   Separate statement required. Identification to the customer or
consumer that the listed price has "delivery included" or other similar
expression is insufficient to show the delivery as a separate charge. Only the
separately stated charge for the delivery shall be deemed a "delivery charge."
   (2)   Freight in. Charges for delivery from place of production or the
manufacturer to the vendor either directly or through a chain of wholesalers or
jobbers or other middlemen are deemed "freight in" and are not considered
delivery.
   (b)   Installation. "Installation," as used in this definition, relates only
to tangible personal property. Installation to real property is deemed
construction contracting in this article. Examples of installation relating to
tangible personal property are installing a radio in an automobile; applying
sun screens on the windows of a boat; installing cabinets, carpeting or built-
in appliances to a camper or motorized recreational vehicle.
   (c)   Exclusion. Repair of tangible personal property is not included in
this definition. See regulation
19-465.1.
   (d)   Direct Customer Services. "Direct customer services" means services
other than repair rendered directly to the customer. Services or labor provided
by any person prior to the transfer of tangible personal property to the
customer or consumer are not included in this definition. In the following
examples, the requirements of subsection (e) below are referred to by the words
"identify" or "identification":
   (1)   A retailer sells a customer a one hundred dollar ($100.00) "plug-in"
appliance, with a twenty-five dollar ($25.00) delivery and installation charge.
If the retailer identifies the twenty-five dollar ($25.00) delivery and
installation charge, it is a charge for direct customer services.
   (2)   A caterer charges his customer one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for
the food and drink served, three hundred dollars ($300.00) for setup and site
cleanup, and five hundred dollars ($500.00) for bartender and waiters. If all
charges are properly identified, only the three hundred dollars ($300.00) for
setup and cleanup is a charge for direct customer services, and the one
thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for food and service is restauranting
gross income.
   (3)   Persons engaged in engraving on wood metal, stone, etc., or persons
engaged in retouching photographs or paintings may consider such charges for
labor as direct customer services.
   (4)   All charges by a photographer resulting in the sale of a photograph
(sitting charges, developing, making enlargements, retouching, etc.) for
services that occur prior to transfer of tangible personal property are not
direct customer services.
   (5)   An equipment rental company charging twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for
delivery may consider such delivery charge as a charge for direct customer
service only if such charge is properly identified.
   (6)   Even if identified, charges for labor incurred in the production of
any manufactured article or of a custom-made article (jewelry, artwork,
tailoring, draperies, etc.) are not included in this definition, as such labor
occurs prior to the transfer of property.
   (e)   Recordkeeping Requirements.
   (1)   Any person who engages in transactions involving these services must:
   a.   Separately bill, invoice or charge the customer for such services in a
manner by which the customer or consumer may readily identify the specific
dollar amount of the service charge; and
   b.   Maintain business books and records in a manner in which the separate
charge for such services can be clearly identified, to the satisfaction of the
tax collector.
   (2)   Rendering a statement to a customer for a transaction involving such
services and the transfer of tangible personal property which only indicates
the total amount of the charges with words such as "services included" or,
"charge includes labor and parts" or similar a expression does not satisfy the
requirements of this subsection.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87)
Reg. 19-100.3. Retailers.
When in the opinion of the tax collector it is necessary for efficient
administration of this article, he may regard any salesman, representative,
peddler, canvasser or agent of any dealer, distributor, supervisor or employer
under whom he operates or from whom he obtains tangible personal property for
sale, rental, lease or license as a retailer for the purposes of this article,
irrespective of whether he is making sales, rentals, leases or licenses on his
own behalf or on behalf of others. The tax collector may also regard such
dealer, distributor, supervisor or employer as a retailer for the purposes of
this article.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87)
Reg. 19-100.4. Out-of-city/out-of-state sales: Sales to Native Americans.
Sales to Native Americans or tribal councils by vendors located within the city
shall be deemed sales within the city, unless all of the following conditions
exist:
   (1)   The vendor has properly accounted for such sales, in a manner similar
to the recordkeeping requirements for out-of-city sales; and
   (2)   All of the following elements of the sale exist:
   a.   Solicitation and placement of the order occurs on the reservation; and
   b.   Delivery is made to the reservation; and
   c.   Payment originates from the reservation.
(Ord. No. 6938, § 20, 4-25-88; Ord. No. 9322, § 14, 11-22-99)
Reg. 19-100.5. Remediation contracting.
The following activities are considered remediation contracting and are exempt:
   (1)   Excavation, transportation, treatment, and/or disposal of contaminated
soil for purposes of site remediation (rather than characterization);
   (2)   Installation of groundwater extraction and/or injection wells for
purposes of groundwater remediation;
   (3)   Installation of pumps and piping into groundwater extraction wells for
remediation purposes;
   (4)   Installation of vapor extraction wells for the purpose of soil or
groundwater remediation;
   (5)   Construction of remediation systems, such as groundwater treatment
plants, vapor extraction systems, or air injection systems;
   (6)   Connection of remediation systems to utilities;
   (7)   Abandonment of groundwater or vapor extraction wells;
   (8)   Removal/demolition of remediation systems;
   (9)   Capping/closure construction activities; and
   (10)   Service or handling charges for subcontracted remediation contracting
activities.
(Ord. No. 9004, § 1(3), 1-5-98)
   Editors Note: Ordinance No. 8794, § 2, adopted January 6, 1997, repealed
regulation 19-100.5 in its entirety. Formerly, such regulation pertained to
remediation contracting and derived from Ord. No. 8793, § 2, 1-6-97.
Subsequently, Ord. No. 9004, § 1, adopted January 5, 1998, added a new
regulation to read as herein set out.
Reg. 19-110.1. Reserved.
   Editors Note: Ordinance No. 8440, § 21, adopted January 23, 1995, repealed
regulation 19-110.1. Formerly, such regulation pertained to income-producing
capital equipment in general and derived from Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87 and
Ord. No. 7446, § 2.15, 7-2-90.
Reg. 19-110.2. Reserved.
   Editors Note: Ordinance No. 8440, § 22, adopted January 23, 1995, repealed
regulation 19-110.2. Formerly, such regulation pertained to income-producing
capital: manufacturing equipment; job printing equipment and derived from Ord.
No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87 and Ord. No. 6938, § 21, 4-25-88.
Reg. 19-115.1. Computer hardware, software, and data services.
   (a)   Definitions.
   (1)   "Computer hardware" (also called "computer equipment" or
"peripherals") is the components and accessories which constitute the physical
computer assembly, including but not limited to: central processing unit,
keyboard, console, monitor, memory unit, disk drive, tape drive or reader,
terminal, printer, plotter, modem, document sorter, optical reader and/or
digitizer, network.
   (2)   "Computer software" (also called "computer program") is tangible
personal property, and includes:
   a.   "Operating program (software)" (also called "executive program
(software)"), which is the programming system or technical language upon which
or by means of which the basic operating procedures of the computer are
recorded. The operating program serves as an interface with user applied
programs and allows the user to access the computer's processing capabilities.
   b.   "Applied program (software)", which is the programming system or
technical language (including the tape, disk, cards, or other medium upon which
such language or program is recorded) designed either for application in a
specialized use, or upon which or by means of which a plan for the solution of
a particular problem is based. Typically, applied programs can be transferred
from one (1) computer to another via storage media. Examples of applied
programs include: payroll processing, general ledger, sales data, spreadsheet,
word processing, and data management programs.
   (3)   "Storage medium" is any hard disk, compact disk, floppy disk,
diskette, diskpack, magnetic tape, cards, or other medium used for storage of
information in a form readable by a computer, but not including the memory of
the computer itself.
   (4)   A "terminal arrangement" (also called "'on-line' arrangement") is any
agreement allowing access to a remote central processing unit through
telecommunications via hardware.
   (5)   A "computer services agreement" (also called "data services
agreement") is an agreement allowing access to a computer through a third-party
operator.
   (b)   For the purposes of this article, transfer of title and possession of
the following are deemed sales of tangible personal property and any other
transfer of title, possession, or right to use for a consideration of the
following is deemed rental, leasing, or licensing of tangible personal
property:
   (1)   Computer hardware or storage media. Rental, leasing, or licensing for
use of computer hardware or storage media includes the lessee's use of such
hardware or storage media on the lessor's premises.
   (2)   Computer software which is not custom computer programming. Such
prewritten ("canned") programs may be transferred to a customer in the form of
punched cards, magnetic tape, or other storage medium, or by listing the
program instructions on coding sheets. Transfer is deemed to have occurred
whether title to the storage medium upon which the program is recorded, coded,
or punched passes to the customer or the program is recorded, coded, or punched
on storage medium furnished by the customer. Gross income from the transfer of
such prewritten programs includes:
   a.   The entire amount charged to the customer for the sale, rental, lease,
or license for use of the storage medium or coding sheets on which or into
which the prewritten program has been recorded, coded, or punched.
   b.   The entire amount charged for the temporary transfer or possession of a
prewritten program to be directly used or to be recorded, coded, or punched by
the customer on the customer's premises.
   c.   License fees, royalty fees, or program design fees; any fee present or
future, whether for a period of minimum use or of use for extended periods,
relating to the use of a prewritten program.
   d.   The entire amount charged for transfer of a prewritten ("canned")
program by remote telecommunications from the transferor's place of business to
or through the customer's computer.
   e.   Any charge for the purchase of a maintenance contract which entitles
the customer to receive storage media on which prewritten program improvements
or error corrections have been recorded or to receive telephone or on-site
consultation services, provided that:
   i.   If such maintenance contract is not optional with the customer, then
the charges for the maintenance contract, including the consultation services,
are deemed gross income from the transfer of the prewritten program.
   ii.   If such maintenance contract is optional with the customer but the
customer does not have the option to purchase the consultation services
separately from the storage media containing the improvements or error
corrections, then the charges for the maintenance contract, including the
consultation services, are deemed gross income from the transfer of the
prewritten program.
   iii.   If such maintenance contract is optional with the customer and the
customer may purchase the consultation services separately from the storage
media containing the improvements or error corrections, then only the charges
for such improvements or error corrections are deemed gross income from the
transfer of a prewritten program and charges for consultation are deemed to be
charges for professional services.
   (c)   Producing the following by means of computer hardware is deemed to be
the activity of job printing for the purposes of this article:
   (1)   Statistical reports, graphs, diagrams, microfilm, microfiche,
photorecordings, or any other information produced or compiled by a computer;
except as provided in subsection (e) below.
   (2)   Additional copies of records, reports, manuals, tabulations, etc.
"Additional copies" are any copies in excess to those produced simultaneously
with the production of the original and on the same printer, whether such
copies are prepared by running the same program, by using multiple printers, by
looping the program, by using different programs to produce the same output, or
by other means.
   (d)   Charges for the use of communications channel in conjunction with a
terminal arrangement or data services agreement are deemed gross income from
the activity of providing telecommunication services.
   (e)   The following transactions are deemed direct customer services,
provided that charges for such services are separately stated and maintained as
provided by regulation
19-100.2(e):
   (1)   "Custom (computer) programming", which is any computer software which
is written or prepared for a single customer, including those services
represented by separately stated charges for the modification of existing
prewritten programs.
   a.   Custom computer programming is deemed a professional service regardless
of the form in which the programming is transferred.
   b.   Custom programming includes such programming performed in connection
with the sale, rental, lease, or license for use of computer hardware, provided
that the charges for such are separately stated from the charges for the
hardware.
   c.   Custom computer programming includes a program prepared to the special
order of a customer who will use the program to produce copies of the program
for sale, rental, lease, or license. The subsequent sale, rental, lease, or
license of such a program is deemed the sale, rental, lease, or license of a
prewritten program.
   (2)   Training services related to computer hardware or software, provided
further that:
   a.   The provider of such training services is deemed the ultimate consumer
of all tangible personal property used in training others or provided to such
trainees without separately itemized charge for the materials provided.
   b.   Training deemed a direct customer service does not include:
   i.   Training materials, books, manuals, etc. furnished to customers for a
charge separate from the charge for training services.
   ii.   Training provided to customers without separate charge as part of the
sale, rental, lease, or license of computer hardware or software, or as part of
a terminal arrangement or data services agreement.
   (3)   The use of computer time through the use of a terminal arrangement or
a data service agreement, but not charges for computer hardware located at the
customer's place of business (for example, the terminal, a printer attached to
the terminal, a modem used to communicate with the remote central processing
unit over a telephone line).
   (4)   Compiling and producing, as part of a terminal arrangement or computer
services agreement, original copies of statistical reports, graphs, diagrams,
microfilm, microfiche, photorecordings, or other information for the same
person who supplied the raw data used to create such reports.
   (f)   The purchase, rental, lease, or license for use of computer hardware,
storage media, or computer software which is not deemed custom programming is
deemed the use or storage of tangible personal property for the purpose of this
chapter, and the amount which may be subject to use tax shall be determined in
the same manner as the determination of the gross income from the sale, rental,
lease, or license for use of such.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 9652, § 10, 1-14-02; Ord. No. 9840, § 6,
5-5-03)
   Editors Note: It should be noted that the provisions of Ord. No. 9641 become
effective retroactive to January 1, 2002.
Reg. 19-120.1. Reserved.
   Editor's note – Ord. No. 11183, § 9, adopted June 17, 2014 and effective
January 1, 2013, repealed Reg.
19-120.1, which pertained to food for home consumption, recordkeeping and
reporting requirements.
Reg. 19-200.1. When refundable deposits are includable in gross income.
   (a)   Refundable deposits shall be includable as gross income of the
taxpayer for the month in which the deposits are forfeited by the lessee.
   (b)   Reserved.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 6938, § 22, 4-25-88; Ord. No. 8440, §
23, 1-23-95)
Reg. 19-250.1. Excess tax collected.
If a taxpayer collects taxes in excess of the combined tax rate from any
customer in any transaction, all such excess tax shall be paid to the taxing
jurisdictions in proportion to their effective rates. The right of the taxpayer
to charge his customer for his own liability for tax does not allow the
taxpayer to enrich himself at the cost of his customers. Tax paid on an
activity that is not subject to tax or that qualifies for an exemption,
deduction, exclusion or credit is not excess tax collected.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 10287, § 4, 6-13-06)
Reg. 19-270.1. Proprietary activities of municipalities are not considered
activities of a governmental entity.
The following activities, when performed by a municipality, are considered to
be activities of a person engaged in business for the purposes of this article,
and not excludable by reason of section
19-270:
   (1)   Rental, leasing or licensing for use of real property to other than
another department or agency of the municipality.
   (2)   Procuring, providing or furnishing electricity, electric lights,
current, power, gas (natural or artificial), or water to consumers or
ratepayers.
   (3)   Sale of tangible personal property to the public, when similar
tangible personal property is available for sale by other persons, as, for
example, at police or surplus auctions.
   (4)   Providing wastewater removal services to consumers or ratepayers by
means of sewer lines or similar pipelines.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 11183, § 12, 6-17-14, eff. 1-1-13)
Reg. 19-270.2. Proprietary clubs.
   (a)   Equity Requirements. In order to qualify for exclusion under section
19-270, a proprietary club must actually be owned by the members. For the
purposes of qualification, a club will be deemed to be member-owned if at least
eighty-five (85) percent of the equity of the total amount of club-owned
property is owned by bona fide individual members whose membership is
represented in the form of shares, certificates, bonds or other indicia of
capital interest. A corporation may be considered an individual owner provided
that it owns a membership solely for the benefit of one (1) or more of its
employees and is not engaged in any business activity connected with the
operation of the club.
   (b)   Gross Revenue Requirements. In computing gross revenue for the
computation of this fifteen (15) percent rule of subsection
19-270(c)(1).
   (1)   The following shall be excluded:
   a.   Membership dues.
   b.   Membership fees which relate to the general admission to the club on a
periodic (or perpetual) basis.
   c.   Assessments.
   d.   Special fund-raising events, raffles, etc.
   e.   Donations, gifts or bequests.
   f.   Gate receipts, admissions and program advertising for not more than one
(1) tournament in any calendar year.
   (2)   The following must be included:
   a.   Green fees, court use fees, and similar charges for the actual use of a
facility or part thereof.
   b.   Pro shop sales if the shop is owned by the club.
   c.   Golf cart rental if the carts are owned by the club.
   d.   Rentals, percentages or commissions received for permitting the use of
the premises or any portion thereof by a caterer, concessionaire, professional
or any other person for sales, rental, leasing, licensing, catering, food or
beverage service, or instruction.
   e.   All receipts from food or beverage sales, room use or rental charge,
corkage and catering charges, and similar receipts.
   f.   Locker and locker room fees and attendants charges if paid to the club.
   g.   Tournament entry fees other than entry fees for the one (1) annual
tournament exempt under subsection (b)(1)(f) above.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87)
Reg. 19-300.1. Reserved.
   Editor's note – Ordinance No. 11219, § 2, adopted December 9, 2014 and
effective January 1, 2015, repealed regulation 19-300.1. Formerly, such
regulation pertained to who must apply for a license and derived from Ord. No.
6938, § 23, 4-25-88 and Ord. No. 10448, § 9, 9-5-07, eff. 1-1-08.
Reg. 19-300.2. Reserved.
(Ord. No. 7446, § 2.16, 7-2-90)
Reg. 19-310.1. Reserved.
   Editor's note – Ordinance No. 11198, § 3, adopted September 9, 2014 and
effective January 1, 2015, repealed regulation 19-310.1. Formerly, such
regulation pertained to proration of initial annual license fee and derived
from Ord. No. 6938, § 23, 4-25-88 and Ord. No. 10448, § 9, 9-5-07, eff. 1-1-08.
Reg. 19-310.2. Reserved.
(Ord. No. 6938, § 23, 4-25-88)
Reg. 19-310.3. Reserved.
(Ord. No. 6938, § 23, 4-25-88)
Reg. 19-350.1 Reserved.
   Editor's note – Ordinance No. 11219, § 2, adopted December 9, 2014 and
effective January 1, 2015, repealed regulation 19-350.1. Formerly, such
regulation pertained to recordkeeping: income and derived from Ord. No. 6674, §
3, 3-23-87.
Reg. 19-350.2. Reserved.
   Editor's note – Ordinance No. 11219, § 2, adopted December 9, 2014 and
effective January 1, 2015, repealed regulation 19-350.1. Formerly, such
regulation pertained to recordkeeping: expenditures and derived from Ord. No.
6674, § 3, 3-23-87 and Ord. No. 9840, § 8, 5-5-03.
Reg. 19-350.3. Reserved.
   Editor's note – Ordinance No. 11219, § 2, adopted December 9, 2014 and
effective January 1, 2015, repealed regulation 19-350.1. Formerly, such
regulation pertained to recordkeeping: out-of-city and out-of-state sales and
derived from Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87 and Ord. No. 10754, § 6, 1-20-10, eff.
7-1-08.
Reg. 19-360.1. Reserved.
   Editor's note – Ordinance No. 11219, § 2, adopted December 9, 2014 and
effective January 1, 2015, repealed regulation 19-350.1. Formerly, such
regulation pertained to proof of exemption: sale for resale; sale, rental,
lease, or license of rental equipment and derived from Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-
23-87.
Reg. 19-360.2. Reserved.
   Editor's note – Ordinance No. 11219, § 2, adopted December 9, 2014 and
effective January 1, 2015, repealed regulation 19-350.1. Formerly, such
regulation pertained to proof of exemption: exemption certificate and derived
from Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87.
Reg. 19-405.1. Local advertising examples.
   For purposes of illustration only, and not by way of limitation, the
following are provided as examples of local advertising subject to the tax:
   (1)   Retail sales and rental establishments doing business within the state
when only one commonly designated business entity is identified by name in the
advertisement.
   (2)   Financial institutions doing business within the state whether part of
a national chain or local business only.
   (3)   Sales of real estate located within the state.
   (4)   Health care facilities located within the state.
   (5)   Hotels, motels, and apartments, whether a national chain or local so
long as the advertisement identifies any location within the state.
   (6)   Brokers doing business within the state whether stockbrokers, real
estate brokers, insurance brokers, etc.
   (7)   Nonprofit organizations, which even though tax exempt, have an office,
whether national, local, or branch, within the state.
   (8)   Political activity, except United States Presidential and Vice
Presidential candidates.
   (9)   Restaurants or food service establishments which have one or more
branches, outlets, or franchises within the state even though the local
franchisee or licensee may not be responsible for the placement of the
advertisement.
   (10)   Services provided by individuals or entities within the state such as
doctors, lawyers, architects, hairdressers, auto repair shops, counseling
services, utilities, contractors, auction houses, etc.
   (11)   Coupons redeemable only at a single commonly designated business
entity within the state.
   (12)   Theater, sports, and other entertainment events held at locations
within the state.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 7436, § 2, 6-18-90; Ord. No. 11183, § 1,
6-17-14, eff. 12-13-11)
Reg. 19-405.2. Advertising activity within the city.
   (a)   In General. Except as provided elsewhere in this regulation, a person
engaged in advertising activity shall be considered to be doing business
entirely within the city if all or a major portion of the dissemination
facilities such as broadcasting studios, printing plants or distribution
centers are located within the city limits. Remote studios patched to an in-
city studio and subject to engineering modulation or control at the in-city
studio are considered studios doing business in the city.
   (b)   Billboards, Outdoor Advertising Companies. Billboards and other
outdoor advertising companies shall be considered to be doing business within
the city to the extent they have billboards or similar displays within the
city.
   (c)   Publishers, Distributors of Newspapers, Periodicals. Publishers and
distributors of newspaper and other periodicals shall be subject to the tax
upon advertising imposed by section
19-405, and such tax shall be allocated in the manner prescribed by subsection
(e) of section
19-435.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 6938, § 24, 4-25-88)
Reg. 19-407.1. Reserved.
(Ord. No. 6938, § 25, 4-25-88)
Reg. 19-415.1. Distinction between the categories of construction contracting.
For the purposes of this article, transactions involving improvements to, or
sales of, real property are designated into one of the following categories;
and these categorizations shall apply, whether or not a person designates
himself as a contractor, construction manager, developer or otherwise:
   (1)   A person performing improvements to real property is one of the
following:
   a.   An "owner-builder" when the work is performed by the owner or lessor or
lessee-in-possession. An "owner-builder" may also be a "speculative builder."
   b.   A "construction contractor" when performing work for the owner or
lessor or lessee-in-possession of the real property, unless that person has
provided a written declaration stating that:
   (i)   The owner-builder is improving the property for sale; and
   (ii)   The owner-builder is liable for the tax for such construction
contracting activity; and
   (iii)   The owner-builder has provided the contractor his city privilege
license number.
   c.   A "subcontractor" as provided in section
19-415(c).
   (2)   An owner or lessor ("owner-builder") of improved real property is one
of the following:
   a.   A "speculative builder" as provided in section
19-100; or
   b.   An "owner-builder who is not a speculative builder" in all other cases.
   (3)   The terms "owner," "lessor" and "lessee-in-possession" shall be deemed
to include any authorized agent for such person.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 7446, § 2.5, 7-2-90)
Reg. 19-415.2. Distinction between construction contracting and certain related
activities.
   (a)   Certain rentals, leases and licenses for use in connection with
construction contracting. Rental, leasing, or licensing of earth-moving
equipment with an operator shall be deemed construction contracting activity.
Rental, leasing, or licensing of any other tangible personal property (with or
without an operator) or of earthmoving equipment without an operator shall be
deemed rental, leasing, or licensing of tangible personal property. For
example:
   (1)   Rental of a backhoe, bulldozer, or similar earthmoving equipment with
operator is construction contracting. Rental of these items without an operator
is rental of tangible personal property.
   (2)   Rental of scaffolding, temporary fences, or barricades is rental of
tangible personal property.
   (3)   Rental of pumps or cranes is rental of tangible personal property,
whether or not an operator is provided with the equipment rented.
   (b)   Distinction between construction, contracting, retail, and certain
direct customer service activities.
   (1)   When an item is attached or installed on real property, it is a
construction contracting activity, and any subsequent repair, removal, or
replacement of that item is construction contracting.
   (2)   Items attached or installed on tangible personal property are retail
sales.
   (3)   Transactions where no tangible personal property is attached or
installed are considered direct customer service activities (for example:
carpet cleaning, lawn mowing, landscaping maintenance).
   (4)   Demolition, earthmoving, and wrecking activities are considered
construction contracting.
   (c)   Sale of consumable goods incorporated into or applied to real property
is considered a retail sale and not construction contracting. Examples of
consumable goods are lubricants, faucet washers, and air conditioning coolant,
but not paint.
   (d)   Installation or removal of tangible personal property which has
independent functional utility is considered a retail activity.
   (1)   "Tangible personal property which has independent functional utility"
must be able to substantially perform its function(s) without attachment to
real property. "Attachment to real property" must include more than connection
to water, power, gas, communication, or other service.
   (2)   Examples of tangible personal property which has independent
functional utility include artwork, furnishings, "plug-in" kitchen equipment,
or similar items installed by bolts or similar fastenings.
   (3)   Examples of tangible personal property which does not have independent
functional utility include wall-to-wall carpeting, flooring, wallpaper, kitchen
cabinets, or "built- in" dishwashers or ranges.
   (4)   The installation of window coverings (drapes, mini-blinds, etc.) is
always a retail activity.
   (e)   Sale and installation of interior window coverings. Notwithstanding
any other provision of this code and regulations pertaining thereto, the sale
of interior window coverings is always a retail activity, except when sold and
installed by the vendor, in which case it shall be construction contracting.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 8440, § 24, 1-23-95; Ord. No. 8766, §§
1, 2, 10-21-96; Ord. No. 8794, § 3, 1-6-97; Ord. No. 8856, § 3, 4-7-97; Ord.
No. 10949, § 4, 12-13-11)
Reg. 19-415.3. Construction contracting; tax rate effective date.
   (a)   In the event of a tax rate change, the rate imposed on gross income
from construction contracting shall be computed based upon the rate in effect
when the contract was executed, subject to the "enactment date" as defined in
this section. Gross income from a contract executed prior to the enactment date
shall not be subject to the tax rate change, provided the contract contains no
provision that entitles the construction contractor to recover the amount of
the tax.
   (b)   In the event of a rate increase, in order to qualify for the lower
rate, the construction contractor shall, upon request, provide sufficient
documentation, in a manner and form prescribed by the tax collector, to verify
that a contract was entered into before the enactment date.
   (c)   For purposes of this section, "enactment date" shall be:
   (1)   In the event an election is held, the date of election.
   (2)   In the event no election is held, the date of final adoption by the
mayor and council.
   (3)   Notwithstanding the above, nothing in this section shall be construed
to prevent the city from establishing a later enactment date.
(Ord. No. 9841, § 2, 5-12-03)
Reg. 19-416.1. Reserved.
   Editor’s note – Ordinance No. 11936, § 18, adopted July 12, 2022, repealed
regulation 19-416.1, effective April 1, 2019. Formerly, such regulation
pertained to speculative builders and derived from Ord. No. 6674, §3, 3-23-87
and Ord. No. 8440, § 25, 1-23-95.
Reg. 19-416.2. Reserved.
   Editor’s note – Ordinance No. 11936, § 18, adopted July 12, 2022, repealed
regulation 19-416.2, effective April 1, 2019. Formerly, such regulation
pertained to reconstruction contracting and derived from Ord. No. 6674, §3, 3-
23-87, Ord. No. 8440, § 26, 1-23-95, and .Ord. No. 8784, § 28, 12-2-96.
Reg. 19-425.1. Distinction between job printing and certain related activities.
   (a)   Computerized Printing. Computerized versions of all items which would
be taxable under section
19-425 if performed without computerized assistance are considered taxable
under that section, and therefore, are not exempt services.
   (b)   Book Publishing. The printing of books shall be deemed job printing.
Sales of books shall be deemed retail sales.
   (c)   Newspaper, etc., publishing. Publication of newspapers, magazines or
other periodicals shall not be considered job printing for the purposes of this
article.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87)
Reg. 19-435.1. Distinction between publishing of periodicals and certain
related activities.
   (a)   Book publishing shall not be considered publication of newspapers,
magazines or other periodicals for purposes of this article. Sales of books
shall be deemed retail sales. The printing of books shall be deemed job
printing.
   (b)   Publication of newspapers, magazines or other periodicals shall not be
considered job printing for the purposes of this article.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87)
Reg. 19-435.2. Advertising income of publishers and distributors of newspapers
and other periodicals.
Publishers and distributors of newspapers and other periodicals shall be
subject to the tax upon advertising imposed by section
19-405, and such tax shall be allocated in the manner prescribed by subsection
(e) of section
19-435.
(Ord. No. 6938, § 26, 4-25-88)
Reg. 19-445.1. When the rental, leasing, and licensing of real property is
exempt as "casual."
   (a)   The person who has less than three (3) apartments, houses, trailer
spaces, or other lodging spaces rented, leased or licensed or available for
rent, lease, or license within the state and no units of commercial property
for rent, lease, or license within the state is deemed not to be in the
business of renting, leasing, or licensing real property, and is therefore
exempt from the tax imposed by section
19-445 on such income. However, a person who has one (1) or more units of any
other real property is deemed to be in the business of renting, leasing, or
licensing real property, and subject to the tax imposed by section
19-445 on rental, lease, and license income from all such lodging spaces and
commercial units of real estate, even though such person may have fewer than
three (3) lodging spaces within the state.
   (b)   Reserved.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 7446, § 2.9, 7-2-90; Ord. No. 8440, §
27, 1-23-95)
Reg. 19-445.2. Reserved.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 8440, § 28, 1-23-95)
Reg. 19-445.3. Rental, leasing, and licensing of real property as lodging: Room
and board; furnished lodging.
   (a)   Room and Board.
   (1)   Rooming houses, lodges, or other establishments providing both lodging
and meals, shall maintain a record of the separate charges made for the lodging
and the meals.
   (2)   The charge for lodging shall be subject to the tax imposed by section
19-444 or section
19-445. The charge for meals is subject to the tax upon restaurants and bars
prescribed by section
19-455.
   (b)   Furnished Lodging. A person who provides lodging with furnishings
shall be deemed to be only in the business of rental, leasing, and licensing of
lodging, and not in the business of rental, leasing, and licensing of such
furnishings as tangible personal property, unless:
   (1)   Any tenant of any lodging space may choose to rent, lease, or license
such lodging space either furnished or unfurnished; and
   (2)   The lessor separately charges tenants for lodging and for furnishings;
and
   (3)   The lessor separately maintains his gross income from lodging and from
furnishings separately in his accounting books and records.
If all of the above conditions are met, such person shall report both sources
of income separately to the city.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 8440, § 29, 1-23-95)
Reg. 19-447.1. Reserved.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87)
Reg. 19-450.1. Distinction between rental, leasing, and licensing for use of
tangible personal property and certain related activities.
   (a)   Certain Rentals, Leases and Licenses for Use in Connection With
Construction Contracting. Rental, leasing or licensing of earth-moving
equipment with an operator shall be deemed construction contracting activity.
Rental, leasing or licensing of any other tangible personal property (with or
without an operator) or of earth-moving equipment without an operator shall be
deemed rental, leasing or licensing of tangible personal property. For example:
   (1)   Rental of a backhoe, bulldozer or similar earth-moving equipment with
operator is construction contracting. Rental of these items without an operator
is rental of tangible personal property.
   (2)   Rental of scaffolding, temporary fences or barricades is rental of
tangible personal property.
   (3)   Rental of pumps or cranes is rental of tangible personal property,
regardless of whether or not an operator is included with the equipment rented.
   (b)   Distinction Between Equipment Rental, Leasing or Licensing for Use and
Transporting for Hire. The hiring of mobile equipment (cranes, airplanes,
limousines, etc.) is considered rental, leasing or licensing of tangible
personal property whenever the charge is for a fixed sum or hourly rate. By
comparison, the activity of a common carrier conveying goods or persons for a
fee based upon distance, and not time, shall be considered transporting for
hire.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87)
Reg. 19-450.2. Rental, leasing, and licensing for use of tangible personal
property: Membership fees; other charges.
   (a)   Membership, admission or other fees charged by any rental club or
limited-access lessor are considered part of taxable gross income.
   (b)   Gross income from rental, leasing or licensing for use of tangible
personal property must include all charges by the lessor to the lessee for
repair, maintenance or other service upon the tangible personal property
rented, leased or licensed.
   (c)   Sale of a warranty, maintenance or service contract as a requirement
of, or in conjunction with, a rental, leasing or licensing contract is exempt.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 8784, § 29, 12-2-96)
Reg. 19-450.3. Rental, leasing, and licensing for use of equipment with
operator.
In cases where the tangible personal property is rented, leased or licensed
with an operator provided by the lessor, the charge for the operator shall not
be includable in the gross income from the rental, lease or license of such
tangible personal property if the charge for the operator and the charge for
the use of the equipment are separately itemized to the lessee and separately
maintained on the books and records of the lessor.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87)
Reg. 19-450.4. Rental, leasing, and licensing for use of tangible personal
property: Semi- permanently or permanently installed tangible personal
property.
   (a)   The term "semi-permanently or permanently installed" means that the
item of tangible personal property has and is expected to have at the time of
installation a permanent location at the site installed, as under a long-term
lease agreement, except that the person using or applying said property may
eventually replace it because it has become worn out or has become obsolete or
the person ceases to have the right to possession of the property.
   (b)   An item of tangible personal property is deemed permanently installed
if its installation requires alterations to the premises.
   (c)   Examples of "semi-permanently or permanently installed tangible
personal property" include but are not limited to computers, duplicating
machines, furniture not of portable design, major appliances, store fixtures.
   (d)   The term does not include mobile transportation equipment or tangible
personal property designed for regular use at different locations, as under
numerous short-term rental, lease or license agreements, whether or not such
property is in fact so used.
   (1)   For example, use of a mobile crane, trencher, automobile or other
similar equipment shall be considered a rental, lease or license transaction
subject to taxation only by the city or town in which such business office of
the lessor is based.
   (2)   Other similar examples include but are not limited to camping
equipment, contracting equipment, chain saw, forklift, household items, invalid
needs, janitorial equipment, reducing equipment, furniture of portable design,
trucks or trailers, tools, towbars, sump pumps, arc welders.
   (e)   A rental, lease or license agreement which specifies that the item in
question shall remain, under the terms of the agreement, located within the
same city or town for more than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days shall
be sufficient evidence that such rented, leased or licensed item is
"permanently or semi-permanently installed" in the city or town, except when
the item is mobile transportation equipment or one of the other types of
portable equipment or property described in subsection (d) above.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87)
Reg. 19-450.5. Rental, leasing, and licensing for use of tangible personal
property: Delivery, installation, repair, and maintenance charges.
   (a)   Delivery and installation charges in connection with the rental,
leasing and licensing of tangible personal property are exempt from the tax
imposed by section
19-450; provided that the provisions of regulation
19-100.2 have been met.
   (b)   Gross income from the sale of a warranty, maintenance or similar
service contract in connection with the rental, leasing and licensing of
tangible personal property shall be exempt.
   (c)   Separately stated charges for repair not included as part of a
warranty, maintenance or similar service contract relating to the rental,
leasing or licensing of tangible personal property are exempt from the tax
imposed by section
19-450; however, such income is subject to the provisions of sections
19-460 and
19-465, and the provisions of regulation
19-465.1.
(Ord. No. 6938, § 27, 4-25-88; Ord. No. 8784, § 30, 12-2-96)
Reg. 19-455.1. Gratuities related to restaurant activity.
Gratuities charged by or collected by persons subject to the tax imposed by
section
19-455 may be excluded from gross income if:
   (1)   Such charge is separately stated upon the bill, invoice, etc.,
provided the customer, and such amounts are maintained separately in the books
and records of the taxpayer; and
   (2)   Such gratuities are distributed in total to employees of the taxpayer
in addition to customary and regular wages.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87)
Reg. 19-460.1. Distinction between retail sales and certain other transfers of
tangible personal property.
   (a)   Distinction Between Transfer of Tangible Personal Property and Sales
at Retail. Charges for transfer of tangible personal property included in the
gross income of the business activity of persons engaged in the following
business activities shall be deemed only as gross income from such business
activity and not sales at retail taxed by section
19-460:
   (1)   Tangible personal property incorporated into real property as part of
reconstruction or construction contracting, per sections
19-415 through
19-418.
   (2)   Reserved.
   (3)   Job printing, per section
19-425.
   (4)   Mining, timbering and other extraction, but not sales of sand, gravel
or rock extracted from the ground, per section
19-430.
   (5)   Publication of newspapers, magazines and other periodicals, per
section
19-435.
   (6)   Rental, leasing and licensing of real or tangible personal property,
per section
19-445 or
19-450.
   (7)   Restaurants and bars, per section
19-455.
   (8)   Food for home consumption, per section
19-462.
   (9)   Telecommunications services, per section
19-470.
   (10)   Utility services, per section
19-480.
   (11)   Wastewater removal services, per section
19-485.
   (b)   Distinction Between Construction Contracting, Retail and Certain
Direct Customer Service Activities.
   (1)   When an item is attached or installed on real property, it is a
construction contracting activity, and any subsequent repair, removal or
replacement of that item is construction contracting.
   (2)   Items attached or installed on tangible personal property are retail
sales.
   (3)   Transactions where no tangible personal property is attached or
installed are considered direct customer service activities (for example:
carpet cleaning, lawn mowing, landscape maintenance).
   (4)   Demolition, earth moving, and wrecking activities are considered
construction contracting.
   (c)   The sale of sand, rock and gravel extracted from the ground shall be
deemed a sale of tangible personal property and not mining or metallurgical
activity.
   (d)   Sale of consumable goods incorporated into or applied to real property
is considered a retail sale and not construction contracting. Examples of
consumable goods are lubricants, faucet washers, and air conditioning coolant,
but not paint.
   (e)   Installation or removal of tangible personal property which has
independent functional utility is considered a retail activity.
   (1)   "Tangible personal property which has independent functional utility"
must be able to substantially perform its function(s) without attachment to
real property. "Attachment to real property" must include more than connection
to water, power, gas, communication or other service.
   (2)   Examples of tangible personal property which has independent
functional utility include artwork, furnishings, "plug-in" kitchen equipment,
or similar items installed by bolts or similar fastenings.
   (3)   Examples of tangible personal property which does not have independent
functional utility include wall-to-wall carpeting, flooring, wallpaper, kitchen
cabinets, or "built- in" dishwashers or ranges.
   (4)   The installation of window coverings (drapes, mini-blinds, etc.) is
always a retail activity.
   (f)   Sale and installation of interior window coverings. Notwithstanding
any other provision of this code and regulations pertaining thereto, the sale
of interior window coverings is always a retail activity, except when sold and
installed by the vendor, in which case it shall be construction contracting.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 8766, §§ 3, 4, 10-21-96; Ord. No. 10949,
§ 5, 12-13-11; Ord. No. 11183, § 10, 6-17-14, eff. 1-1-13)
Reg. 19-460.2. Retail sales: Trading stamp company transactions.
A trading stamp transaction is defined as follows: the trading stamp company
issues stamps to a vendor; the vendor then provides them to its customers; and
the customer then exchanges the stamps for merchandise from the trading stamp
company.
The exchange transaction for the merchandise shall be deemed a retail sale and
the trading stamp company a retailer. All taxes imposed by this article
applicable to retail transactions are therefore applicable to such exchange
transactions.
The rate of tax shall be the retail rate based upon the retail dollar value of
the redeemed merchandise as expressed in the redemption dollar value per book
of stamps or portion thereof. The tax imposition described herein is in lieu of
any privilege or use tax upon the business of issuing stamps, redeeming the
same, or using or storing property redeemed.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87)
Reg. 19-460.3. Retail sales: Membership fees of retailers.
Membership, admission or other fees charged by limited-access retailers are
considered part of taxable gross income of the business activity of selling
tangible personal property.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87)
Reg. 19-460.4. Retail sales: Professional services.
   (a)   "Professional services" refer to services rendered by such persons as
doctors, lawyers, accountants, architects, etc., for their customers or clients
where the services meet particular needs of a specific client and only apply in
the factual context of the client and the final product has no retail value in
itself. For example, opinion letters, workpapers, reports, etc., are not in a
form which would be subject to retail sales to customers. However, transfer of
items in a form which would be subject to retail sales (e.g., artwork, forms,
manuals, etc.) would not be considered professional services. The issue is one
of fact which must be resolved in each situation.
   (b)   Creative ("idea") labor and design labor that do not result in
tangible personal property that will be or can be sold are deemed professional
services and, if charged separately and maintained separately in the taxpayer's
books and records, are not includable in gross income.
   (c)   "Professional services" shall be deemed to include those items of
tangible personal property which are incidental to the services rendered,
provided such tangible personal property is "inconsequential."
   (1)   Incidental transfers of tangible personal property shall be regarded
as "inconsequential" if:
   a.   The purchase price of the tangible personal property to the person
rendering the professional services represents less than fifteen (15) percent
of the charge, billing or statement rendered to the purchaser in connection
with the transaction; and
   b.   The tangible personal property transferred is not itself in a form
which is subject to retail sale.
   (2)   In cases where the tangible personal property transferred is deemed
inconsequential, the provider of the tangible personal property so transferred
is deemed the ultimate consumer of such tangible personal property, and subject
to all applicable taxes imposed by this article upon such transfer.
   (d)   Examples:
   (1)   The transfer of paper embodying the result or work product of the
services rendered by an attorney or certified public accountant is regarded as
inconsequential to the charges for professional services.
   (2)   An appraisal report issued by an appraiser, reflecting such
appraiser's efforts to appraise real estate, is regarded as inconsequential.
   (3)   Use of a hair care product on a client's hair by a barber or
beautician in connection with performing professional services is usually
inconsequential. On the other hand, if the barber or beautician supplies the
customer with a bottle of the product for the client's use thereafter and
without the professional's assistance, the transfer of the bottle of hair care
product is deemed not inconsequential.
   (4)   If a mortician properly segregates his professional services from
other taxable activities on his bill (invoice, contract), his gross income
would include only the income derived from the sale of tangible personal
property (caskets, cards, flowers, etc.) and rental, leasing or licensing of
real and tangible personal property. His charges for professional services
(embalming, cosmetic work, etc.) would not be includable in gross income.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87)
Reg. 19-460.5. Retail sales: Monetized bullion; numismatic value of coins.
   (a)   "Monetized bullion" means coins or other forms of money manufactured
or minted from precious metals or other metals and issued as legal tender or a
medium of exchange by or for any government authorized to do so.
   (b)   Any coin shall be considered to have been transferred or acquired
primarily for its "numismatic value" if the sale or acquisition price:
   (1)   Is equal to or greater than twice (2 times) the value of the metallic
content of the coin as of the date of transfer or acquisition; and
   (2)   Is equal to or greater than twice (2 times) its face value, in the
case of a coin which, at the time of transfer or acquisition, was legal tender
or a medium of exchange of the government issuing or authorizing its issuance.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87)
Reg. 19-460.6. Retail sales: Consignment sales.
Sales of merchandise acquired on consignment are taxable as retail sales. In
cases where the merchant is acting as an agent on behalf of another dealer,
sales of the consigned merchandise are taxable to the principal, provided the
merchant makes full disclosure to customers that he is acting only as an agent
for the named principal. However, when the principal is not deemed to be a
dealer, such sales are considered to be those of the merchant and are taxable
to him.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87)
Reg. 19-465.1. Retail sales: Repair services.
   (a)   Fair Market Value of Parts and Labor Charges. The tax collector may
examine the reporting of all transactions covered by this section to determine
if an "arms-length" price is charged for the parts and materials. The
applicable tax may not be avoided by pricing a part, which ordinarily sells to
the customer at ten dollars ($10.00), at five dollars ($5.00) and including the
difference as "service" or "labor." In the absence of satisfactory evidence
supplied by the taxpayer as to industry or business practice, the tax collector
may use the cost of the part or materials to the taxpayer marked up by a
reasonable profit, to estimate the gross income subject to tax.
   (b)   Reserved.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87)
Reg. 19-465.2. Retail sales: Warranty, maintenance and similar service
contracts.
   (a)   Gross income from sales of warranty, maintenance and service contracts
is exempt from the tax imposed by section
19-460.
   (b)   Transfers of tangible personal property in connection with a service,
warranty, guaranty or maintenance agreement between a vendor and a vendee shall
be subject to tax under section
19-460 only to the extent of gross income received from separately itemized
charges made for the items of property transferred.
   (c)   The gross income derived from a maintenance insurance agreement, which
agreement is entered into between the purchaser and any person other than the
seller is not subject to tax imposed by section
19-460. If the provider of the maintenance insurance agreement pays for
tangible personal property on behalf of the insured in the performance of the
agreement, such sales are subject to all applicable taxes imposed by this
article.
   (d)   Charges for tangible personal property provided under the terms of a
warranty, maintenance or service contract exempted under section
19-465 are subject to tax as retail sales.
   (e)   However, gross income received by a dealer from a manufacturer for
work performed under a manufacturer's warranty is not taxable under section
19-460.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 8784, § 31, 12-2-96)
Reg. 19-465.3. Retail sales: Sale of containers, paper products, and labels.
   (a)   The sale of a "container" or similar packaging material which contains
personal property and which is transferred to the customer with the sale of the
product is not taxable as a sale for resale. Examples of such nontaxable
containers include, but are not limited to:
   (1)   Packaging materials sold to a manufacturer of video equipment for
containment of the product during shipment.
   (2)   Cellophane-type wrap sold to a meat department or butcher for
containment of the individually wrapped or contained meat.
   (3)   Bags used to contain loose fungible goods such as fruits, vegetables
and other products sold in bulk, where such bags or containers are used to
contain and measure the amount purchased by the customer.
   (4)   Shopping bags and similar merchandising bags sold to grocery stores,
department stores or other retailers.
   (5)   Gift wrappings and gift boxes sold to department stores or other
retailers.
   (b)   Sales of nonrefundable or disposable paper (and similar products such
as plastic or styrofoam) cups, lids, plates, bags, napkins, straws, knives,
forks and other similar food accessories to a restaurant or others taxable
under section
19-455 for transfer by the restaurant to its customer to contain or facilitate
the consumption of the food, drink or condiment are sales for resale and not
taxable.
   (c)   Where a retailer imposes a charge for gift wrapping and the charge
includes the container, paper, and other appropriate materials, the wrapping
charge shall be considered a sale.
   (d)   Charges for returnable containers, where the charges are imposed on
the customer, are subject to tax at the time of the transaction. A credit may
be taken for the amount of refund after such refund is made.
   (f)   The sale of labels to a purchaser who affixes them to a primary
container is a sale for resale and not taxable. Directional or instructional
material included with products sold are considered to be part of the product
and a sale for resale. However, the sale of items such as price tags, shipping
tags, and advertising matter delivered to the customer in connection with the
retail sale is taxable to the retailer as a retail sale to it, and is not
exempt as a sale for resale.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 6938, § 28, 4-25-88; Ord. No. 8440, §
30, 1-23-95)
Reg. 19-465.4. Retail sales: Aircraft acquired for use outside the state.
   Aircraft acquired for use outside the state means aircraft, navigational and
communication instruments, and other accessories and related equipment sold to:
   (1)   Any foreign government for use by such government outside of this
state.
   (2)   Persons who are not residents of this state and who will not use such
property in this state other than in removing such property from this state.
This subsection also applies to corporations that are not incorporated in this
state, regardless of maintaining a place of business in this state, if the
principal corporate office is located outside this state and the property will
not be used in this state other than in removing the property from this state.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 8440, § 31, 1-23-95)
Reg. 19-470.1. Reserved.
   Editor’s note – Ordinance No. 11936, § 18, adopted July 12, 2022, repealed
regulation 19-470.1, effective July 1, 2019. Formerly, such regulation
pertained to telecommunication services and derived from Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-
23-87.
Reg. 19-475.1. Distinction between transporting for hire and certain related
activities.
The hiring of mobile equipment (cranes, airplanes, limousines, etc.) is deemed
rental, leasing or licensing for use of tangible personal property whenever the
charge is for a fixed sum or hourly rate. By comparison, the activity of a
common carrier conveying goods or persons for a fee based upon distance, and
not time, shall be considered transporting for hire.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87)
Reg. 19-520.1. Reports made to the city.
   (a)   Each taxpayer shall provide, as a minimum, all of the following when
reporting taxes due as provided in this article:
   (1)   Legal business name of the taxpayer or his agent.
   (2)   Mailing address of the taxpayer.
   (3)   City privilege license number of the taxpayer.
   (4)   Period of time for which the report is intended.
   (5)   For each category of income to which the taxpayer is subject, for the
reporting period, as provided on the official city tax return:
   a.   All amounts subject to, excluded from, exempt from or deductible from
the tax imposed upon that category of business activity, summarized in total as
"gross receipts" of that category of business activity.
   b.   The total amount claimed as excludable, exempted or deducted from such
"gross receipts," itemized as provided on the official city tax return, and
summarized in total as "total deductions" for that category.
   c.   The difference between such "gross receipts" and "total deductions" as
"net taxable" for that category.
   d.   The tax due and payable for that category.
   (6)   That total amount subject to use tax, summarized as "net taxable," and
the use tax due and payable for that reporting period.
   (7)   Any excess tax collected which is due and payable.
   (8)   Any claimed tax credits against taxes due and payable.
   (9)   Total amount remitted with the return.
   (10)   A statement verifying that the information provided on the return is
accurate to the best of the preparer's knowledge. Such statement must be
accompanied by a dated signature of the preparer, and also show the preparer's
title or relationship to the taxpayer.
   (11)   The tax collector may prescribe and will notify taxpayers of
alternative methods for signing, subscribing or verifying any report or
statement required to be filed, including but not limited to electronic
signatures and/or security codes, and such methods shall have the same validity
and consequence as the actual signature or written declaration of the taxpayer
or other person required to sign, subscribe or verify the return, statement or
other document.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 9840, § 9, 5-5-03; Ord. No. 10043, § 1,
9-27-04)
Reg. 19-520.2. Change of method of reporting.
   (a)   Any taxpayer electing to change his reporting method shall be
permitted to do so only upon filing a written request to the tax collector and
after receiving written approval of the tax collector. The approval shall state
the effective date of the change.
   (b)   The tax collector may postpone such approval to allow for examination
of the records of the taxpayer and may further require that all tax liability
be satisfied up to the effective date of the change.
   (c)   Failure of the taxpayer to notify the tax collector and await approval
before changing the method of reporting will subject the taxpayer to interest
and penalties if his original method of reporting would produce higher taxes
due the city. When a person makes such change without the consent of the tax
collector, the tax collector may audit his books and records to verify the tax
liability as of the date of the change.
   (d)   Any taxpayer who has failed to indicate a choice of reporting method
upon the application for a privilege license shall be deemed to have chosen the
accrual method of reporting.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87)
Reg. 19-555.1. Administrative request for the attendance of witnesses or the
production of documents; service thereof; remedies and penalties for failure to
respond.
   (a)   If a taxpayer refuses or fails to comply in whole or in part with a
request to provide records authorized by section
19-555, the tax collector may issue his written administrative request, which
shall:
   (1)   Designate the individual to provide information.
   (2)   Describe specifically or generally the information to be provided, and
any documents sought to be examined.
   (3)   State the date, time and place in which the individual shall appear
before the tax collector to provide the information and to produce the
documents sought.
   (4)   Be directed to:
   a.   Any director, officer, employee, agent or representative of the person
sought to be examined; or
   b.   Any independent accountant, accounting firm, bookkeeping or financial
service retained or employed by such person for any purpose connected with
business activity subject to taxation; or
   c.   Any other person who, in the opinion of the tax collector, has
knowledge of facts bearing upon any tax liability of the person or taxpayer
from whom information is sought.
   (b)   The failure of a taxpayer to comply with reasonable requests for
records without good reason or cause may, in the exercise of judicial
discretion by a court, be held to constitute a failure to exhaust
administrative remedies.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87)
Reg. 19-571.1. Collection of tax in jeopardy.
Evidence that collection of tax due is in jeopardy shall include documentation
that:
   (1)   The taxpayer is going out of business.
   (2)   The taxpayer has no city privilege license or has no permanent
business location in the state.
   (3)   The taxpayer has failed to timely pay any tax (or penalties and
interest thereon) due to the city on three (3) or more occasions within the
previous thirty-six (36) calendar months.
   (4)   The taxpayer has remitted payment by check, which has been dishonored.
   (5)   The taxpayer has failed to comply with a formal written request of the
tax collector made pursuant to regulation
19-555.1.
(Ord. No. 6674, § 3, 3-23-87)
ARTICLE III.
PUBLIC UTILITY TAX*
__________
*   Editors Note: The expansion of art. II has necessitated the renumbering of
art. III, beginning with § 19-701 as opposed to the original, § 19-201. This
action was ratified by § 1 of Ord. No. 6733, adopted July 6, 1987.
Subsequently, § 1.A of Ord. No. 6926, adopted Apr. 18, 1987, repealed §§ 19-
701--19-766; and § 1.B added a new art. III, §§
19-699--
19-1120. The article was formerly derived from Ord. Nos. 3081, 6538, 6688.
__________
DIVISION 1.
GENERAL CONDITIONS AND DEFINITIONS
Sec. 19-699. Words of tense, number and gender; Code references.
   (a)   For the purposes of this article, all words of tense, number and
gender shall comply with A.R.S. section 1-214 as amended.
   (b)   For the purposes of this article, all Code references, unless
specified otherwise, shall:
   (1)   Refer to this City Code.
   (2)   Be deemed to include all amendments to such Code reference.
(Ord. No. 6926, § 1.B, 4-18-88)
Sec. 19-700. General definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply:
   Assembler means a person who unites or combines products, wares or articles
of manufacture so as to produce a change in form or substance of such items
without changing or altering component parts.
   Broker means any person engaged or continuing in business who acts for
another for a consideration in the conduct of a business activity taxable under
this article, and who receives for his principal all or part of the gross
income from the taxable activity.
   Business means all activities or acts, personal or corporate, engaged in and
caused to be engaged in with the object of gain, benefit or advantage, either
direct or indirect, but not casual activities or sales.
   Casual activity or sale means a transaction of an isolated nature made by a
person who neither represents himself to be nor is engaged in a business
subject to a tax imposed by this article. However, no sale, rental, license for
use, or lease transaction concerning real property nor any activity entered
into by a business taxable by this article shall be treated, or be exempt, as
casual. This definition shall include sales of used capital assets, provided
that the volume and frequency of such sales do not indicate that the seller
regularly engages in selling such property.
   Combined taxes means the sum of all applicable state transaction privilege
and use taxes; all applicable transportation taxes imposed upon gross income by
the county as authorized by A.R.S. chapter 8.3, title 42; all applicable taxes
imposed by Articles II and III of this Chapter; and all other taxes and fees
imposed by this city which are measured by gross income.
   Communications channel means any line, wire, cable, microwave, radio signal,
light beam, telephone, telegraph or any other electromagnetic means of moving a
message.
   Engaging, when used with reference to engaging or continuing in business,
includes the exercise of corporate or franchise powers.
   Federal government means the United States government, its departments and
agencies; but not including national banks or federally chartered or insured
banks, savings and loan institutions, or credit unions.
   Person means an individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association,
corporation, estate, trust, receiver, syndicate, broker, the federal
government, this state, or any political subdivision or agency of this state.
For the purposes of this article, a person shall be considered a distinct and
separate person from any general or limited partnership or joint venture or
other association with which such person is affiliated. A subsidiary
corporation shall be considered a separate person from its parent corporation
for purposes of taxation of transactions with its parent corporation.
   Providing telecommunication services means providing transmissions between
or among points specified by the user, of information of the user's choosing
(whether voice, video, or data), without change in content of information are
sent and received, where such transmissions are accomplished through a
telecommunication network. Telecommunications services shall include all
ancillary or adjunct switching services and signal conversions rendered as a
function of underlying transmission services, but excludes interstate long
distance transmissions. Telecommunications services also include all content or
value-added services rendered in conjunction with transmission services.
Providing telecommunication services means:
   a.   Two-way voice, sound, and/or video communication over a communications
channel.
   b.   One-way voice, sound, and/or video transmission or relay over a
communications channel.
   c.   Facsimile transmissions.
   d.   Relay or repeater service.
   e.   Computer interface services over a communications channel.
   f.   Time-sharing activities with a computer accomplished through the use of
a communications channel.
   Public utility means a person carrying on a utility service or
telecommunication service.
   Public utility business activity includes only those activities of a public
utility which comprise utility services or telecommunication services.
   Resides within the city means in cases other than individuals, whose legal
addresses are determinative of residence, the engaging, continuing or
conducting of regular business activity within the city.
   Sale means any transfer of title or possession, or both, exchange, barter,
conditional or otherwise, in any manner or by any means whosoever, including
consignment transactions and auctions, of property for a consideration. "Sale"
includes any transaction whereby the possession of such property is transferred
but the seller retains the title as security for the payment of the price.
"Sale" also includes the fabrication of tangible personal property for
consumers who, in whole or in part, furnish either directly or indirectly the
materials used in such fabrication work.
   Tax collector means the finance director or his/her designee or agent for
all purposes under this article.
   Telecommunication service means any service or activity connected with the
transmission or relay of sound, visual image, data, information, images or
material over a communications channel or any combination of communications
channels.
   Utility service means the producing, providing, or furnishing of
electricity, electric lights, current, power, gas (natural or artificial), or
water to consumers or ratepayers.
(Ord. No. 6926, § 1.B, 4-18-88; Ord. No. 8998, § 1, 12-8-97; Ord. No. 9870, §
1, 6-30-03; Ord. No. 11183, § 17, 6-17-14, eff. 8-1-14)
DIVISION 2.
DETERMINATION OF GROSS INCOME
Sec. 19-800. Determination of gross income in general.
   (a)   Gross income includes:
   (1)   The value proceeding or accruing from the sale of property, the
provision of service, or both.
   (2)   The total amount of the sale, lease, license for use, or rental price
at the time of such sale, rental, lease or license.
   (3)   All receipts, cash, credits, barter, exchange, reduction of or
forgiveness of indebtedness, and property of every kind or nature derived from
a sale, lease, license for use, rental or other taxable activity.
   (4)   All other receipts whether payment is advanced prior to,
contemporaneous with, or deferred in whole or in part subsequent to the
activity or transaction.
   (b)   Barter, exchange, trade-outs or similar transactions are includable in
gross income at the fair market value of the service rendered or property
transferred, whichever is higher, as they represent consideration given for
consideration received.
   (c)   No deduction or exclusion is allowed from gross income on account of
the cost of the property sold, the time value of money, expense of any kind or
nature, losses, materials used, labor or service performed, interest paid, or
credits granted.
(Ord. No. 6926, § 1.B, 4-18-88)
Sec. 19-805. Exclusion from gross income of amounts derived from activities
other than public utility business activities.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article III, gross income does not
include any amounts or values derived by a public utility from activities which
are not public utility business activities.
(Ord. No. 6926, § 1.B, 4-18-88)
Sec. 19-810. Determination of gross income--Transactions between affiliated
companies or persons.
In transactions between affiliated companies or persons, or in other
circumstances where the relationship between the parties is such that the gross
income from the transaction is not indicative of the market value of the
subject matter of the transaction, the tax collector shall determine the
"market value" upon which the city public utility tax shall be levied. "Market
value" shall correspond as nearly as possible to the gross income from similar
transactions of like quality or character by other taxpayers where no common
interest exists between the parties, but otherwise under similar circumstances
and conditions.
(Ord. No. 6926, § 1.B, 4-18-88)
Sec. 19-820. Same--Artificially contrived transactions.
The tax collector may examine any transaction, reported or unreported, if, in
his opinion, there has been or may be an evasion of the taxes imposed by this
article and to estimate the amount subject to tax in cases where such evasion
has occurred. The tax collector shall disregard any transaction which has been
undertaken in an artificial manner in order to evade the taxes imposed by this
article.
(Ord. No. 6926, § 1.B, 4-18-88)
Sec. 19-830. Same--Based upon method of reporting.
The method of reporting chosen by a taxpayer, as provided in section
19-520, adopted by reference in section
19-1100, necessitates the following adjustments to gross income for all
purposes under this article:
   (1)   Cash basis. When a person elects to report and pay taxes on a cash
basis, gross income for the reporting period shall include:
   a.   The total amounts received on "paid in full" transactions, against
which are allowed all applicable deductions and exclusions; and
   b.   All amounts received on accounts receivable, conditional sales
contract, or other similar transactions, against which no deductions and no
exclusions from gross income are allowed.
   (2)   Accrual basis. When a person elects to report and pay taxes on an
accrual basis, gross income shall include all gross income for the applicable
period regardless of whether receipts are for cash, credit, conditional, or
partially deferred transactions, and regardless of whether or not any security
document or instrument is sold, assigned or otherwise transferred to another.
Persons reporting on the accrual basis may deduct bad debts, provided that:
   a.   The amount deducted for the bad debt must be deducted from gross income
of the month in which the actual charge-off was made, and only to the extent
that such amount was actually charged off, and also only to the extent that
such amount is or was included as taxable gross income; and
   b.   If any amount is subsequently collected on such charged-off account, it
shall be included in gross income for the month in which it was collected,
without deduction for expense of collection.
(Ord. No. 6926, § 1.B, 4-18-88)
Sec. 19-840. Exclusion of cash discounts, returns, refunds, trade-in values,
vendor-issued coupons, and rebates from gross income.
   (a)   The following items are not included in gross income:
   (1)   Cash discounts allowed by the vendor for timely payment, but only
discounts allowed against taxable gross income.
   (2)   The value of property returned by customers to the extent of the
amount actually refunded either in cash or by credit and the amount refunded
was included in taxable gross income.
   (3)   The trade-in allowance for tangible personal property accepted as
payment, not to exceed the full sales price for any tangible personal property
sold, when the full sales price is included in taxable gross income.
   (4)   When coupons issued by a vendor are later accepted by the vendor as a
discount against the transaction, the discount may be excluded from gross
income as a cash discount. Amounts credited or refunded by a vendor for
redemption of coupons issued by any person other than the vendor may not be
excluded from gross income.
   (5)   Rebates issued by the vendor to a customer as a discount against the
transaction may be excluded from gross income as a cash discount. Rebates
issued by a person other than the vendor may not be excluded from gross income,
even when the vendee assigns his right to the rebate to the vendor.
   (b)   If the amount specified in subsection (a) above is credited by a
vendor subsequent to the reporting period in which the original transaction
occurs, such amount may be excluded from the taxable gross income of that
subsequent reporting period, but only to the extent that the excludable amount
was reported as taxable gross income in that prior reporting period.
(Ord. No. 6926, § 1.B, 4-18-88)
Sec. 19-850. Exclusion of combined taxes from gross income; itemization;
notice; limitations.
   (a)   When Tax Is Separately Charged and/or Collected. The total amount of
gross income shall be exclusive of combined taxes only when the person upon
whom the tax is imposed shall establish to the satisfaction of the tax
collector that such tax has been added to the total price of the transaction.
The taxpayer must provide to this customer and also keep a reliable record of
the actual tax charged or collected, shown by cash register tapes, sales
tickets, or other accurate record, separating net transaction price and
combined tax. If at any time the tax collector cannot ascertain from the
records kept by the taxpayer the total or amounts billed or collected on
account of combined taxes, the claimed taxes collected may not be excluded from
gross income, unless such records are completed and/or classified to the
satisfaction of the tax collector.
   (1)   Remittance of all tax charged and/or collected. When an added charge
is made to cover city (or combined) privilege and public utility taxes, the
person upon whom the tax is imposed shall pay the full amount of the city taxes
due, whether collected by him or not; and in the event he collects more than
the amount due, he shall remit the excess to the tax collector. In the event
the tax collector cannot ascertain from the records kept by the taxpayer the
total of amounts of taxes collected by him, and the tax collector is satisfied
that the taxpayer has collected taxes in an amount in excess of the tax
assessed under this article, the tax collector may determine the amount
collected and collect the tax so determined in the manner provided in this
article.
   (2)   Itemization. A taxpayer, in order to be entitled to exclude from his
gross income any amounts paid to him by customers for combined taxes passed on
to the customer, must prove that he has provided his customer with a written
record of the transaction showing at a minimum the price before the tax, the
combined taxes, and the total cost. This shall be in addition to the record
required to be kept under subsection (a) above.
   (b)   When Tax Has Been Neither Separately Charged Nor Separately Collected.
When the person upon whom the tax is imposed shall establish by means of
invoices, sales tickets or other reliable evidence that no added charge was
made to cover combined taxes, the taxpayer may exclude tax collected from such
income by dividing such taxable gross income by 1.00 plus a decimal figure
representing the effective combined tax rate expressed as a fraction of 1.00.
(Ord. No. 6926, § 1.B, 4-18-88)
Sec. 19-870. Exclusion of gross income of persons deemed not engaged in
business.
   (a)   For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall
apply:
   (1)   Federally exempt organization means an organization which has received
a determination of exemption, or qualifies for such exemption, under 26 U.S.C.
section 501(c) and rules and regulations of the commissioner of internal
revenue pertaining to same, but not including a "governmental entity,"
"nonlicensed business," or "public educational entity."
   (2)   Governmental entity means the federal government, the State of
Arizona, any other state, or any political subdivision, department or agency of
any of the foregoing; provided further that persons contracting with such a
governmental entity to operate any part of a governmentally adopted and
controlled program to provide urban mass transportation shall be deemed a
governmental entity in all activities such person performs when engaged in said
contract.
   (3)   Nonlicensed business means any person conducting any business activity
for gain or profit, whether or not actually realized, which person is not
required to be licensed for the conduct or transaction of activities subject to
the tax imposed under this article.
   (4)   Proprietary club means any club which has qualified or would otherwise
qualify as an exempt club under the provisions of 26 U.S.C. section 501(c)(7),
(8) and (9), notwithstanding the fact that some or all of the members may own a
proprietary interest in the property and assets of the club.
   (5)   Public educational entity means any educational entity operated
pursuant to any provision of A.R.S. title 15.
   (b)   Transactions which, if conducted by any other person, would produce
gross income subject to tax under this article shall not be subject to the
imposition of such tax if conducted entirely by a public educational entity,
governmental entity, except "proprietary activities" of municipalities as
provided by regulation, or nonlicensed business.
   (c)   Transactions which, if conducted by any other person, would produce
gross income subject to the tax under this article shall not be subject to the
imposition of such tax if conducted entirely by a federally exempt organization
or proprietary club with the following exceptions:
   (1)   Transactions involving proprietary clubs and organizations exempt
under 26 U.S.C. section 501(c)(7), (8) and (9), where the gross revenue of the
activity received from persons other than members and bona fide guests of
members is in an amount in excess of fifteen (15) percent of total gross
revenue, as prescribed by regulation. In the event this fifteen (15) percent
limit is exceeded, the entire gross income of such entity shall be subject to
the applicable tax.
   (2)   Gross income from unrelated business income as that term is defined in
26 U.S.C. section 512, including all statutory definitions and determinations,
the rules and regulations of the commissioner of internal revenue, and his
administrative interpretations and guidelines.
   (3)   (Reserved.)
   (d)   Except as may be provided elsewhere in this article, transactions
where customers are exempt organizations, proprietary clubs, public educational
entities, governmental entities, or nonlicensed businesses shall be deemed
taxable transactions for the purpose of the imposition of taxes under this
article, notwithstanding that property so acquired may in fact be resold or
leased by the acquiring person to others. In the case of sales, rentals, leases
or licenses to proprietary clubs or exempt organizations, the vendor may be
relieved from the responsibility for reporting and paying tax on such income
only by obtaining from its vendee a verified statement that includes:
   (1)   A statement that when the property so acquired is resold, rented or
licensed, that the otherwise exempt vendee chooses, or its required, to pay
city public utility tax or an equivalent excise tax on its gross income from
such transactions and does in fact file returns on same; and
   (2)   Proof of public utility licensing of the otherwise exempt vendee; and
   (3)   Such other information as the tax collector may require.
   (e)   Franchisees or concessionaires operating businesses for or on behalf
of any exempt organization, governmental entity, public educational entity,
proprietary club, or nonlicensed business shall not be considered to be such an
exempt organization, club, entity or nonlicensed business, but shall be deemed
to be a taxpayer subject to the provisions of this article, except as provided
in the definition of governmental entity, regarding urban mass transit.
   (f)   (Reserved.)
(Ord. No. 6926, § 1.B, 4-18-88)
Sec. 19-890. Exclusion of certain activities occurring on Davis Monthan Air
Force Base from the measure of gross income.
Notwithstanding provisions contained elsewhere in this article, gross income
derived from the following transactions and activities that would be considered
taxable, occurring elsewhere in the city, shall be deemed exempt from the taxes
imposed by this chapter when the transaction or activity occurs on Davis
Monthan Air Force Base:
   (1)   Providing telecommunication or utility service to customers on the
base.
   (2)   (Reserved.)
(Ord. No. 6926, § 1.B, 4-18-88)
DIVISION 3.
LICENSING AND RECORDKEEPING
Sec. 19-900. Licensing requirements.
   (a)   Generally. The following persons shall make application to the tax
collector for a public utility tax license, accompanied by a nonrefundable
application fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and no person shall engage or
continue in business or engage in such activities until he shall have such a
license:
   (1)   Every person desiring to engage or continue in business activities
within the city upon which a public utility tax is imposed by this article.
   (2)    If a person is required to be licensed pursuant to section
19-3 or section
19-300, that person is not required to submit an application for a public
utility license.
   (b)   Limitation. The issuance of a public utility license by the tax
collector shall in no way be construed as permission to operate a business
activity in violation of any other law or regulation to which such activity may
be subject.
   (c)   [License fee.] Licensees whose initial application for a business
license is received by the tax collector on or after January 1, 2008, will be
subject to an initial annual license fee of forty-five dollars ($45.00) on a
proration schedule as follows:
 
Business Start Date    Applicable License Fee
January 1--March 31    $45.00
April 1--June 30       33.75
July 1--September 30   22.50
October 1--December 31 11.25
 
(Ord. No. 6926, § 1.B, 4-18-88; Ord. No. 10448, § 15, 9-5-07, eff. 1-1-08)
Sec. 19-905. Special licensing requirements.
   (a)   Partnerships. Application for a public utility license for a
partnership engaging or continuing in business in the city shall provide, as a
minimum, the names and addresses of all general partners. Licenses issued to
persons engaged in business as partners, limited or general, shall be in the
name of the partnership.
   (b)   Corporations. Application for a public utility license for a
corporation engaging or continuing in business in the city shall provide, as a
minimum, the names and addresses of both the chief executive officer and chief
financial officer of the corporation. Licenses issued to persons engaged in
business as corporations shall be in the name of the corporation.
   (c)   Multiple Locations or Multiple Business Names. A person engaged in or
conducting one (1) or more businesses at two (2) or more locations or under two
(2) or more business names shall procure a license for each such location or
business name. A "location" is a place of a separate business establishment.
   (d)   Conditions. Licenses shall not be issued until all legal requirements
are met. It shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of a license that
all statutes, ordinances, regulations and other requirements affecting the
public peace, health and safety be complied with in total.
(Ord. No. 6926, § 1.B, 4-18-88)
Sec. 19-910. Licensing--Duration of license; transferability; display.
   (a)   Except as provided in section
19-920, the privilege license shall be valid only for the calendar year in
which it is issued unless renewed each year by filing the appropriate
application for renewal and paying the renewal fee of forty-five dollars
($45.00) which is due and payable on January 1 and shall be considered
delinquent if not received on or before the last business day of January.
Application and payment for renewal must be received within the tax collector's
office by such date to be deemed filed and paid.
   (b)   The public utility license shall be nontransferable between owners or
locations, and shall be on display to the public in the licensee's place of
business.
   (c)   Any licensee who permits his license to expire through cancellation as
provided in section 19.720,* by his request for cancellation, by surrender of
the license, or by the cessation of the business activity for which the license
was issued, and who thereafter applies for license, shall be granted a new
license as an original applicant and shall pay the current license fee. Any
licensee who loses or misplaces his public utility license which is still in
effect shall be charged the current license fee for each reissuance of a
license.
__________
*   Editors Note: There is no § 19-720; reference presumably should be to §
19-920.
__________
   (d)   Any taxpayer who fails to renew his license on or before the date
provided in subsection (a) above shall be deemed to be operating without a
license after such date and until the appropriate application for renewal and a
renewal fee of sixty-seven dollars and fifty cents ($67.50) has been received
by the tax collector.
(Ord. No. 6926, § 1.B, 4-18-88; Ord. No. 10448, §§ 16, 17, 9-5-07, eff. 1-1-08)
Sec. 19-920. Same--Cancellation; revocation.
   (a)   Cancellation. The tax collector shall be authorized to cancel the city
public utility license of any licensee as "inactive" if the taxpayer, required
to report monthly to the city, has neither filed any return nor remitted to the
city any taxes imposed by this article for a period of six (6) consecutive
months; or, if required to report quarterly, has neither filed any return nor
remitted any taxes imposed by this article for two (2) consecutive quarters;
or, if required to report annually, has either filed any return nor remitted
any taxes imposed by this article when such annual report and tax are due to be
filed with and remitted to the tax collector.
   (b)   Revocation. If any licensee fails to pay any tax, interest, penalty,
fee or sum required to be paid to the city under this article, or if such
licensee fails to comply with any other provisions of this article, the tax
collector shall be authorized to revoke the city public utility license of said
licensee.
   (c)   Notice and Hearing. The tax collector shall deliver notice to such
licensee of cancellation or revocation of the public utility license. If within
twenty (20) days the licensee so notified requests a hearing, he shall be
granted a hearing before the tax collector.
   (d)   Relicensing. After cancellation or revocation of a taxpayer's license,
the taxpayer shall not be relicensed until all reports have been filed; all
fees, taxes, interest, and penalties due have been paid; and he is in
compliance with the provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 6926, § 1.B, 4-18-88)
Sec. 19-930. Operating without a license.
It shall be unlawful for any person who is required by this article to obtain a
public utility license to engage in or continue in business within the city
without a license. The tax collector shall assess any delinquencies in tax,
interest and penalties which may apply against such person upon any
transactions subject to the taxes imposed by this article.
(Ord. No. 6926, § 1.B, 4-18-88)
Sec. 19-950. Recordkeeping requirements.
   (a)   It shall be the duty of every person subject to the tax imposed by
this article to keep and preserve suitable records and such other books and
accounts as may be necessary to determine the amount of tax for which he is
liable under this article. The books and records must contain, at a minimum,
such detail and summary information as may be required by regulation. It shall
be the duty of every person to keep and preserve such books and records for a
period equal to the applicable limitation period for assessment of tax, and all
such books and records shall be open for inspection by the tax collector during
any business day.
   (b)   The tax collector may direct, by letter, a specific taxpayer to keep
specific other books, records and documents. Such letter directive shall apply:
   (1)   Only for future reporting periods; and
   (2)   Only by express determination of the tax collector that such specific
recordkeeping is necessary due to the inability of the city to conduct an
adequate examination of the past activities of the taxpayer, which inability
resulted from inaccurate or inadequate books, records, or documentation
maintained by the taxpayer.
(Ord. No. 6926, § 1.B, 4-18-88)
Sec. 19-960. Recordkeeping; claim of exclusion, exemption, deduction, or
credit; documentation; liability.
   (a)   All deductions, exclusions, exemptions and credits provided in this
article are conditional upon adequate proof and documentation of such as may be
required either by this article or regulation.
   (b)   Any person who claims and receives an exemption, deduction, exclusion
or credit to which he is not entitled under this article shall be subject to,
liable for, and pay the tax on the transaction as if the vendor subject to the
tax had passed the burden of the payment of the tax to the person wrongfully
claiming the exemption. A person who wrongfully claimed such exemption shall be
treated as if he is delinquent in the payment of the tax and shall be subject
to interest and penalties upon such delinquency. However, if the tax is
collected from the vendor on such transaction it shall not again be collected
from the person claiming the exemption, or if collected from the person
claiming the exemption it shall not also be collected from the vendor.
(Ord. No. 6926, § 1.B, 4-18-88)
Sec. 19-970. Inadequate or unsuitable records.
In the event the records provided by the taxpayer are considered by the tax
collector to be inadequate or unsuitable to determine the amount of the tax for
which such taxpayer is liable under the provisions of this article, it is the
responsibility of the taxpayer either:
   (1)   To provide such other records required by this article or regulation;
or
   (2)   To correct or to reconstruct his records, to the satisfaction of the
tax collector.
(Ord. No. 6926, § 1.B, 4-18-88)
DIVISION 4.
PUBLIC UTILITY TAX
Sec. 19-1000. Imposition of public utility tax; credit; presumption.
   (a)   There is hereby levied and imposed, subject to all other provisions of
this article, a public utility tax for the purpose of raising revenue to be
used in defraying the necessary expenses of the city, such tax to be collected
by the tax collector, upon persons on account of their public utility business
activities, to the extent provided elsewhere in this division, to be measured
by the gross income of persons, whether derived from residents of the city or
not, or whether derived from within the city or from without, or whether any
person is doing business under a franchise.
All franchise payments made by a person to the city shall be credited towards
the payment of the public utility tax levied in this article III.
   (b)   Taxes imposed by this article are in addition to others. Except as
specifically designated elsewhere in this article, each of the taxes imposed by
this article shall be in addition to all other licenses, fees and taxes levied
by law, including other taxes imposed by this article.
   (c)   Presumption. For the purpose of proper administration of this article
and to prevent evasion of the taxes imposed by this article, it shall be
presumed that all gross income is subject to the tax until the contrary is
established by the taxpayer.
(Ord. No. 6926, § 1.B, 4-18-88)
Sec. 19-1070. Telecommunication services.
   (a)   Tax Rate. The tax rate shall be levied upon the gross income from the
business activity upon every person engaging or continuing in the business of
providing telecommunication services to consumers within this city as follows:
   (1)   (i)   A tax rate at an amount equal to four and one half (4.5) percent
upon the gross income of providing telecommunication services.
   (ii)   Gross income from providing telecommunication services under this
subsection includes all telecommunication services provided under Titles II and
VI of the Federal Communications Act of 1934, as amended, (47 U.S.C. 201 et.
seq.), but excludes resellers of solely interstate services.
   (2)   (i)   A tax rate at an amount equal to an additional one and one-half
(1 1/2) percent upon the gross income of providing telecommunication services
by any provider who uses any city rights-of- way.
   (ii)   Gross income from providing telecommunication services under this
subsection includes all telecommunication services provided under Titles II and
VI of the Federal Communications Act of 1934, as amended, (47 U.S.C. 201 et.
seq.), but excludes:
   (1)   Resellers of solely interstate services;
   (2)   Resellers who do not separately bill customers for local exchange
service; and
   (3)   Providers of services provided principally by means of wireless
transmitter/receiver cell sites located within the rights-of-way together with
not more than one thousand (1,000) feet of facility installation per cell site
in rights-of-way, provided the wireless provider has independent authorization
from the city/town to occupy city/town rights-of-way with such facilities.
   (iii)   All franchise or license payments made by a person to the city shall
be credited toward the payment of the public utility tax levied in this article
III. All right-of-way permit payments made by a person to the city shall be
credited towards the payment of the public utility tax levied in this
subsection (a)(2)(i).
   (b)   Resale of Telecommunication Services. Gross income from sales of
telecommunication services to another provider of telecommunications services
for the purpose of providing the purchaser's customers with such service shall
be exempt from the tax imposed by this section; provided such purchaser is
properly licensed by the city to engage in such business under this article.
   (c)   Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 6926, § 1.B, 4-18-88; Ord. No. 8998, § 2, 12-8-97; Ord. No. 9870, §
2, 6-30-03; Ord. No. 10685, § 1, 6-16-09, eff. 7-1-09; Ord. No. 11369, § 2, 6-
7-16, eff. 7-1-16)
Sec. 19-1080. Utility services.
   (a)   Tax rate. The tax rate shall be an amount equal to four and one half
(4.5) percent of the gross income from the business activity upon every person
engaging or continuing in the business of providing utility services to
consumers or ratepayers who reside within the city.
   (b)   Resale of Utility Services. Sales of utility services to another
provider of the same utility services for the purpose of providing such utility
services either to another properly licensed utility provider or directly to
such purchaser's customers or ratepayers shall be exempt and deductible from
the gross income subject to the tax imposed by this section, provided the
purchaser is properly licensed by all applicable taxing jurisdictions to engage
or continue in the business of providing utility services, and further provided
that the seller maintains proper documentation, in a manner similar to that for
sales for resale, of such transactions.
   (c)   Exemptions. The tax imposed by this section shall not apply to sales
of utility services to any nonprofit primary health care facility, except when
sold for use in activities resulting in gross income from unrelated business
income as that term is defined in 26 U.S.C. section 512. For purposes of this
section, "primary health care facility" means any hospital or any licensed
nursing care institution, licensed pursuant to A.R.S. chapter 4, title 36, or
any licensed kidney dialysis center.
(Ord. No. 6926, § 1.B, 4-18-88; Ord. No. 9870, § 3, 6-30-03; Ord. No. 10685, §
2, 6-16-09, eff. 7-1-09; Ord. No. 11369, § 3, 6-7-16, eff. 7-1-16)
DIVISION 5.
ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 19-1100. Administration of this article.
The administration of this article shall be governed by and in accordance with
the provisions of division 5, and the regulations following division 5, in
article II of this chapter, except those provisions which are unrelated to any
provision in this article III.
(Ord. No. 6926, § 1.B, 4-18-88)
Sec. 19-1110. Criminal penalties.
   (a)   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly or willfully:
   (1)   Fail or refuse to make any return required by this article.
   (2)   Fail to remit as and when due the full amount of any tax or additional
tax or penalty and interest thereon.
   (3)   Make or cause to be made a false or fraudulent return.
   (4)   Make or cause to be made a false or fraudulent statement in a return,
in written support of a return, or to demonstrate or support entitlement to a
deduction, exclusion or credit, or to entitle the person to an allocation or
apportionment or receipts subject to tax.
   (5)   Fail or refuse to permit any lawful examination of any book, account,
record or other memorandum by the tax collector.
   (6)   Fail or refuse to remit any tax collected by such person from his
customer to the tax collector before the delinquency date next following such
collection.
   (7)   Advertise or hold out to the public in any manner, directly or
indirectly, that any tax imposed by this article, as provided in this article,
is not considered as an element in the price to the consumer.
   (8)   Fail or refuse to obtain a public utility license or to aid or abet
another in any attempt to intentionally refuse to obtain such a license or
evade the license fee.
   (9)   Reproduce, forge, falsify, fraudulently obtain or secure, or aid or
abet another in any attempt to reproduce, forge, falsify, or fraudulently
obtain or secure, an exemption from taxes imposed by this article.
   (b)   The violation of any provision of subsection
   (a)   above shall constitute a class two misdemeanor.
   (c)   In addition to the foregoing penalties, any person who shall knowingly
swear to or verify any false or fraudulent statement, with the intent
aforesaid, shall be guilty of the offense of perjury and on conviction thereof
shall be punished in the manner provided by law.
(Ord. No. 6926, § 1.B, 4-18-88)
Sec. 19-1120. Civil actions.
   (a)   Liens.
   (1)   Any tax, penalty or interest imposed under this article which has
become final, as provided in this article, shall become a lien when the city
perfects a notice and claim of lien setting forth the name of the taxpayer, the
amount of the tax, penalty and interest, the period or periods for which due,
the date of accrual thereof, and stating that the city claims a lien therefor.
   (2)   The notice of claim of lien shall be signed by the tax collector under
his official seal of the city, and, with respect to real property, shall be
recorded in the office of the county recorder of any county in which the
taxpayer owns real property, and, with respect to personal property, shall be
filed in the office of the secretary of state. After the notice and claim of
lien is recorded or filed, the taxes, penalties and interest in the amounts
specified therein shall be a lien on all real property of the taxpayer located
in such county where recorded, and all tangible personal property of the
taxpayer within the state, superior to all other liens and assessments recorded
or filed subsequent to the recording or filing of the notice and claim of lien.
   (3)   Every tax imposed by this article, and all increases, interest and
penalties thereof, shall become from the time the same is due and payable a
personal debt from the person liable to the city, but shall be payable to and
recoverable by the tax collector and which may be collected in the manner set
forth in subsection (b) below.
   (4)   Any lien perfected pursuant to this section shall, upon payment of the
taxes, penalties and interest affected thereby, be released by the tax
collector in the same manner as mortgages and judgments are released. The tax
collector may, at his sole discretion, release a lien in part, that is, against
only specified property, for partial payment of moneys due the city.
   (b)   Actions To Recover Tax. An action may be brought by the city attorney
or other legal advisory to the city designated by the city council, at the
request of the tax collector, in the name of the city, to recover the amount of
any taxes, penalties and interest due under this article; provided that:
   (1)   No action or proceeding may be taken or commenced to collect any taxes
levied by this article until the amount thereof has been established by
assessment, correction or reassessment; and
   (2)   Such collection effort is made or the proceedings begun:
   a.   Within six (6) years after the assessment of the tax; or
   b.   Prior to the expiration of any period of collection agreed upon in
writing by the tax collector and the taxpayer before the expiration of such
six-year period, or any extensions thereof; or
   c.   At any time for the collection of tax arising by reason of a tax lien
perfected, recorded or possessed by the city under this section.
(Ord. No. 6926, § 1.B, 4-18-88)
ARTICLE IV.
RESERVED*
__________
   *Editor's note – Article IV, §§ 19-1200 – 19-1255, relating to the Access to
Care Program, derived from Ord. No. 11104, § 1, adopted August 6, 2013, was
repealed by Ord. No. 11219, § 5, adopted December 9, 2014.
__________
Secs. 19-1200 – 19-1255 Reserved.
Chapter 20
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC*
__________
*   Cross References: Bicycles, ch.
5
__________
Art. I.   In General, §§ 20-1--20-39
Art. II.   Administration, §§ 20-40--20-90
   Div. 1. Generally, §§ 20-40--20-67
   Div. 2. Violations, §§ 20-68--20-90
Art. III.   Pedestrians, §§ 20-91--20-108
Art. IV.   Traffic-Control Devices, §§ 20-109--20-134
Art. V.   Operation, §§ 20-135--20-172
Art. VI.   One-Way Streets and Stop Streets, §§ 20-173--20-199
Art. VII.   Stopping, Standing and Parking, §§ 20-200--20-299
   Div. 1. Generally, §§ 20-200--20-209
   Div. 2. Administration, §§ 20-210--20-219
   Div. 3. Parking for Individuals with Physical Disabilities, §§ 20-220--20-
224
   Div. 4. Basic Parking Controls, §§ 20-225--20-245
   Div. 5. Nuisance Parking Controls, §§ 20-246--20-270
   Div. 6. Safety Issues, §§ 20-271--20-299
Art. VIII.   Taxicab Regulations, §§ 20-300--20-399
Art. IX.   Trolleys, §§ 20-400--20-499
Art. X.   Traffic Medians, §§ 20-500--20-502
Article I. In General
Sec.
20-1.   Definitions.
Sec.
20-2.   Civil traffic violations.
Sec.
20-3.   Penalties.
Sec.
20-4.   Applicability to public employees.
Sec.
20-5.   Applicability to pushcarts, animals, animal-drawn vehicles.
Sec.
20-6.   Reserved.
Sec.
20-7.   Office of traffic engineer created; general powers, duties.
Sec.
20-8.   Enforcement duties of police.
Sec.
20-9.   Police authorized to direct traffic; emergency authority.
Sec.
20-10.   Authority of officers of fire department.
Sec.
20-11.   Reserved.
Sec.
20-11.1.   Appointment of park rangers as special policemen.
Sec.
20-11.2.   Jurisdiction of special policemen.
Sec.
20-11.3.   Authority of special policemen.
Sec.
20-11.4.   Status of special policemen.
Sec.
20-11.5.   Compensation of special policemen.
Sec.
20-11.6.   Revocation of authority.
Sec.
20-11.7.   Appointment of community service officers.
Sec.
20-11.8.   Authority of community service officers.
Sec.
20-11.9.   Appointment of civilian volunteer police assist specialists.
Sec.
20-11.10.   Authority of civilian volunteer police assist specialists.
Sec.
20-12.   Impounding vehicles--When permitted.
Sec.
20-13.   Same--Notice.
Sec.
20-14.   Same--Redemption or sale.
Sec.
20-15.   Truck routes established.
Sec.
20-15.1.   Driving vehicles with a gross vehicle weight rating in excess of
twenty thousand (20,000) pounds on streets not designated as truck routes
prohibited; exceptions.
Sec.
20-15.2.   Exceptions to truck route restrictions.
Sec.
20-16.   Special permission required to use streets not designated for trucks
or to operate or move vehicles, loads or mobile homes exceeding state
limitations; exemptions; permit and fee structure; violation of civil
infraction.
Sec.
20-17.   Districts where loading, unloading large vehicles prohibited;
variances.
Sec.
20-18.   Governmental vehicles exempt from truck route and loading or unloading
provisions.
Sec.
20-19.   Driving on property of another prohibited without permission.
Secs.
20-19.1, 20-20. Reserved.
Sec.
20-21.   Driving in parks and playgrounds.
Sec.
20-21.1.   Reserved.
Sec.
20-22.   Driving on city-owned property.
Sec.
20-23.   Reserved.
Sec.
20-24.   Reserved.
Sec.
20-25.   Boarding, alighting from moving vehicles.
Sec.
20-26.   Opening vehicle doors into traffic.
Sec.
20-27.   Unlawful riding.
Sec.
20-28.   Roller skating, skateboards, coasting, toy vehicles, prohibited on
roadways; skateboards prohibited in central business district areas and all
library property and facilities within the Tucson-Pima Library System;
exceptions:
Sec.
20-29.   Requirement for helmet use; bicycle renters and sellers; civil
penalties; waiver of fine.
Sec.
20-30.   Operating motorized skateboards and motorized play vehicles;
definitions; prohibitions; penalty.
Secs.
20-31--20-39.   Reserved.
Article II. Administration
Division 1. Generally
Sec.
20-40.   Traffic division established.
Sec.
20-41.   General duties of traffic division, other police officers.
Sec.
20-42.   Record of violations required.
Sec.
20-43.   Form for records and notices of violations.
Sec.
20-44   Accidents; duty of police to investigate, make arrests, assist in
prosecutions.
Sec.
20-45.   Accident studies.
Sec.
20-46.   Reserved.
Sec.
20-47.   Supplemental accident reports.
Sec.
20-48.   Investigating officer to make report of accident.
Sec.
20-49.   Filing, use of accident reports; driver's reports declared
confidential.
Sec.
20-50.   Availability of accident reports and files to parties involved, their
attorneys, agents, insurers, or adjusters.
Sec.
20-51.   Fees for copies of traffic accident reports, files, photographs or
other information.
Sec.
20-52.   Individual accident records required.
Sec.
20-53.   Study of cases of frequent offenders.
Sec.
20-54.   Annual traffic report required.
Sec.
20-55.   Identification of vehicles in funeral processions.
Sec.
20-56.   Temporary, experimental regulations authorized.
Sec.
20-57.   Testing traffic-control devices authorized.
Secs.
20-58--20-67.   Reserved.
Division 2. Violations
Sec.
20-68.   Reserved.
Sec.
20-69.   Reserved.
Sec.
20-70.   Procedures for adjudication of civil traffic violations.
Sec.
20-71.   Reserved.
Sec.
20-72.   Reserved.
Sec.
20-73.   Reserved.
Secs.
20-74--20-76.   Reserved.
Sec.
20-77.   Reserved.
Sec.
20-78.   Records of chief magistrate.
Sec.
20-79.   Reserved.
Sec.
20-80.   Disposition of civil sanctions.
Secs.
20-81--20-90.   Reserved.
Article III. Pedestrians
Sec.
20-91.   Obedience to traffic-control signals and this article.
Sec.
20-92.   Prohibited crossings.
Secs.
20-93--20-108.   Reserved.
Article IV. Traffic-Control Devices
Sec.
20-109.   Installation of devices by traffic engineer; existing devices
ratified.
Sec.
20-110.   Conformance to state specifications required; uniformity; declared
official.
Sec.
20-111.   Obedience required.
Sec.
20-112.   Observance of flashing yellow arrow display.
Sec.
20-112.1.   Bicycle traffic control signals.
Sec.
20-113.   Required stops for pedestrians in crosswalks.
Sec.
20-114.   Displaying unauthorized or confusing signs, signals, markings;
obstructing view of devices.
Sec.
20-115.   Authority to prohibit or require turns; obedience to signs; public
transit buses exempted from same.
Sec.
20-115.1.   Authority to exempt bicyclists from required or prohibited turns.
Sec.
20-116.   Authority to designate crosswalks.
Sec.
20-117.   Authority to designate safety zones.
Sec.
20-118.   Authority to mark lanes.
Sec.
20-119.   Traffic engineer authorized to establish school crossings.
Sec.
20-120.   Authority to prohibit entry onto streets and alleys from
intersections; obedience to "do not enter" signs; authority to exempt
bicyclists.
Secs.
20-121.--20-134.   Reserved.
Article V. Operation
Sec.
20-135.   Reserved.
Sec.
20-136.   State speed laws applicable generally.
Sec.
20-137.   Intersections where fifteen miles per hour speed limit imposed.
Sec.
20-138.   Speed limit in all city parks.
Sec.
20-138.1.   Speed limit in bicycle boulevards.
Sec.
20-138.2.   Designating current streets or parts of streets as bicycle
boulevards where twenty miles per hour speed limit is imposed.
Sec.
20-139.   Speed limit in alleys.
Sec.
20-140.   Where thirty miles per hour speed limit imposed.
Sec.
20-141.   Where thirty-five miles per hour speed limit imposed.
Sec.
20-142.   Where forty miles per hour speed limit imposed.
Sec.
20-143.   Where forty-five miles per hour speed limit imposed.
Sec.
20-144.   Where fifty miles per hour speed limit imposed.
Sec.
20-145.   Where fifty-five miles per hour speed limit imposed.
Secs.
20-145.1.--20-145.4. Reserved.
Sec.
20-146
.   Special speed restrictions on certain streets.
Sec.
20-146.1.   Special speed limit reductions in temporary traffic control zones.
Sec.
20-146.2.   Special speed limit reductions during nighttime hours.
Sec.
20-146.3.   Speeding in temporary traffic control zone prohibited.
Sec.
20-147.   Regulation of speed by traffic signals.
Sec.
20-148.   Following fire or rescue apparatus.
Sec.
20-149.   Driving over fire hose.
Sec.
20-150.   Permission required for processions and parades; compliance with
chapter.
Sec.
20-151.   Reserved.
Sec.
20-152.   Method of driving in processions.
Sec.
20-153.   Reserved.
Sec.
20-154.   Operation of unsafe vehicles.
Sec.
20-155.   Limitations on U-turns.
Sec.
20-156.   Obstructing intersections, crosswalks.
Sec.
20-157.   Reserved.
Sec.
20-158.   Regulation of towing services.
Sec.
20-159.   Traffic signal preemptor devices.
Sec.
20-160.   Use of handheld mobile telephone or portable electronic device;
prohibited conduct; exceptions.
Sec.
20-161   Racing of vehicles prohibited; definitions; penalties.
Secs.
20-162 – 20-172. Reserved.
Article VI. One-Way Streets and Stop Streets
Sec.
20-173.   Signs required.
Sec.
20-174.   Through streets.
Sec.
20-175.   Stop sign required at each intersection with through street.
Sec.
20-176.   Traffic engineer to designate hazardous intersections for "stop."
Sec.
20-176.1.   Traffic to stop at intersection when traffic signals are out of
service.
Sec.
20-177.   Traffic engineer to designate hazardous intersections for "yield."
Sec.
20-178.   Reserved.
Sec.
20-179.   One-way streets and alleys.
Secs.
20-180--20-199.   Reserved.
Article VII. Stopping, Standing and Parking
Division 1. Generally
Sec.
20-200.   Unlawful parking prohibited; classification; parking defined; parties
liable; applicability of regulations; continuous violations; mandatory fines
and fees; community service.
Sec.
20-201.   Reserved.
Sec.
20-202.   Prima facie evidence of parking infraction.
Sec.
20-203.   Failure to respond to citation; default fee; booting and impounding
vehicle authorized, booting and impound fees; damages to boot.
Sec.
20-204.   Booting or impounding list.
Secs.
20-205--20-209.   Reserved.
Division 2. Administration
Sec.
20-210.   Director of transportation; duties; Park Tucson Administrator duties;
authorization to issue citations and collect violation fines.
Sec.
20-211.   Administrative guidelines.
Sec.
20-212.   Civilian volunteer police assist specialists authorized to issue
citations.
Sec.
20-213.   Parking enforcement agents exempt.
Secs.
20-214--20-219.   Reserved.
Division 3. Parking for Individuals with Physical Disabilities
Sec.
20-220.   Parking for individuals with physical disabilities; designation;
enforcement.
Sec.
20-221.   Penalty.
Sec.
20-222.   Parking prohibited in spaces reserved for individuals with physical
disabilities.
Sec.
20-222.1.   Parking prohibited in access aisles of spaces reserved for
individuals with physical disabilities.
Sec.
20-222.2.   Paratransit loading zones.
Sec.
20-223.   Wheelchair curb access ramps.
Sec.
20-224.   Reserved.
Division 4. Basic Parking Controls
Sec.
20-225.   Penalty.
Sec.
20-226.   Designation of places angle parking permitted.
Sec.
20-226.1.   Obedience to angle parking signs, marking.
Sec.
20-226.2.   Parking at angle to load or unload merchandise.
Sec.
20-226.3.   Angle parking.
Sec.
20-226.4. Angle parking, direction.
Sec.
20-227.   Designation of common-carrier passenger vehicle stands.
Sec.
20-228.   Taxicab stands--Application for; location; signs required.
Sec.
20-228.1.   Same--Revocation.
Sec.
20-229.   Time limit parking.
Sec.
20-230.   Designation of parking meter zones; authority to create, alter,
eliminate.
Sec.
20-230.1.   Park Tucson administrator shall install within designated zones.
Sec.
20-230.2.   Temporary suspension of operation--When granted.
Sec.
20-230.3.   Same--Fees.
Sec.
20-230.4.   Location; legend.
Sec.
20-230.5.   Spaces to be marked; parking in spaces.
Sec.
20-230.6.   Overtime parking prohibited; "feeding" meters prohibited.
Sec.
20-230.7.   Effective days and hours.
Sec.
20-230.8.   Prima facie evidence of overtime parking.
Sec.
20-230.9.   Meters to show parking compliance.
Sec.
20-230.10.   Deposit of slugs prohibited.
Sec.
20-230.11.   Residential parking permit meter exemption.
Sec.
20-230.12.   Parking rates.
Sec.
20-231.   Police/fire vehicle parking.
Sec.
20-232.   Government plated vehicles.
Sec.
20-233.   Specific vehicle type restrictions (RV, motorcycle, etc.).
Sec.
20-234.   Hazard flashers mandatory.
Sec.
20-235.   Public parking prohibited in parking lots or spaces reserved for city
officers or employees.
Sec.
20-236.   Height limit restriction.
Sec.
20-237.   Obedience to markings; double parking prohibited.
Secs.
20-238--20-245.   Reserved.
Division 5. Nuisance Parking Controls
Sec.
20-246.   Penalty.
Sec.
20-247.   Parking for certain purposes prohibited.
Sec.
20-248.   Parking regulations for peddlers.
Sec.
20-248.1.   Parking regulations for peddlers in certain central business
district streets and at Silverbell Road/Camino del Cerro.
Sec.
20-249.   Freight curb loading zones; location of provisional zones in parking
meter zones.
Sec.
20-249.1.   Same--When nonauthorized vehicles prohibited in provisional zones.
Sec.
20-250.   Parking on property of another prohibited without permission.
Sec.
20-251.   Parking in parks and playgrounds.
Sec.
20-252.   Parking on city-owned property.
Sec.
20-253.   Parking for purposes of sale on unpaved lots.
Sec.
20-254.   Parking prohibited during certain hours on certain streets.
Sec.
20-255.   Neighborhood parking program.
Sec.
20-257.   Special events permit parking.
Sec.
20-258.   Additional permit parking programs; fees; city manager may establish
additional permit parking programs and an annual parking permit fee.
Sec.
20-259.   Expired registration.
Sec.
20-260.   Stopping, standing, parking prohibited between the curb and sidewalk
or in an unimproved pedestrian area impeding continuous pedestrian use.
Sec.
20-261.   Unattended and inoperable vehicles prohibited.
Sec.
20-262.   Truck parking on streets not designated as truck routes prohibited.
Sec.
20-263.   Recreational vehicles; commercial vehicles.
Secs.
20-264--20-270.   Reserved.
Division 6. Safety Issues
Sec.
20-271.   Penalty.
Sec.
20-272.   Reserved.
Sec.
20-273.   Parking in alleys.
Sec.
20-274.   Hazardous areas adjacent to schools.
Sec.
20-275.   Standing or parking outside of business or residence district.
Sec.
20-276.   Buses stopping on crosswalks, within intersections prohibited.
Sec.
20-277.   Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in specified places.
Sec.
20-278.   Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in additional specified
places.
Sec.
20-279.   Parallel parking.
Sec.
20-280.   Parking near fire or rescue apparatus.
Sec.
20-281.   Parking prohibited on certain streets and portions of streets.
Sec.
20-282.   Fire lanes.
Sec.
20-283.   Law enforcement officers exempt from specified parking provisions.
Secs.
20-284--20-299.   Reserved.
Art. VIII. Taxicab Regulations
Sec.
20-300.   Purpose.
Sec.
20-301.   Definitions.
Sec.
20-302.   Taxicab businesses and executive sedan services regulated.
Sec.
20-303.   Exterior display of fare and other information.
Sec.
20-304.   Interior display of fare and other information.
Sec.
20-305.   Meters, fares, charges.
Sec.
20-306.   Direct routes required.
Sec.
20-307.   Two-way radios required.
Sec.
20-308.   Civil infraction.
Sec.
20-309.   Police department and Park Tucson enforcement agents authorized to
issue citations.
Secs.
20-310--20-399.   Reserved.
Art. IX. Trolleys
Sec.
20-400.   Purpose.
Sec.
20-401.   Definition.
Sec.
20-402.   Application of law.
Sec.
20-403.   Operation of motor vehicles.
Sec.
20-404.   Civil infraction.
Sec.
20-405.   Enforcement.
Secs.
20-406--20-499.   Reserved.
Article X. Traffic Medians
Sec.
20-500.   Purpose and intent; legislative findings.
Sec.
20-501.   Prohibited conduct; definitions; exemptions.
Sec.
20-502.   Classification and penalty.
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL
Sec. 20-1. Definitions.
   The words and phrases used in this chapter shall, for the purpose of this
chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in A.R.S. title 28,
except for the words and phrases defined herein, as follows:
   Sec. 20-1(1). Alley means any public or private way set aside as a right-of-
way for municipal services, or street or alley purposes and as a means of
reaching the rear end of lots or buildings.
   Sec. 20-1(2). Annual permit means a permit allowing the operation or
movement, during a calendar year, of a specific vehicle, or vehicle and load,
along truck routes established pursuant to section
20-15 of this Code.
   Sec. 20-1(3). Bicycle zone means a place adjacent to a curb reserved for the
exclusive use or purpose of parking bicycles. Such zone shall be designated by
blue and white marking on the curb or signs appropriately marked for the
exclusive use of bicycles, or by both such signs and blue and white curb
markings.
   Sec. 20-1(4). Booting means to place a device on a vehicle to prevent the
vehicle's movement until the device is removed.
   Sec. 20-1(5). Business district means the area contiguous to and including a
street, where within any six hundred (600) feet along the street there are
buildings used for business or industrial purposes which occupy at least three
hundred (300) feet of frontage on one side, or three hundred (300) feet
collectively on both sides of the street.
   Sec. 20-1(6). Central business district means all streets and portions of
streets within the area described as follows: All that area bounded by the
following streets: On the north by Sixth Street; on the east by Fourth Avenue;
on the south by Cushing Street to Stone Avenue and from Stone Avenue by East
Fourteenth Street; and on the west by Granada Avenue.
   Sec. 20-1(7). Commercial vehicle means any vehicle originally registered for
commercial use, or any vehicle rated for a load capacity in excess of one (1)
ton, or any vehicle not originally designed for personal private passenger
transportation.
   Sec. 20-1(8). Curb means the raised edge or curbline along the lateral lines
of a roadway, or in the absence of a raised edge, the curbline or lateral lines
along the edge of the vehicular travel lanes, to include any designated or
marked road shoulder.
   Sec 20-1(9). Disabled or handicapped curb loading zone means a space
adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the
loading or unloading of passengers or materials for the physically disabled as
defined in section
20-222 of this Code. Such zone shall be designated by blue marking on the curb,
or by appropriate signs, or by both such signs and blue curb markings.
   Sec. 20-1(10). Divided highway or street means any street or highway within
the city that has been divided into two (2) roadways by leaving an intervening
space, island or other physical barrier, or clearly indicated dividing section
so constructed as to obstruct or impede vehicular traffic.
   Sec. 20-1(11). Envelope permit means a permit issued for the operation or
movement, during a calendar year, along truck routes established pursuant to
section
20-15 of this Code, of a nonspecific and nonreducible vehicle, or vehicle and
load, that does not exceed two hundred fifty thousand (250,000) pounds in gross
weight, fourteen (14) feet in width, sixteen (16) feet in height, one hundred
twenty (120) feet in length, and has at least four (4) axles.
   Sec. 20-1(12). Freight curb loading zone means a space adjacent to a curb
for the exclusive use of authorized vehicles, as defined in section 20-195.1 of
this Code, during the loading or unloading of freight. Such zone shall be
designated by yellow marking on the curb, or by appropriate signs, or by both
such signs and yellow curb markings.
   Sec. 20-1(13). Impound means to tow or remove a vehicle and then store the
vehicle at a garage or lot designated by the police department or maintained by
the city.
   Sec. 20-1(14). In governmental service means owned or operated by any
federal, state, county, or municipal agency, or any agency whose primary source
of operating revenue is public taxation.
   Sec. 20-1(15). Mobile home means a nonmotorized dwelling, as defined in
section 23-21 of this Code.
   Sec. 20-1(16). Mobile home permit means a permit issued for a one-time, one-
way, continuous movement of a specific mobile home, whose dimensions and/or
weight exceed the limits set forth in A.R.S. title 28, sections 1002 through
1031, or any successor provision(s), along a designated route to a designated
location. Any subsequent movement of the mobile home, whether from the
designated location back to its original location, or to any other location,
shall require a new and separate mobile home permit.
   Sec. 20-1(17). Motor vehicle means every vehicle which is self-propelled and
every vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead
trolley wires, but not operated upon rails.
   Sec. 20-1(18). No parking zone means a space adjacent to a curb which is
designated by red markings on the curb, or by appropriate signs, or by both
such signs and red markings on the curb.
   Sec. 20-1(19). Official time standard means whenever certain hours are named
herein, they shall mean standard time or such time as may be in current use in
the city.
   Sec. 20-1(20). Oversize or overweight vehicle, load or mobile home means a
vehicle, load or mobile home whose dimensions and/or weight exceed the limits
set forth in A.R.S., title 28.
   Sec. 20-1(21). Passenger curb loading zone means a place adjacent to a curb
reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of
passengers or their personal effects. Such zone shall be designated by white
marking on the curb, or by appropriate signs, or by both such signs and white
curb markings.
   Sec. 20-1(22). Police officer means every officer of the municipal police
department or any certified law enforcement officer authorized to direct or
regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
   Sec. 20-1(23). Recreational vehicle means a motor vehicle or vehicle
combination that is designed and customarily used for private pleasure use and
includes vehicles commonly called motor homes, pickup trucks with campers,
travel trailers, boat trailers, or horse trailers.
   Sec. 20-1(24). Residence district means the area contiguous to and including
a street, not comprising a business district, where for a distance of three
hundred (300) feet or more the property along the street is predominantly
improved with residences.
   Sec. 20-1(25). Right-of-way means the privilege of the immediate use of the
street, highway and alleys.
   Sec. 20-1(26). Roadway means that portion of a street improved, designed,
and used for vehicular travel.
   Sec. 20-1(27). Sidewalk means that portion of a street between the curbs, or
the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, is improved
for the use of pedestrians.
   Sec. 20-1(28). Single trip permit means a permit issued for a one-time, one-
way, continuous operation or movement of a specific vehicle, or vehicle and
load, along a designated route to a designated location. Where the single trip
permit is for both a vehicle and load, it shall be permissible under that
permit to completely unload the vehicle at the designated location and
thereafter return the empty transporting vehicle directly to its original
location, so long as the return trip is completed within twenty-four (24) hours
of beginning the movement of vehicle and load that is authorized under the
permit.
   Sec. 20-1(29). Thirty-day permit means a permit allowing the operation or
movement of a specific vehicle, or vehicle and load, along a designated route
for a period of thirty (30) days from the date of issuance.
   Sec. 20-1(30). Traffic means pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles
and other conveyances, either singly or together, while using any highway,
street or alley for purposes of travel.
   Sec. 20-1(31). Traffic agent means any person authorized by this code to
enforce any provisions of this code.
   Sec. 20-1(32). Traffic division means the traffic division of the police
department of the city; or in the event a traffic division is not established,
then such term, whenever used herein, shall be deemed to refer to the police
department of the city.
   Sec. 20-1(33). Unimproved pedestrian area means that portion of a street
between the curbs, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property
lines, which is not improved with a sidewalk, is not landscaped, and is
physically capable of continuous pedestrian use. An unimproved pedestrian area
less than four (4) feet wide is determined to be incapable of pedestrian use.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 1; Ord. No. 1821, § 3, 4-21-85; Ord. No. 4502, § 2, 6-21-
76; Ord. No. 4653, § 1, 5-16-77; Ord. No. 5931, § 2, 12-19-83; Ord. No. 6041, §
1, 6-25-84; Ord. No. 6988, § 1, 6-20-88; Ord. No. 7757, § 1, 1-27-92; Ord. No.
8270, § 1, 11-21-94; Ord. No. 8464, § 1, 3-20-95; Ord. No. 8958, § 7, 9-22-97;
Ord. No. 10418, § 2, 6-12-07; Ord. No. 11063, § 1, 3-27-13)
   State law reference – Similar provisions, A.R.S. 20-8-602.
Sec. 20-2. Civil traffic violations.
   It shall be a civil traffic violation for any person, firm or corporation to
violate any of the provisions of article I, II, III, IV, V or VI of this
chapter.
   Except that it shall not be a violation if evidence is gathered through the
use of any automatic photo red light cameras or any automatic photo speed
cameras such as were in use by a private contractor for traffic enforcement on
behalf of the City in 2012.
   The City shall not use, or contract for the use of, such technology or any
technology for traffic control that does not produce a human, on-site,
eyewitness to violations who is able to testify in court.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 6; Ord. No. 5391, § 3, 8-3-81; Ord. No. 5931, § 3, 12-19-
83; Ord. No. 11297, 8-5-15; Res. No. 22499, 11-17-15)
   Editor’s note—Proposition No. 201, adding the second and third paragraphs to
this section 20-2, was approved at a Special Election held on November 3, 2015.
Sec. 20-3. Penalties.
Unless otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the violation of any
provision of article I, II, III, V or VI shall result in the imposition of a
civil sanction which shall not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 23c; Ord. No. 5391, § 4, 8-3-81; Ord. No. 5931, § 4, 12-
19-83; Ord. No. 9492, § 2, 11-27-00)
Sec. 20-4. Applicability to public employees.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned
by or used in the service of the United States Government, this state, county
or city; and it shall be unlawful for any such driver to violate any of the
provisions of this chapter except as otherwise permitted in this chapter or by
state statute.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 8)
   State Law References: Similar provisions, A.R.S. § 28-623.
Sec. 20-5. Applicability to pushcarts, animals, animal-drawn vehicles.
Every person propelling any pushcart or riding an animal upon a roadway, and
every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle shall be subject to the
provisions of this chapter applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except
those provisions which by their very nature can have no application.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 10)
   State Law References: Similar provisions, A.R.S. § 26-625.
Sec. 20-6. Reserved.
Sec. 20-7. Office of traffic engineer created; general powers, duties.
The office of city traffic engineer is hereby established. The duties of the
traffic engineer shall be, among other things, to regulate traffic under the
provisions of this chapter and the traffic ordinances of the city. It shall be
the general duty of the traffic engineer to establish, change, remove or
prohibit, as conditions may require, boulevard stops, pedestrian lanes, U-turns
and right- and left-hand turns, traffic lanes, and other necessities of
traffic, subject to the approval of the city manager, and under such
regulations as he may prescribe; provided, that nothing in this section shall
be construed as conferring upon the office of traffic engineer the duties or
authority over traffic of the chief of police.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 2; Ord. No. 11400, § 2, 9-20-16)
Sec. 20-8. Enforcement duties of police.
It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department or such officers
as are assigned by the chief of police to enforce all traffic laws of the city
and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to traffic in the city.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 3)
Sec. 20-9. Police authorized to direct traffic; emergency authority.
Officers and reserve officers of the police department, community service
officers, volunteers with appropriate training appointed by the chief of police
to assist with traffic control, or such officers as are assigned by the chief
of police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal
in conformance with state and city traffic laws; provided, that in the event of
a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians,
such officers may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the
provisions of the traffic laws.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 4; Ord. No. 4605, § 1, 1-3-77; Ord. No. 12030, 1, 8-22-
23)
Sec. 20-10. Authority of officers of fire department.
Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or
assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 5)
Sec. 20-11. Reserved.
   Editors Note: Section 20-11, requiring obedience to police and fire
officers, derived from the 1953 Code, ch. 17, § 7, was repealed by § 1 of Ord.
No. 5931, adopted Dec. 19, 1983.
Sec. 20-11.1. Appointment of park rangers as special policemen.
The police chief may in his sound discretion certify as peace officers certain
persons employed by the city parks and recreation department as park rangers,
provided they meet the following qualifications:
   Sec. 20-11.1(1). Attend a full training course at the Tucson Police Academy.
   Sec. 20-11.1(2). Be not less than twenty-one (21) years of age.
   Sec. 20-11.1(3). Be a citizen of the United States and of good moral
character and able to read and write the English language understandably.
(Ord. No. 2954, § 1, 1-16-67; Ord. No. 4605, § 2, 1-3-77)
Sec. 20-11.2. Jurisdiction of special policemen.
   (a)   The authority of the park rangers as special policemen shall be
limited to when they are on duty as park rangers and when they are off duty but
in the parks and in the park ranger's uniform and shall be limited, further, in
that such authority shall exist only in public parks of the city or while in
fresh pursuit out of public parks:
   (1)   When the person to be arrested has committed a misdemeanor or felony
in the presence of the park ranger in the parks; or
   (2)   When the park ranger has reasonable ground to believe a felony has
been committed in the parks, and reasonable grounds to believe the persons to
be arrested has committed it.
   (b)   Public parks shall include all those grounds dedicated or deeded to
the city for park purposes or those that are used for public park and
recreation purposes, grounds maintained by the parks and recreation department
and all structures or improvements included within any of the above areas when
such structures are maintained or their use controlled by the parks and
recreation department.
(Ord. No. 2954, § 1, 1-16-67; Ord. No. 3010, § 2, 6-5-67; Ord. No. 4605, § 3,
1-3-77)
Sec. 20-11.3. Authority of special policemen.
A park ranger, as a special policemen, shall be considered as and have the
authority of a peace officer to make arrests within their jurisdiction, as set
forth in section
20-11.2 of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 2954, § 1, 1-16-67; Ord. No. 4605, § 4, 1-3-77)
Sec. 20-11.4. Status of special policemen.
Special policemen shall not be a part of, nor affiliated or connected in any
official capacity with, the city police department. Special policemen shall
exercise such other limited police powers as may be delegated to them by the
police chief. A special policemen shall not be subject to, or acquire any
rights under any police pension fund of the state or of the city.
(Ord. No. 2954, § 1, 1-16-67)
Sec. 20-11.5. Compensation of special policemen.
Special policemen shall receive no compensation from the city police department
for duties performed.
(Ord. No. 2954, § 1, 1-16-67)
Sec. 20-11.6. Revocation of authority.
The police chief shall have the authority to revoke the status of special
policemen when he finds such revocation to be in the best interest of the city.
(Ord. No. 2954, § 1, 1-16-67)
Sec. 20-11.7. Appointment of community service officers.
The chief of police shall, at his discretion, have the authority to appoint
certain persons to the position of community service officer, providing they
meet the following qualifications:
   Sec. 20-11.7(1). Attend a specified training course at the Tucson Police
Academy.
   Sec. 20-11.7(2). Must be eighteen (18) years of age.
   Sec. 20-11.7(3). Be a citizen of the United States and of good moral
character, and able to understand, read and write the English language.
   Sec. 20-11.7(4). Possess a high school diploma (or general equivalency
diploma).
(Ord. No. 4605, § 5, 1-3-77; Ord. No. 8761, §§ 1, 2, 10-7-96)
Sec. 20-11.8. Authority of community service officers.
Community service officers shall have the authority:
   Sec. 20-011.8(1). To investigate traffic accidents occurring within the city
limits of Tucson.
   Sec. 20-11.8(2). To issue summons, or commence an action or proceeding
before a court or judge for any violation of any state statute or local
ordinance relating to traffic laws, providing that such violence is related to
a traffic accident within the jurisdiction of the city.
   Sec. 20-11.8(3). To commence an action or proceeding before a court or judge
for any violation of city ordinance or state statutes regulating the standing
or parking of vehicles.
   Sec. 20-11.8(4). To investigate complaints of thefts or attempted thefts of
property, and to file reports relating to each offense.
   Sec. 20-11.8(5). To carry out any lawful order of, or conduct such
investigations as directed by, the chief of police not involving hazardous
duty.
(Ord. No. 4605, § 6, 1-3-77; Ord. No. 8761, § 3, 10-7-96)
Sec. 20-11.9. Appointment of civilian volunteer police assist specialists.
The chief of police shall have the authority and discretion to appoint certain
persons to the position of unarmed civilian volunteer police assist specialist,
providing those persons meet the following qualifications:
   Sec. 20-11.9(1). Attend training as required under the direction of the
chief of police.
   Sec. 20-11.9(2). Be at least eighteen (18) years of age, of good moral
character, and able to understand, read and write the English language.
(Ord. No. 7671, § 1, 8-5-91)
Sec. 20-11.10. Authority of civilian volunteer police assist specialists.
Civilian volunteer police assist specialists, acting in an unarmed capacity,
shall have the authority at the discretion of the chief of police, to:
   Sec. 20-11.10(1). Commence an action or proceeding before the administrative
hearing officer for any violation of any chapter of the Tucson Code regarding
the stopping, standing or parking of motor vehicles.
   Sec. 20-11.10(2). Testify, on behalf of the city as required before the
administrative hearing officer or any subsequent court proceedings involving
any violation of any chapter of the Tucson Code regarding the stopping,
standing or parking of motor vehicles.
   Sec. 20-11.10(3). Assist in the taking of reports involving civil
infractions of the Tucson Code and file reports relating to such infractions.
   Sec. 20-11.10(4). Carry out any lawful order of the chief of police, not
involving hazardous duty, the exercise of the power of arrest or the use of
force.
(Ord. No. 7671, § 1, 8-5-91)
Sec. 20-12. Impounding vehicles--When permitted.
   (a)   Members of the police department are hereby authorized to impound a
vehicle from a street, alley or highway under any of the circumstances
enumerated in this section.
   (b)   Members of the fire department are authorized to impound a vehicle
under the circumstances enumerated in subsections (d)(6) or (7) of this
section.
   (c)   Traffic agents are authorized to remove a vehicle under the
circumstances enumerated in subsections (d)(1), (3), (4), (6), (7), (9), (10)
or (11) of this section.
   (d)   Vehicles may be impounded under the following circumstances:
   (1)   When any vehicle is left unattended upon any bridge, viaduct or
causeway, or in any tube or tunnel where such vehicle constitutes an
obstruction to traffic.
   (2)   When a vehicle upon a highway is so disabled as to constitute an
obstruction to traffic, and the person in charge of the vehicle is by reason of
physical injury incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to provide for
its custody or removal.
   (3)   When any vehicle is left unattended upon a street or alley and is
parked illegally or constitutes a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal
movement of traffic.
   (4)   When any vehicle is left unattended upon a street for a period in
excess of twenty- four (24) hours.
   (5)   When any person is arrested while in possession of a motor vehicle and
taken into custody.
   (6)   When any vehicle other than an authorized emergency vehicle is parked,
whether or not attended, in a properly designated fire lane established
pursuant to chapter
13 of this Code, or earlier legislation.
   (7)   When any vehicle other than an authorized emergency vehicle is parked,
whether or not attended, within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant placed on
either public or private property.
   (8)   When any person is given a civil citation for operating a motor
vehicle off the roadway within a quarter mile of a structure in violation of
section
11-70.1 of this Code.
   (9)   When a special limited magistrate or magistrate orders a vehicle
impounded as authorized by this Code.
   (10)   When any vehicle is owned by a person who has three (3) or more
unpaid civil parking infractions or has failed to respond as set forth in
section
20-203(a) of this Code.
   (11)   When any vehicle has been booted for more than forty-eight (48)
hours.
   (12)   When any person is arrested or given a citation for operating a motor
vehicle in violation of section
20-161 of this Code, relating to racing motor vehicles.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 17; Ord. No. 4969, § 1, 5-14-79; Ord. No. 5544, § 1, 4-
12-82; Ord. No. 8464, § 2, 3-20-95; Ord. No. 9697, § 1, 4-15-02; Ord. No.
10418, § 2, 6-12-07; Ord. No. 11452, § 2, 4-19-17)
Sec. 20-13. Same--Notice.
   Sec. 20-13(1). If owner known. Whenever an officer removes a vehicle from a
street as authorized in section
20-12, and the officer knows or is able to ascertain from the registration
records in the vehicle the name and address of the owner thereof such officer
shall immediately give or cause to be given notice in writing to such owner of
the fact of such removal and the reasons therefor and of the place to which
such vehicle has been removed. In the event any such vehicle is stored in a
public garage, a copy of such notice shall be given to the proprietor of such
garage.
   Sec. 20-13(2). If owner unknown. Whenever a traffic agent removes a vehicle
from a street under section
20-12 and does not know and is not able to ascertain the name of the owner, or
for any other reason is unable to give the notice to the owner as herein before
provided, and in the event the vehicle is not returned to the owner within a
period of three (3) days, the traffic agent shall immediately send or cause to
be sent a written report of such removal by mail to the motor vehicle division,
state highway department, whose duty it is to register motor vehicles, and
shall file a copy of such notice with the proprietor of any public garage in
which the vehicle may be stored. Such notice shall include a complete
description of the vehicle, the date, time and place from which removed, the
reasons for such removal, and name of the garage or place where the vehicle is
stored.
(1953 Code, ch 17, § 18; Ord. No. 10418, § 2, 6-12-07)
Sec. 20-14. Same--Redemption or sale.
Application for redemption of a vehicle impounded under the provisions of
sections
20-12 and
20-13 shall be made by the owner or his duly authorized agent, who shall be
entitled to the possession thereof upon payment to the city of the sum of five
dollars ($5.00), together with all other costs of removal, storage, and any
assessments due pursuant to section
20-203 that may have accrued thereon. In the event the vehicle impounded shall
not be redeemed by its owner or agent within thirty (30) days, then such
vehicle shall be sold for such penalty, charges, costs and any assessments due
pursuant to section
20-203 that may have accrued thereon, in a manner provided by A.R.S. Title 28.
This remedy shall be cumulative of any and all other penalties provided by this
chapter.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 19; Ord. No. 8464, § 3, 3-20-95; Ord. No. 8958, § 7, 9-
22-97; Ord. No. 9697, § 2, 4-15-02)
Sec. 20-15. Truck routes established.
Within the incorporated city all streets identified as arterial or collector
streets in the Major Streets and Routes Plan, adopted by Resolution 12340 and
as amended, are hereby established as truck routes.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 20; Ord. No. 3448, § 1, 5-18-70; Ord. No. 5927, § 1, 12-
19-83; Ord. No. 7757, § 2, 1-27-92; Ord. No. 10418, § 2, 6-12-07)
Sec. 20-15.1. Driving vehicles with a gross vehicle weight rating in excess of
twenty thousand (20,000) pounds on streets not designated as truck routes
prohibited; exceptions.
   (a)   All vehicles having a total gross vehicle weight rating in excess of
twenty thousand (20,000) pounds, including, but not limited to, trucks, truck
tractors, road tractors, trailers, semitrailers, vehicle transporters, or any
combination of such vehicles, shall use only those streets established as truck
routes. It is unlawful to drive any vehicle having a gross vehicle weight
rating in excess of twenty thousand (20,000) pounds on a street not established
as a truck route, except as provided in section
20-15.2 below, or where a permit has been issued by the chief of police, or
that officer's designee, pursuant to the procedures set forth in section
20-16.
   (b)   The director of transportation, or the director's designee, is
authorized to prohibit certain vehicles from using certain designated streets,
including truck routes, by the placement of appropriate signs limiting the
gross weight of vehicles permitted to use those streets. However, the vehicles
may use the streets designated under this section to make a delivery or pickup
or to provide services to a property as permitted under section
20-15.2(b).
(Ord. No. 7757, § 3, 1-27-92; Ord. No. 8270, § 2, 11-21-94; Ord. No. 10418, §
2, 6-12-07)
Sec. 20-15.2. Exceptions to truck route restrictions.
   (a)   Section
20-15.1 does not apply to recreational vehicles.
   (b)   A vehicle regulated under section
20-15.1 may:
   (1)   Leave the truck routes by the shortest route to perform the following
activities, after which it must return to the nearest designated truck route.
   (i)   Deliver, pick up, load, or unload merchandise, materials, or
equipment, including furniture and other household goods, except as prohibited
under section
20-17; or
   (ii)   Provide construction, repair, or similar services to a property.
   (2)   Drive on any street within a business district, except as prohibited
under section
20-15.1(b) or section
20-17.
(Ord. No. 7757, § 3, 1-27-92)
Sec. 20-16. Special permission required to use streets not designated for
trucks or to operate or move vehicles, loads or mobile homes exceeding state
limitations; exemptions; permit and fee structure; violation a civil
infraction.
   (a)   Except as may be otherwise specifically provided in subsection (b),
where it is necessary for a vehicle whose use of city streets is regulated
under section
20-15.1(a) to use a street not established as a truck route pursuant to section
20-15; or for any oversize or overweight vehicle, load, or mobile home to use
any street, whether established as a truck route or not, that lies within the
corporate limits of the city and that is not designated as a state highway,
application shall be made to the chief of police, or that officer's designee,
for a permit for such use under police department supervision, and no such use
of streets as is set forth in this subsection shall occur, unless and until
such permit is issued.
   (b)   A permit pursuant to subsection (a) is not required in the following
situations:
   (1)   Where a vehicle whose use of city streets is regulated under section
20-15.1(a) engages in activities specifically authorized by section
20-15.2(b).
   (2)   Where the total maximum width of the vehicle, or of the vehicle and
load, does not exceed one hundred two (102) inches, exclusive of safety
equipment, and the operation or movement takes place solely on streets
established as truck routes pursuant to section
20-15.
   (3)   Where the vehicle is exempted from size, weight and load limitations
under A.R.S. section 28-1001(b), or any successor provision(s).
   (c)   The chief of police, or that officer's designee, is hereby authorized
to issue the permits required under subsection (a). The categories of
authorized permits shall be as follows: single trip permits, mobile home
permits, thirty-day permits, envelope permits, and annual permits. Permits to
use a street not designated as a truck route shall be issued on a single trip
or thirty-day basis only. Envelope permits shall be issued on an annual basis
only, and neither envelope permits nor single trip permits shall be issued for
the movement of mobile homes. Any movement of a mobile home subject to the
permit requirements of this section shall be undertaken as one continuous
journey pursuant to a mobile home permit, which shall be valid for ninety-six
(96) hours from the time of issuance.
   (d)   A person seeking any of the types of permits authorized under
subsection (c) shall submit an application, accompanied by the corresponding
fee as established in subsection (e). Such fees shall be waived for a vehicle,
load or mobile home in governmental service. In addition, no fee shall be
collected for a vehicle, load, or mobile home for whose operation or movement a
valid permit has been issued by the state, a political subdivision of the
state, or any other municipality, when the operation or movement of such
vehicle, load, or mobile home terminates in or transits the city.
   (e)   Permit fees shall be as follows:
 
Type of Permit Non Truck Route Oversize Overweight Envelope
Single trip:   $15.00          $ 15.00  $ 25.00    --
Mobile home:   --              $ 15.00  $ 25.00    --
Thirty-day:    $30.00          $ 30.00  $ 50.00    --
Annual:        --              $240.00  $480.00    $600.00
 
Note: The fee for annual permits issued after January 31 of a calendar year
shall be reduced by one-twelfth ( 1/12) for each full calendar month that has
expired prior to issuance of the permit. Where a vehicle, load, or mobile home
is both oversize and overweight, the permit fee shall consist solely of the
overweight fee.
   (f)   Upon receipt of the application, and payment of any applicable fee,
the chief of police, or that officer's designee, may grant the requested
permit. The permit may restrict the use of any street, whether or not
established as a truck route, or the operation or movement of any oversize or
overweight vehicle, load, or mobile home, by day of the week, time of the day,
route, or location within the city, and may set such additional restrictions as
are necessary for public safety and convenience.
   (g)   All annual permits issued under this section shall expire at midnight
on January 1 of the next calendar year, and persons seeking an annual permit
for the new calendar year shall be required to submit a new application and
permit fee.
   (h)   Any violation of the provisions of this section, specifically
including, but not limited to, the failure to obtain a required permit or to
comply with permit restrictions, is declared to be a civil infraction
punishable by a mandatory sanction of not less than one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00), nor more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00), no part
of which shall be suspended or waived by the court.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 20; Ord. No. 8270, § 3, 11-21-94; Ord. No. 8958, § 7, 9-
22-97)
Sec. 20-17. Districts where loading, unloading large vehicles prohibited;
variances.
   (a)   No single-unit vehicle having more than two (2) axles or having an
overall length in excess of twenty-six (26) feet, and no tractor-semitrailer
having more than three (3) axles or having an overall length in excess of forty
(40) feet shall be permitted to load or unload any packages of merchandise
within that district bounded on the north by the south and west line of Toole
Avenue and Franklin Street, on the east by the east line of Fourth Avenue, on
the south by the south line of Fourteenth Street and Cushing Street, and on the
west by the west line of Granada Avenue, between the hours of 6:30 a.m. and 9:
00 a.m., 12:00 p.m. and 1:00 p.m., and 3:30 p.m. and 6:00 p.m.
   (b)   The director of transportation, or the director's designee, may grant
written variances from the provisions as set forth in subsection (a) provided:
   (1)   The nature of the merchandise being delivered is exceptional; or
   (2)   The nature of the business or service on the property is exceptional;
and
   (3)   The applicant can conform to any required barricading and signing as
set forth in section
25-24; and
   (4)   The variance is not against the public interest, safety, convenience
or general welfare.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 21; Ord. No. 7157, § 1, 3-20-89; Ord. No. 10418, § 2, 6-
12-07)
Sec. 20-18. Governmental vehicles exempt from truck route and loading or
unloading provisions.
The provisions of sections
20-15 through
20-17 shall not be construed to prohibit the use of any street, alley or area
of the city by vehicles of the United States Government, this state, county or
city while in performance of their official or normal duties.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 22)
Sec. 20-19. Driving on property of another prohibited without permission.
It is unlawful for the driver of a motor vehicle to drive a vehicle in or upon
property of another without having in his possession the written permission of
the person legally entitled to possession of the property. However, no person
charged with violating this section shall be found responsible and such charge
against him shall be dismissed, if he subsequently produces in court the
aforesaid written permission.
(1953 Code, ch 17, § 23; Ord. No. 4115, § 1, 12-10-73; Ord. No. 5391, § 5, 8-3-
81; Ord. No. 5931, § 6, 12-19-83)
Secs. 20-19.1, 20-20. Reserved.
   Editors Note: Section 20-19.1, prohibiting parking on property of another
without permission, derived from Ord. No. 5391, § 6, adopted Aug. 3, 1981, and
§ 20-20 providing for impounding and redemption of motor vehicles parked on
property of another, derived from the 1953 Code, ch. 17, § 23, were both
repealed by § 1 of Ord. No. 5931, adopted Dec. 19, 1983. See now §
20-223 for these provisions.
Sec. 20-21. Driving in parks and playgrounds.
It is unlawful to drive a motor vehicle in or upon the parks and playgrounds of
the city except on streets or roads designated for vehicular traffic.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 23a; Ord. No. 5391, § 7, 8-3-81)
Sec. 20-21.1. Reserved.
   Editors Note: Section 20-21.1, regulating parking in parks and playgrounds,
derived from Ord. No. 5391, § 8, adopted Aug. 3, 1981, was repealed by § 1 of
Ord. No. 5931, adopted Dec. 19, 1983. See now §
20-224.
Sec. 20-22. Driving on city-owned property.
It shall be unlawful for a driver of any motor vehicle to drive a motor vehicle
in or upon city-owned property, other than public streets or alleys, when signs
prohibiting or regulating driving have been placed thereon by the director of
transportation, or the director's designee, as authorized by this chapter,
unless in compliance with such erected signs.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 23b; Ord. No. 5931, § 7, 12-19-83; Ord. No. 10418, § 2,
6-12-07)
Sec. 20-23. Reserved.
   Editors Note: Section 20-23, prohibiting parking for purpose of sale on
unpaved lots, derived from Ord. No. 4968, § 1, adopted June 11, 1979, and Ord.
No. 5391, § 9, adopted Aug. 3, 1981, was repealed by § 1 of Ord. No. 5931,
adopted Dec. 19, 1983. See now §
20-226.
Sec. 20-24. Reserved.
   Editors Note: Section 20-24, prohibiting clinging to moving vehicles,
derived from the 1953 Code, ch. 17, § 13, was repealed by § 1 of Ord. No. 5931,
adopted Dec. 19, 1983.
Sec. 20-25. Boarding, alighting from moving vehicles.
No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in
motion.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 14)
Sec. 20-26. Opening vehicle doors into traffic.
It shall be unlawful for any person to open any door of a vehicle on the street
side thereof when other moving vehicles are so close thereto as to constitute a
hazard.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 15)
Sec. 20-27. Unlawful riding.
No person shall ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designed or
intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not apply to an
employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty, or to persons riding
within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 16)
Sec. 20-28. Roller skating, skateboards, coasting, toy vehicles, prohibited on
roadways; skateboards prohibited in central business district areas and all
library property and facilities within the Tucson-Pima Library System;
exceptions:
   (a)   No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster,
toy vehicle, or similar device shall go upon any roadway, except while crossing
a street in a crosswalk, and, when so crossing, such person shall be granted
all of the rights and shall be subject to all of duties applicable to
pedestrians.
   (b)   Unless otherwise provided for in this section, it shall be a civil
infraction for any person upon or by means of any skateboard or similar device,
to operate or cause to be operated any such device upon any publicly owned
property, including streets or sidewalks, within the area described as: That
area bounded by the following streets: On the north by the intersection of
Alameda and Granada Avenue, east along Alameda to Church Avenue, south along
Church Avenue to Cushing Street, west along Cushing Street to Grenada Avenue
and north along Granada Avenue to Alameda Street.
   (c)   It shall be a civil infraction for any person upon or by means of any
skateboard or similar device, to operate or cause to be operated any such
device upon any Tucson-Pima Library property or facility, including adjacent
streets or sidewalks, when such prohibition is clearly and conspicuously posted
by the city.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 9; Ord. No. 8474, § 1, 3-27-95; Ord. No. 8588, § 1, 10-
23-95; Ord. No. 8862, § 1, 4-14-97; Ord. No. 9198, § 1, 2-1-99)
Sec. 20-29. Requirement for helmet use; Bicycle renters and sellers; civil
penalties; waiver of fine.
   Sec. 20-29(1). No person under eighteen (18) years of age shall ride a
bicycle or be a passenger on a bicycle, ride in a restraining seat attached to
a bicycle, or ride in a trailer towed by a bicycle unless that person is
wearing a properly fitted and fastened bicycle helmet which meets the current
standards of the American National Standards Institute for protective headgear.
   Sec. 20-29(2). It shall be unlawful for any person to rent or lease any
bicycle to or for the use of a person under the age of eighteen (18) years
unless:
   (a)   The person is in possession of a protective helmet meeting the
standards set out above in section
20-29(1) at the time of such rental or lease; or
   (b)   The rental or lease includes a protective bicycle helmet meeting the
standards set out above in section
20-29(1) and the person agrees to wear the helmet at all times while operating
or riding as a passenger on the bicycle.
   Sec. 20-29(3). A person regularly engaged in the business of selling
bicycles shall provide any purchaser of a bicycle with a written explanation,
either on the receipt of sale or on a separate form indicating receipt of a
written explanation of the provisions of section
20-29(1) and (3).
   Sec.20-29(4). Any person in violation of this section shall be found guilty
of a civil infraction and be required to pay a minimum fine of fifty dollars
($50.00) which cannot be suspended except pursuant to subsection
20-29(5).
   Sec. 20-29(5). The penalty provided in this section for a violation of
section
20-29(1) may be waived if an offender presents suitable proof that an approved
helmet has been purchased or otherwise obtained since the time of the violation
and that the minor uses or intends to use said helmet whenever required to do
so by this section.
(Ord. No. 8167, § 1, 11-22-93)
Sec. 20-30. Operating motorized skateboards and motorized play vehicles;
definitions; prohibitions; penalty.
   A.   Purpose and intent. It is the purpose and intent of this enactment to
provide for the regulation of motorized skateboards and motorized play vehicles
in order to protect the safety of pedestrians, bicyclists, motor vehicle
drivers and operators of motorized skateboards and motorized play vehicles
alike. The increasing prevalence of motorized skateboards and growing concerns
about their safe uses requires local regulation in order to protect the public
safety.
The state has granted municipalities express authority to regulate or prohibit
the operation of motorized skateboards. Therefore, the mayor and council find
it is in the public interest to prohibit the operation of motorized skateboards
and motorized play vehicles except on private property.
   B.   Definitions. In this article, unless the context otherwise requires:
   Motorized play vehicle means a coaster, scooter, any other alternatively
fueled device, or other motorized vehicle that is self-propelled by a motor or
engine, gas or electric, and which is not otherwise defined in A.R.S. title 28,
as a "motor vehicle," "motorcycle," "motor-driven cycle," "motorized
wheelchair" or "electric personal assistive mobility device."
   Motorized skateboard means a self-propelled device that has a motor, gas or
electric, a deck on which a person may ride and at least two (2) tandem wheels
in contact with the ground, and which is not otherwise defined in A.R.S. title
28, as a "motor vehicle," "motorcycle," "motor-driven cycle," "motorized
wheelchair" or "electric personal assistive mobility device."
   C.   Prohibited operation.
   1.   No motorized skateboard or motorized play vehicle may be operated on
any public sidewalk, roadway, or any other part of a highway or on any bikeway,
bicycle path or trail, equestrian trail, or shared-use path.
   2.   No motorized skateboard or motorized play vehicle may be operated on
any private property of another without the written permission of the owner,
the person entitled to immediate possession of the property, or the authorized
agent of either.
   3.   No person shall operate a motorized skateboard or motorized play
vehicle on any private property in a manner causing excessive, unnecessary, or
offensive noise which disturbs the peace and quiet of any neighborhood or which
causes discomfort or annoyance to a reasonable person of normal sensitivity.
   D.   Responsibilities of parents, guardians, and legal custodians.
   1.   The parent, guardian, or legal custodian of any minor shall not
authorize or knowingly permit such minor to violate any of the provisions of
this section.
   2.   If a fine is imposed upon a minor who is found to be in violation of
this section, the parents or legal guardian having custody or control of the
minor shall be jointly and severally liable with the minor for payment of the
fine, whether or not the parents or guardian knew of, or anticipated, a
violation of this section.
   E.   Violation declared civil traffic violation. Any violation of this
section is punishable as a civil traffic violation pursuant to sections
20-2 and
20-3 of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 9962, § 1, 5-10-04)
Secs. 20-31--20-39. Reserved.
ARTICLE II.
ADMINISTRATION
DIVISION 1.
GENERALLY
Sec. 20-40. Traffic division established.
There is hereby established in the police department of the city a traffic
division to be under the control of an officer of police appointed by and
directly responsible to the chief of police.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 24)
Sec. 20-41. General duties of traffic division, other police officers.
It shall be the duty of the traffic division and other members of the police
department to enforce the street traffic regulations of the city and all of the
state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the city, to make arrests
for traffic violations, to investigate accidents and to cooperate with the
traffic engineer and other officers of the city in the administration of the
traffic laws in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to
carry out those duties specially imposed upon such division by this chapter and
the traffic ordinances of the city.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 25)
Sec. 20-42. Record of violations required.
The police department or the traffic division thereof shall keep a record of
all violations of the traffic ordinances of the city or of the state vehicle
laws of which any person has been charged. Such record shall accumulate during
at least a five-year period, and from that time on the record shall be
maintained complete for at least the most recent five-year period.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 26)
Sec. 20-43. Form for records and notices of violations.
All forms for records of violations and notices of violations shall be serially
numbered. For each month and year a written record shall be kept, showing the
disposal of all such forms.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 26)
Sec. 20-44. Accidents; duty of police to investigate, make arrests, assist in
prosecutions.
It shall be the duty of all police officers, including the officers of the
traffic division, to investigate traffic accidents, to arrest and to assist in
the prosecution of those persons charged with violations of law, causing or
contributing to such accidents.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 27)
   State Law References: Accidents and accident reports generally, A.R.S. §§
28-661--28-675.
Sec. 20-45. Accident studies.
Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the traffic
division shall cooperate with the traffic engineer in conducting studies of
such accidents and determining remedial measures.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 28)
Sec. 20-46. Reserved.
   Editors Note: Section 20-46, requiring an accident report from the driver in
event of death, injury or property damage, derived from the 1953 Code., ch. 17,
§ 29, was repealed by § 1 of Ord. No. 5931, adopted Dec. 19, 1983.
Sec. 20-47. Supplemental accident reports.
The police department may required any driver of a vehicle involved in an
accident of which report must be made as provided in section
20-46 to file supplemental reports whenever the original report is insufficient
in the opinion of the department and may require witnesses of accidents to
render reports to the police department.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 30)
   Editors Note: It should be noted that §
20-46 has been repealed.
Sec. 20-48. Investigating officer to make report of accident.
Every law enforcement officer who, in the regular course of duty, investigates
a motor vehicle accident of which report must be made as required in section
20-46, either at the time of and at the scene of the accident, or thereafter by
interviewing participants or witnesses shall, within twenty-four (24) hours
after completing such investigation, forward a written report of such accident
to the police department.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 31)
   Editors Note: It should be noted that §
20-46 has been repealed.
Sec. 20-49. Filing, use of accident reports; driver's reports declared
confidential.
The police department shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic
accident reports. Accident reports or cards referring to them shall be filed
alphabetically by location. Such reports shall be available for the use and
information of the traffic engineer. The police department shall receive and
properly file all accident reports made to it under state law or under any
ordinance of the city, but all such accident reports made by drivers shall be
for the confidential use of the police department and the traffic engineer, and
no such report shall be admissible in any civil or criminal proceeding unless
to prove a compliance with the laws requiring the making of any such report.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 32)
   State Law References: Similar provision, A.R.S. § 28-673.
Sec. 20-50. Availability of accident reports and files to parties involved,
their attorneys, agents, insurers, or adjusters.
All information obtained in the investigation of traffic accidents, other than
the reports of the parties involved and by garages, made pursuant to A.R.S.
section 28-673, shall be made available within a reasonable time in all cases
that do not prejudice the investigation of criminal matters, in the opinion of
the chief of police, upon the payment of such fee or fees as are established
pursuant to section
20-51, to the parties involved, their attorneys, agents, insurers or adjusters,
provided that before the chief of police furnishes such information to an
attorney, agent, adjuster or insurer, he shall furnish the chief of police a
written request therefor in substantially the following form:
"Chief of Police
Tucson, Arizona
"I request as (attorney), (adjuster), (insurer), or (agent) for (party
involved) such information as you have compiled, exclusive of that which is
confidential under A.R.S. section 28-673, concerning a traffic accident
occurring in the City of Tucson at (location) on (date) wherein above party was
involved.
____
(Attorney-Adjuster-Insurer-Agent)
____
Company
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 32a; Ord. No. 3125, § 1, 5-2-68)
Sec. 20-51. Fees for copies of traffic accident reports, files, photographs or
other information.
The director of finance shall establish a schedule of fees to be charged for
copies of accident reports, files, photographs or other information made
available under section
20-50.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 32b; Ord. No. 1942, § 1, 8-17-59; Ord. No. 3058, § 1, 11-
20-67; Ord. No. 5052, § 1, 10-15-79)
Sec. 20-52. Individual accident records required.
The police department shall maintain a suitable record of all traffic
accidents, reported for each driver, which shall be filed alphabetically under
the name of the driver concerned. Such records shall accumulate during at least
a five-year period, and from that time on such records shall be maintained
complete for at least the most recent five-year period.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 33)
Sec. 20-53. Study of cases of frequent offenders.
The traffic division shall study the cases of all the drivers charged with
frequent or serious violations of the traffic laws or involved in frequent
traffic accidents or any serious accident, and shall attempt to discover the
reasons therefor, and shall take whatever steps are lawful and reasonable to
prevent the same or to have the licenses of such persons suspended or revoked.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 34)
Sec. 20-54. Annual traffic report required.
The police department shall annually prepare a traffic report which shall be
filed with the city manager. Such report shall contain information on traffic
matters in the city as follows:
   Sec 20-54(1). The number of traffic accidents, the number of persons injured
and other pertinent traffic accident data.
   Sec. 20-54(2). The number of traffic accidents investigated and other
pertinent data on the safety activities of the police.
   Sec. 20-54(3). The plans and recommendations of the police department for
future traffic safety activities.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 35)
Sec. 20-55. Identification of vehicles in funeral processions.
The traffic division shall designate a type of pennant or other identifying
insignia to be displayed upon, or other method to be employed to identify, the
vehicles in funeral processions.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 36)
   State Law References: Authority to regulate processions, A.R.S. § 28-
627.A.3.
Sec. 20-56. Temporary, experimental regulations authorized.
The chief of police is hereby empowered to enforce temporary or experimental
regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 37)
Sec. 20-57. Testing traffic-control devices authorized.
The traffic engineer may test traffic-control devices under actual condition of
traffic.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 37)
Secs. 20-58--20-67. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
VIOLATIONS
Sec. 20-68. Reserved.
   Editors Note: Ord. No. 3219, § 1, adopted and effective Feb. 17, 1969,
repealed §
20-68, formerly derived from the 1953 Code, ch. 17, § 38, and pertaining to the
form of the notice to appear for violation.
Sec. 20-69. Reserved.
   Editors Note: Section 20-69, prescribing when violators are to be taken
before a magistrate, derived from the 1953 Code, ch. 17, § 39, was repealed by
§ 1 of Ord. No. 5931, adopted Dec. 19, 1983.
Sec. 20-70. Procedures for adjudication of civil traffic violations.
Except for violations of article VII and article VIII, all complaints for
violations of this chapter shall be issued and adjudicated in accordance with
the Arizona Rules of Procedure in Civil Traffic Violation Cases and applicable
state law.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 40; Ord. No. 5931, § 8, 12-19-83; Ord. No. 8051, § 1, 5-
17-93)
Sec. 20-71. Reserved.
   Editors Note: Section 20-71, prescribing the procedure to be followed when a
person violating the provisions of this chapter fails to appear, derived from
1953 Code, ch. 17, § 41, and Ord. No. 4679, § 9, adopted June 27, 1977, was
repealed by § 10 of Ord. No. 5391, adopted Aug. 3, 1981.
Sec. 20-72. Reserved.
   Editors Note: Section 20-72, stating the presumption against the owner of an
illegally parked vehicle, derived from the 1953 Code, ch. 17, § 42, was
repealed by § 1 of Ord. No. 5931, adopted Dec. 19, 1983.
Sec. 20-73. Reserved.
   Editors Note: Section 20-73, prescribing procedure when a person fails to
comply with a notice of violation, derived from the 1953 Code, ch. 17, § 43;
Ord. No. 4679, § 7, adopted June 27, 1977; Ord. No. 5169, § 5, adopted June 16,
1980; and Ord. No. 5391, § 11, adopted Aug. 3, 1981, was repealed by § 1 of
Ord. No. 5931, adopted Dec. 19, 1983.
Secs. 20-74--20-76. Reserved.
   Editors Note: Ord. No. 4679, § 1, adopted June 27, 1977, specifically
amended the Code by repealing §§ 20-74--20-76, which had pertained to the
traffic violations bureau. Said sections had been derived from the 1953 Code,
ch. 17, §§ 45--47.
Sec. 20-77. Reserved.
   Editors Note: Section 20-77, allowing payment of a fine to the city court in
lieu of a court appearance, derived from the 1953 Code, ch. 17, § 48; Ord. No.
4679, § 8, adopted June 27, 1977; and Ord. No. 5169, § 6, adopted June 16,
1980, was repealed by § 1 of Ord. No. 5931, adopted Dec. 19, 1983.
Sec. 20-78. Records of chief magistrate.
The chief magistrate of the city court shall keep records of all complaints for
violations of the traffic laws and ordinances in the city, and of all the fines
collected, and of the final disposition or present status of every case of
violation of the provisions of such laws and ordinances. Such records shall be
so maintained as to show all types of violations and the totals of each.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 49; Ord. No. 4679, § 9, 6-27-77; Ord. No. 5169, § 7, 6-
16-80; Ord. No. 5931 § 9, 12-19-83)
Sec. 20-79. Reserved.
   Editors Note: Ord. No. 4679, § 1, adopted June 27, 1977, specifically
amended the Code by repealing §
20-79, which had pertained to the procedures for the traffic violations bureau.
Said section had been derived from the 1953 Code, ch. 17, § 49.
Sec. 20-80. Disposition of civil sanctions.
All civil sanctions collected upon a finding of responsibility or upon the
default of any person charged with a violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter and any ordinance of the city regulating the time, place and method of
parking a vehicle shall be paid to the director of finance.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 44; Ord. No. 5931, § 10, 12-19-83)
Secs. 20-81--20-90. Reserved.
ARTICLE III.
PEDESTRIANS
Sec. 20-91. Obedience to traffic-control signals and this article.
Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic-control signals as declared in section
20-116, but at all other places pedestrians shall be granted those rights and
be subject to the restrictions stated in this article.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 50)
   State Law References: For similar provision, see A.R.S. § 28-791.
Sec. 20-92. Prohibited crossings.
Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control signals are in
operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a crosswalk.
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk in the central
business district or in any business district.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 53)
   State Law References: Authority to prohibit crossing other than in
crosswalk, A.R.S. § 28-791.B.
Secs. 20-93--20-108. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV.
TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES*
__________
*   State Law References: Authority to place and maintain traffic-control
signals, A.R.S. § 28-643.
__________
Sec. 20-109. Installation of devices by traffic engineer; existing devices
ratified.
The city traffic engineer shall place traffic-control signs, signals and
devices when and as required under the traffic ordinances of the city to make
effective the provisions of such ordinances, and may place such additional
traffic-control devices as he may deem necessary to regulate traffic under the
traffic ordinances of the city or under state law, or to guide or warn traffic;
provided, that all traffic-control signs, signals and devices now in place are
hereby ratified and approved as so placed.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 59)
Sec. 20-110. Conformance to state specifications required; uniformity; declared
official.
All traffic-control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the manual and
specifications approved by the state highway commission. All signs and signals
required hereunder for a particular purpose shall, so far as practicable, be
uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic-control signs,
signals and devices which are placed in position approximately conforming to
the requirements of state law and this chapter shall be presumed to have been
so placed by the official act or direction of lawful authority, and shall be
presumed to be official traffic-control signs, signals or devices, unless the
contrary shall be established by competent evidence.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 60; Ord. No. 3218, § 1, 2-17-69)
   State Law References: Duty of commission to adopt uniform system, A.R.S. §
28-641.
Sec. 20-111. Obedience required.
The driver of any vehicle or bus shall obey the instructions of any official
traffic-control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the traffic
ordinances of the city, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, subject
to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in this
chapter.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 61)
   State Law References: Similar provisions, A.R.S. § 28-644.A.
Sec. 20-112. Observance of flashing yellow arrow display.
   (a)   When a yellow arrow is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes,
vehicular traffic facing such indication may cautiously enter the intersection
to make a movement indicated by such arrow, but shall yield the right-of-way to
pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk, and to any vehicle lawfully in the
intersection or approaching on another highway so closely as to constitute an
immediate hazard.
   (b)   After a driver has yielded at a flashing yellow arrow, the driver may
proceed, and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection
shall yield to the vehicle so proceeding; provided that if the driver is
involved in a collision with a pedestrian in a crosswalk or a vehicle in the
intersection after making the movement indicated by a flashing yellow arrow
without stopping, such collision shall be deemed prima facie evidence of
failure to yield right-of- way.
(Ord. No. 7848, § 1, 7-6-92)
Sec. 20-112.1. Bicycle traffic control signals.
If bicycle traffic is controlled by the use of red, yellow, and green colored
lights with bicycles on the lenses, the colored lights shall have the same
meanings as those used for regular traffic control.
(Ord. No. 9893, § 4, 9-15-03)
Sec. 20-113. Required stops for pedestrians in crosswalks.
When a red "stop for pedestrian in crosswalk" sign is illuminated with rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the
crosswalk and shall yield the right-of- way to pedestrians who are preparing to
enter or who have entered the crosswalk or who are approaching so closely as to
constitute an immediate hazard, after which such driver, having so yielded, may
proceed with caution.
(Ord. No. 8987, § 1, 11-17-97)
   Editors Note: Section 1 of Ord. No. 4268, adopted Jan. 20, 1975, repealed §
20-0-113. Former § 20-113 pertained to prohibiting right turns on red at
certain intersections and was derived from: Code 1953, ch. 17, § 63; Ord. No.
2266, § 1, adopted Feb. 19, 1962; Ord. No. 2482, § 1, adopted July 8, 1963;
Ord. No. 3073, § 1, adopted Jan. 2, 1968; Ord. No. 3204, § 1, adopted Jan. 6,
1969; Ord. No. 3291, § 1, adopted July 21, 1969; Ord. No. 3746, § 1, adopted
Dec. 13, 1971; and Ord. No. 4045, § 1, adopted July 9, 1973. Subsequently, Ord.
No. 8987, § 1, adopted November 17, 1997, added a new §
20-113 to read as herein set out.
Sec. 20-114. Displaying unauthorized or confusing signs, signals, markings;
obstructing view of devices.
   Sec. 20-114(1). Prohibited. No person shall place, maintain or display upon
or in view of any highway, street or alley any unauthorized sign, signal,
marking or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an
official traffic-control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts
to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with
the effectiveness of any official traffic-control device or any railroad sign
or signal, and no person shall place or maintain, nor shall any public
authority permit upon any highway, street or alley any traffic sign or signal
bearing thereon any commercial advertising. This shall not be deemed to
prohibit the erection upon private property adjacent to highways, streets or
alleys of signs giving useful directional information and of a type that cannot
be mistaken for official signs.
   Sec. 20-114(2). Declared Nuisance; Removal. Every such prohibited sign,
signal or marking is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and the traffic
engineer is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be removed
without notice. (Ord. No. 6148, § 1, 1-7-85)
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 66)
   State Law References: Similar provisions, A.R.S. § 28-648.
Sec. 20-115. Authority to prohibit or require turns; obedience to signs; public
transit buses exempted from same.
   (a)   The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to determine those
intersections and lanes at which drivers of vehicles shall or shall not make a
right turn, left turn or U-turn, and shall place proper signs at such
intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited or required between
certain hours of any day and not so controlled at other hours, in which event
the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs, or the signs may be removed
when such turns are not prohibited or required.
   (b)   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that right turns,
left turns or U- turns are prohibited or required, no driver of a vehicle shall
disobey the directions of any such sign except as set out in this section.
   (c)   It shall be lawful for operators of public transit buses to proceed
through mandatory right-turn lanes designated as such and such public transit
buses shall be exempt from the requirement that all vehicles in the mandatory
right-turn lane must turn right where lanes are marked "public buses exempted"
in conformance with subsection (d) below:
   (1)   "Mandatory right-turn lanes" means those lanes to the far right of any
street, road, roadway or highway which are designated by appropriate lane-
stripping and/or which are marked "right lane must turn right" on the surface
of such lane and/or are so marked by use of similar signs on the adjacent
curbing.
   (d)   The city traffic engineer or chief of police is hereby authorized to
exempt public transit buses from "right turn only" requirements only in those
intersections where a prolongation of the subject right lane continues past the
intersection without meeting any traffic obstructions and where a prolongation
of the lateral curbline adjacent to the subject lane coincides with the lateral
curbline adjacent to the right lane on the opposite side of the intersection.
At all intersections to which subsection (c) is applicable, there shall be a
sign posted prominently at the entrance to such mandatory right turn lanes and/
or painted on the lane surface of the entrance thereto, the warning "right lane
must turn right--public buses exempted."
   (e)   Vehicle operators other than operators of public transit buses using
an intersection marked in accordance with subsection (d) are deemed to be on
notice that right turns are mandatory notwithstanding the exemption for public
transit buses. It shall be no defense that operators of nonexempt vehicles
relied upon the actions of a public transit bus operator continuing through a
mandatory right-turn lane.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 69; Ord. No. 4487, § 1, 5-24-76; Ord. No. 4521, § 1, 6-
21-76; Ord. No. 5931, § 1, 12-19-83; Ord. No. 6148, § 2, 1-7-85)
Sec. 20-115.1. Authority to exempt bicyclists from required or prohibited
turns.
The city traffic engineer hereby is authorized to determine those intersections
and lanes at which bicyclists shall be exempt from compliance with posted
traffic-control signs signifying any of the following: Do Not Enter; No Turns;
No Left Turns; No Right Turns; Right Lane Must Turn Right; or Left Lane Must
Turn Left. Where he deems such exemption necessary, he shall cause to be
erected a "bicyclist exempted" sign immediately below the existing traffic-
control sign.
(Ord. No. 4754, § 1, 2-6-78)
Sec. 20-116. Authority to designate crosswalks.
The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to designate and maintain by
appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks
at intersections where, in his opinion there is particular danger to
pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other places as he may deem
necessary.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 58)"
Sec. 20-117. Authority to designate safety zones.
The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to establish safety zones of
such kind and character and at such places as he may deem necessary for the
protection of pedestrians.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 58)
Sec. 20-118. Authority to mark lanes.
The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to mark lanes for traffic on
street pavements at such places as he may deem advisable, consistent with the
traffic ordinances of the city.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 58)
Sec. 20-119. Traffic engineer authorized to establish school crossings.
The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to establish abutting and
nonabutting school crossings, consistent with guidelines prescribed by the
Arizona Department of Transportation as specified in the Arizona Revised
Statutes. The school district shall operate such crossings in conformance with
the guidelines and operating agreement.
(Ord. No. 4503, § 1, 6-21-76; Ord. No. 6148, § 3, 1-7-85)
Sec. 20-120. Authority to prohibit entry onto streets and alleys from
intersections; obedience to "do not enter" signs; authority to exempt
bicyclists.
   Sec. 20-120(1). The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to determine
those intersections at which the driver of a vehicle shall not leave the
intersection by way of a particular public street or alley adjoining such
intersection, and to cause "do not enter" signs to be erected where appropriate
at such intersections. When an official "do not enter" sign has been erected as
authorized herein, no driver of a vehicle shall leave the intersection in
violation of any such sign. All "do not enter signs now in place hereby are
ratified and approved.
   Sec. 20-120(2). The city traffic engineer hereby is authorized to exempt
bicyclists from the prohibition of minor section (1) above. At any such
intersection where he deems such exemption appropriate, he shall cause to be
erected a "bicyclist exempted" sign immediately below the "do not enter" sign.
(Ord. No. 4754, § 2, 2-6-78; Ord. No. 5931, § 1, 12-19-83)
Secs. 20-121--20-134. Reserved.
ARTICLE V.
OPERATION*
__________
*   Cross References: Operation of motor vehicles carrying hazardous materials,
§
13-13.
__________
Sec. 20-135. Reserved.
   Editors Note: Ord. No. 3219, § 1, adopted and effective Feb. 17, 1969,
repealed §
20-135, formerly pertaining to passing near school crossings, and derived from
the 1953 Code, ch. 17, § 70a, and Ord. No. 2173, § 1, enacted Apr. 17, 1961.
Sec. 20-136. State speed laws applicable generally.
   The state traffic laws regulating the speed of vehicles shall be applicable
upon all streets within the city, except as otherwise provided by ordinance
upon the basis of engineering and traffic investigation that certain speed
regulations shall be applicable upon specified streets in certain areas. Any
speed in excess of the speed so declared by ordinance, when signs are in place
giving notice thereof, is prima facie evidence that the speed is too great and
therefore unreasonable.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 71; Ord. No. 5931, § 11, 12-19-83)
   State Law References: State speed limits, A.R.S. § 28-701; authority to
alter state limits. A.R.S. § 28-703.
Sec. 20-137. Intersections where fifteen miles per hour speed limit imposed.
   The prima facie speed limit within one hundred (100) feet upon every
designated approach to and within the intersections set forth by ordinance
shall be fifteen (15) miles per hour, which speed limit shall be effective when
signs are erected upon the approaches to such intersections giving notice of
such prima facie speed limit. Three (3) copies of the current ordinances
designating the intersections subject to this section shall be kept on file by
the city clerk.
   Editor's note – Fifteen miles per hour speed limits have been designated by
1953 Code, ch. 17, § 72, as supplemented in 1957 and amended by:
   Ord. No. 1925, § 1, 7-6-59
   Ord. No. 1935, § 1, 8-3-59
   Ord. No. 2145, § 1, 2-20-61
   Ord. No. 2268, § 1, 2-19-62
   Ord. No. 2486, § 1, 7-8-63
   Ord. No. 2964, § 1, 2-6-67
   Ord. No. 3106, § 1, 4-15-68
   Intersections designated by Ord. No. 3106 were amended by Ord. No. 3292, §
1, 7-21-69
   Intersections designated by Ord. No. 3292 were amended by Ord. No. 3747, §
1, 12-13-71
   Intersections designated by Ord. No. 3747 were amended by Ord. No. 4046, §
1, 7-9-73
   Intersections designated by Ord. No. 4046 were repealed by Ord. No. 4269, §
1, 1-20-75
Sec. 20-138. Speed limit in all city parks.
   The prima facie speed limit upon the streets and driveways in all city parks
shall be twenty (20) miles per hour, which shall be effective when signs are
erected giving notice thereof.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 72a; Ord. No. 4108, § 1, 11-13-73)
Sec. 20-138.1. Speed limit in bicycle boulevards.
   The prima facie speed limit upon and along all officially designated and
substantially constructed bicycle boulevards within the city, unless otherwise
specifically provided by ordinance, shall be twenty (20) miles per hour, which
speed limit shall be effective when signs are erected giving notice thereof.
The definition of bicycle boulevard shall be the same as that included in the
most recent version of the City of Tucson Department of Transportation Bicycle
Boulevard Master Plan.
(Ord. No. 12007 § 2, 6-6-23)
Sec. 20-138.2. Designating current streets or parts of streets as bicycle
boulevards where twenty miles per hour speed limit is imposed.
   The streets or portions thereof which are subject to the provisions of Sec.
20-138.2 are designated in Exhibit A, attached to Ord. No. 12007, passed June
6, 2023.
(Ord. No. 12007 § 2, 6-6-23)
Sec. 20-139. Speed limit in alleys.
   The prima facie speed limit upon and along all of the alleys within the
city, unless otherwise specifically provided by ordinance, shall be fifteen
(15) miles per hour, which speed limit shall be effective when signs are
erected giving notice thereof. Three (3) copies of current ordinances
specifying exceptions to this section shall be kept on file by the city clerk.
   Editor's note – As of the time of republication of this Code, there have
been no ordinances establishing exceptions to section
20-139.
Sec. 20-140. Where thirty miles per hour speed limit imposed.
   The prima facie speed limit upon streets or portions thereof as so
designated by ordinance shall be thirty (30) miles per hour, which speed shall
be effective when signs are erected giving notice thereof. Three (3) copies of
current ordinances designating the streets governed by this section shall be
kept on file by the city clerk.
   Editor's note – Thirty miles per hour speed limits have been designated by
1953 Code, ch. 17, § 73, as supplemented in 1957 and amended by:
   Ord. No. 1935, § 2, 8-3-59
   Ord. No. 2145, § 2, 2-20-61
   Ord. No. 2312, § 1, 7-2-62
   Ord. No. 2966, § 1, 2-6-67
   Ord. No. 3107, § 1, 4-15-68
   Streets designated by Ord. No. 3107 were amended by Ord. No. 3293, § 1, 7-
21-69
   Streets designated by Ord. No. 3478 were amended by Ord. No. 4047, § 1, 7-9-
73
   Streets designated by Ord. No. 4047 were amended by:
      Ord. No. 4270, § 1, 1-20-75
      Ord. No. 4504, § 2, 6-21-76
      Ord. No. 4881, §§ 1, 2, 10-16-78
      Ord. No. 5441, §§ 1, 2, 9-28-81
      Ord. No. 5654, §§ 1, 2, 9-27-82
      Ord. No. 5965, §§ 1, 2, 3-12-84
   Ord. No. 5965 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 6180,
§§ 1, 2, 2-19-85
   Ord. No. 6180 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 6412,
§§ 1, 2, 5-5-86
   Ord. No. 6412 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 6470,
§§ 1, 2, 7-7-86
   Ord. No. 6470 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 6545,
§§ 1, 2, 10-20-86
   Ord. No. 6545 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 6585,
§§ 1, 2, 12-8-86
   Ord. No. 6585 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 6794,
§§ 1, 2, 9-21-87
   Ord. No. 6794 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 706,
§§ 1, 2, 10-17-88
   Ord. No. 7062 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 7440,
§§ 1, 2, 7-2-90
   Ord. No. 7440 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 7543,
§§ 1, 2, 1-7-91
   Ord. No. 7543 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 7641,
§§ 1, 2, 6-17-91
   Ord. No. 7641 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 7785,
§§ 1, 2, 3-16-92
   Ord. No. 7785 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 8076,
§§ 1, 2, 6-28-93
   Ord. No. 8076 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 8213,
§§ 1, 2, 2-28-94
   Ord. No. 8213 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 8465,
§§ 1, 2, 3-20-95
   Ord. No. 8465 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 8550,
§§ 1, 2, 8-7-95
   Ord. No. 8550 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 9049,
§§ 1, 2, 5-4-98
   Ord. No. 9049 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No.
10408, §§ 1, 2, 6-12-07
   Ord. No. 10408 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No.
10543, §§ 1, 2, 6-10-08
   Ord. No. 10543 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No.
10728, §§ 1, 2, 11-17-09
   Ord. No. 11220 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No.
11527, §§ 1, 2, 2-21-18
   Ord. No. 11527 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No.
11604, §§ 1, 2, 12-4-18
   Ord. No. 11527 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No.
11678, §§ 1, 2, 9-4-19
   Ord. No. 11678 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No.
11692, §§ 1, 2, 10-10-19
   Ord. No. 11692 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No.
11859, §§1, 2, 8-10-21
   Ord. No. 11859 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No.
12000, §§ 1, 2, 4-4-23
   Ord. No. 12000 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No.
12087, §§ 1, 2, 5-21-24
   Ord. No. 12087 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No.
12161, §§ 1, 2, 5-6-25
Sec. 20-141. Where thirty-five miles per hour speed limit imposed.
   The prima facie speed limit upon such streets or portions thereof as may be
designated by ordinances shall be thirty-five (35) miles per hour, which speed
limit shall be effective when signs are erected giving notice thereof. Three
(3) copies of current ordinances designating the streets governed by this
section shall be kept on file by the city clerk.
   Editor's note – Thirty-five miles per hour speed limits have been designated
by 1953 Code, ch. 17, § 74, as supplemented in 1957 and as amended by:
   Ord. No. 1935, § 3, 8-3-59
   Ord. No. 2145, § 3, 2-20-60
   Ord. No. 2312, § 2, 7-2-62
   Ord. No. 2961, § 1, 2-6-67
   Ord. No. 3109, § 1, 4-15-68
   Streets designated by Ord. No. 3109 were amended by Ord. No. 3294, § 1, 7-
21-69
   Streets designated by Ord. No. 3294 were amended by Ord. No. 3749, § 1, 12-
13-71
   Streets designated by Ord. No. 3749 were amended by Ord. No. 4080, § 1, 7-9-
73
   Streets designated by Ord. No. 4080 were amended by:
      Ord. No. 4271, § 1, 1-20-75
      Ord. No. 4505, § 2, 6-21-76
      Ord. No. 4558, §§ 1, 2, 8-23-76
      Ord. No. 4882, §§ 1, 2, 10-16-78
      Ord. No. 4962, § 2, 4-23-79
      Ord. No. 5453, §§ 1, 2, 10-19-81
      Ord. No. 5655, §§ 1, 2, 10-19-81
      Ord. No. 5966, §§ 1, 2, 3-12-84
   Ord. No. 5966 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 6181,
§§ 1, 2, 2-19-85
   Ord. No. 6181 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 6413,
§§ 1, 2, 5-5-86
   Ord. No. 6413 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 6471,
§§ 1, 2, 7-7-86
   Ord. No. 6471 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 6490,
§§ 1, 2, 8-4-86
   Ord. No. 6490 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 6514,
§§ 1, 2, 9-2-86
   Ord. No. 6514 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 6549,
§§ 1, 2, 10-2-86
   Ord. No. 6549 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 6586,
§§ 1, 2, 12-8-86
   Ord. No. 6586 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 6668,
§§ 1, 2, 3-16-87
   Ord. No. 6668 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 6703,
§§ 1, 2, 5-18-87
   Ord. No. 6703 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 6795,
§§ 1, 2, 9-21-87
   Ord. No. 6795 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 6841,
§§ 1, 2, 11-23-87
   Ord. No. 6841 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 6928,
§§ 1, 2, 4-18-88
   Ord. No. 6928 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 7063,
§§ 1, 2, 10-17-88
   Ord. No. 7063 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 7115,
§§ 1, 2, 12-19-88
   Ord. No. 7115 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 7355,
§§ 1, 2, 2-26-90
   Ord. No. 7355 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 7418,
§§ 1, 2, 6-4-90
   Ord. No. 7418 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 7441,
§§ 1, 2, 7-2-90
   Ord. No. 7441 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 7613,
§§ 1, 2, 5-6-91
   Ord. No. 7613 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 7642,
§§ 1, 2, 6-17-91
   Ord. No. 7642 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 7784,
§§ 1, 2, 3-16-92
   Ord. No. 7784 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 7976,
§§ 1, 2, 2-1-93
   Ord. No. 7976 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 8158,
§§ 1, 2, 11-15-93
   Ord. No. 8158 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 8294,
§§ 1, 2, 6-6-94
   Ord. No. 8294 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 8340,
§§ 1, 2, 8-1-94
   Ord. No. 8340 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 8551,
§§ 1, 2, 8-7-95
   Ord. No. 8551 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 8684,
§§ 1, 2, 5-6-96
   Ord. No. 8684 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 8715,
§§ 1, 2, 6-17-96
   Ord. No. 8715 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 8924,
§§ 1, 2, 9-2-97
   Ord. No. 8924 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 9012,
§§ 1, 2, 2-2-98
   Ord. No. 9012 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 9050,
§§ 1, 2, 5-4-98
   Ord. No. 9050 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 9134,
§§ 1, 2, 10-5-98
   Ord. No. 9134 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 9759,
§§ 1, 2, 9-3-02
   Ord. No. 9759 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 9964,
§§ 1, 2, 5-17-04
   Ord. No. 9964 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No.
10409, §§ 1, 2, 6-12-07
   Ord. No. 10409 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No.
10544, §§ 1, 2, 6-10-08
   Ord. No. 10544 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No.
10729, §§ 1, 2, 11-17-09
   Ord. No. 11221 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No.
11528, §§ 1, 2, 2-21-18
   Ord. No. 11528 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No.
11605, §§ 1, 2, 12-4-18
   Ord. No. 11528 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No.
11679, §§ 1, 2, 9-4-19
   Ord. No. 11679 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No.
11693, §§ 1, 2, 10-10-19
   Ord. No. 11693 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No.
11734, §§ 1, 2, 3-3-20
   Ord. No. 11693 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No.
11861, §§ 1, 2, 8-10- 21
   Ord. No. 11861 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No.
12088, §§ 1, 2, 5-21-24
   Ord. No. 12088 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No.
12162, §§ 1, 2, 5-6-25
Sec. 20-142. Where forty miles per hour speed limit imposed.
   The prima facie speed limit upon such streets, roads, highways or portions
thereof as may be designated by ordinance shall be forty (40) miles per hour,
which speed limit shall be effective when signs are erected giving notice
thereof. Three (3) copies of current ordinances designating the streets
governed by this section shall be kept on file by the city clerk.
   Editor's note – Forty mile per hour speed limits have been designated by
1953 Code, ch. 17, § 74b, as supplemented in 1957, and as amended by:
   Ord. No. 2145, § 5, 2-20-61
   Ord. No. 2312, § 4, 7-2-62
   Ord. No. 2459, § 1, 5-6-63
   Ord. No. 2965, § 1, 2-6-67
   Ord. No. 3108, § 1, 4-15-68
   Streets designated by Ord. No. 3108 were amended by Ord. No. 3295, § 1, 7-
21-69
   Streets designated by Ord. No. 3295 were amended by Ord. No. 3750, § 1, 12-
13-71
   Streets designated by Ord. No. 3750 were amended by Ord. No. 4049, § 1, 7-9-
73
   Streets designated by Ord. No. 4049 were amended by Ord. No. 4272, § 1, 1-
20-75
   Ord. No. 4506, § 2, 6-21-76
   Ord. No. 4883, §§ 1, 2, 10-16-78
   Ord. No. 4962, § 1, 4-23-79
   Ord. No. 5656, §§ 1, 2, 9-27-82
   Ord. No. 5967, §§ 1, 2, 3-12-84
   Ord. No. 5967 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 6182,
§§ 1, 2, 2-19-85
   Ord. No. 6182 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 6415,
§§ 1, 2, 5-5-86
   Ord. No. 6415 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 6472,
§§ 1, 2, 7-7-86
   Ord. No. 6472 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 6489,
§§ 1, 2, 8-4-86
   Ord. No. 6489 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 6515,
§§ 1, 2, 9-2-86
   Ord. No. 6515 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 6550,
§§ 1, 2, 10-20-86
   Ord. No. 6550 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 6587,
§§ 1, 2, 12-8-86
   Ord. No. 6587 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 6619,
§§ 1, 2, 1-5-87
   Ord. No. 6619 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 6669,
§§ 1, 2, 3-16-87
   Ord. No. 6669 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 6704,
§§ 1, 2, 5-18-87
   Ord. No. 6704 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 6796,
§§ 1, 2, 9-21-87
   Ord. No. 6796 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 6842,
§§ 1, 2, 11-23-87
   Ord. No. 6842 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 6929,
§ 1, 2, 4-18-88
   Ord. No. 6929 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 6951,
§§ 1, 2, 5-16-88
   Ord. No. 6951 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 7041,
§§ 1, 2, 9-19-88
   Ord. No. 7041 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 7067,
§§ 1, 2, 10-17-88
   Ord. No. 7067 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 7116,
§§ 1, 2, 12-19-88
   Ord. No. 7116 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 7204,
§§ 1, 2, 6-5-89
   Ord. No. 7204 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 7231,
§§ 1, 2, 7-3-89
   Ord. No. 7231 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 7356,
§§ 1, 2, 2-26-90
   Ord. No. 7356 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 7375,
§§ 1, 2, 3-19-90
   Ord. No. 7375 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 7419,
§§ 1, 2, 6-4-90
   Ord. No. 7419 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 7482,
§§ 1, 2, 9-17-90
   Ord. No. 7482 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 7614,
§§ 1, 2, 5-6-91
   Ord. No. 7614 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 7643,
§§ 1, 2, 6-17-91
   Ord. No. 7643 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 7810,
§§ 1, 2, 5-4-92
   Ord. No. 7810 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 7977,
§§ 1, 2, 2-1-93
   Ord. No. 7977 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 8080,
§§ 1, 2, 6-28-93
   Ord. No. 8080 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 8159,
§§ 1, 2, 11-15-93
   Ord. No. 8159 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 8626,
§§ 1, 2, 1-8-96
   Ord. No. 8626 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 8925,
§§ 1, 2, 9-2-97
   Ord. No. 8925 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 9013,
§§ 1, 2, 2-2-98
   Ord. No. 9013 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 9051,
§§ 1, 2, 5-4-98
   Ord. No. 9051 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 9135,
§§ 1, 2, 10-5-98
   Ord. No. 9135, was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 9618
§§ 1, 2, 10-8-01
   Ord. No. 9618, was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 9966
§§ 1, 2, 5-17-04
   Ord. No. 9966, was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No.
10229 §§ 1, 2, 12-20-05
   Ord. No. 10229, was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No.
10410 §§ 1, 2, 6-12-07
   Ord. No. 10410, was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No.
10545 §§ 1, 2, 6-10-08
   Ord. No. 10545 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No.
10730, §§ 1, 2, 11-17-09
   Ord. No. 10730 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No.
11222, §§ 1, 2, 12-9-14
   Ord. No. 11222 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No.
11694, §§ 1, 2, 10-10-19
   Ord. No. 11694 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No.
11735, §§ 1, 2, 3-3-20
   Ord. No. 11735 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No.
12089, §§ 1, 2, 5-21-24
   Ord. No. 12089 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No.
12163, §§ 1, 2, 5-6-25
Sec. 20-143. Where forty-five miles per hour speed limit imposed.
   The prima facie speed limit upon such streets, roads, highways or portions
thereof as may be designated by ordinance shall be forty-five (45) miles per
hour, which speed limit shall be effective when signs are erected giving notice
thereof. Three (3) copies of current ordinances designating the streets
governed by this section shall be kept on file by the city clerk.
   Editor's note – Forty-five miles per hour speed limits have been designated
by 1953 Code, ch. 17, § 74a, as supplemented in 1957, and as amended by:
   Ord. No. 1935, § 4, 8-3-50
   Ord. No. 2145, § 4, 2-20-61
   Ord. No. 2312, § 3, 7-2-62
   Ord. No. 2963, § 1, 2-6-67
   Ord. No. 3110, § 1, 4-15-68
   Streets designated by Ord. No. 3110 were amended by Ord. No. 3296, § 1, 7-
21-69
   Streets designated by Ord. No. 3296 were amended by Ord. No. 3751, § 1, 12-
13-71
   Streets designated by Ord. No. 3751 were amended by Ord. No. 4050, § 1, 7-9-
73
   Streets designated by Ord. No. 4050 were amended by:
      Ord. No. 4273, § 1, 1-20-75
      Ord. No. 4507, § 2, 6-21-76
      Ord. No. 4884, §§ 1, 2, 10-16-78
      Ord. No. 5657, §§ 1, 2, 9-27-82
      Ord. No. 5968, §§ 1, 2, 3-12-84
   Ord. No. 5968 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord.No. 6183,
§§ 1, 2, 2-19-85
   Ord. No. 6183 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 6414,
§§ 1, 2, 5-5-86
   Ord. No. 6414 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 6474.
§ 1, 2, 7-7-86
   Ord. No. 6474 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 6516,
§§ 1, 2, 9-2-86
   Ord. No. 6516 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 6551,
§§ 1, 2, 10-20-86
   Ord. No. 6551 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 6588,
§§ 1, 2, 12-8-86
   Ord. No. 6588 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 6900,
§§ 1, 2, 3-7-88
   Ord. No. 6900 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 6952,
§§ 1, 2, 5-16-88
   Ord. No. 6952 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 7042,
§§ 1, 2, 9-19-88
   Ord. No. 7042 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 7064,
§§ 1, 2, 10-17-88
   Ord. No. 7064 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 7232,
§§ 1, 2, 7-3-89
   Ord. No. 7232 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 7357,
§§ 1, 2, 2-26-90
   Ord. No. 7357 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 7374,
§§ 1, 2, 3-19-90
   Ord. No. 7374 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 7483,
§§ 1, 2, 9-17-90
   Ord. No. 7483 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 7644,
§§ 1, 2, 6-17-91
   Ord. No. 7644 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 7769,
§§ 1, 2, 2-24-92
   Ord. No. 7769 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 7811,
§§ 1, 2, 5-4-92
   Ord. No. 7811 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 7978,
§§ 1, 2, 2-1-93
   Ord. No. 7978 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 8077,
§§ 1, 2, 6-28-93
   Ord. No. 8077 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 8627,
§§ 1, 2, 1-8-96
   Ord. No. 8627 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 8685,
§§ 1, 2, 5-6-96
   Ord. No. 8685 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 8716,
§§ 1, 2, 6-17-96
   Ord. No. 8716 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 8926,
§§ 1, 2, 9-2-97
   Ord. No. 8926 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 9617,
§§ 1, 2, 10-8-01
   Ord. No. 9617 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 9698,
§§ 1, 2, 4-15-02
   Ord. No. 9698 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No.
10230, §§ 1, 2, 12-20-05
   Ord. No. 10230 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No.
10411, §§ 1, 2, 6-12-07
   Ord. No. 10411 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No.
10546, §§ 1, 2, 6-10-08
   Ord. No. 10546 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No.
10731, §§ 1, 2, 11-17-09
   Ord. No. 10730 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No.
11222, §§ 1, 2, 12-9-14
   Ord. No. 11223 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No.
11695, §§ 1, 2, 10-10-19
   Ord. No. 11695 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No.
11736, §§ 1, 2, 3-3-20
   Ord. No. 11695 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No.
11862, §§ 1, 2, 8-10-21
   Ord. No. 11862 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No.
12090, §§ 1, 2, 5-21-24
   Ord. No. 12090 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No.
12164, §§ 1, 2, 5-6-25
Sec. 20-144. Where fifty miles per hour speed limit imposed.
   The prima facie speed limit upon such streets, roads, highways or portions
thereof as may be designated by ordinance shall be fifty (50) miles per hour,
which speed limit shall be effective when signs are erected giving notice
thereof. Three (3) copies of current ordinances designating the streets
governed by this section shall be kept on file by the city clerk.
   Editor's note – Fifty miles per hour speed limits have been designated by
1953 Code, ch. 17, § 74c, as added by Ord. No. 2145, § 6, 2-20-61, and as
amended by:
   Ord. No. 2312, § 5, 6-2-62
   Ord. No. 2962, § 1, 2-6-67
   Ord. No. 5969, §§ 1, 2, 3-12-84
   Ord. No. 5969 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 6184,
§§ 1, 2, 2-19-85
   Ord. No. 6184 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 6416,
§§ 1, 2, 5-5-86
   Ord. No. 6416 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 6473,
§§ 1, 2, 7-7-86
   Ord. No. 6473 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 6546,
§§ 1, 2.10-20-86
   Ord. No. 6546 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 6589,
§§ 1, 2, 12-8-86
   Ord. No. 6589 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 6620,
§§ 1, 2, 1-6-87
   Ord. No. 6620 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 6953,
§§ 1, 2, 5-16-88
   Ord. No. 6953 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 7066,
§§ 1, 2, 10-17-88
   Ord. No. 7066 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 8686,
§§ 1, 2, 5-6-96
   Ord. No. 8686 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 9011,
§§ 1, 2, 2-2-98
   Ord. No. 9011 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 9699,
§§ 1, 2, 4-15-02
   Ord. No. 9699 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No. 9965,
§§ 1, 2, 5-17-04
   Ord. No. 9965 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No.
10412, §§ 1, 2, 6-12-07
   Ord. No. 10412 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No.
10547, §§ 1, 2, 6-10-08
   Ord. No. 10547 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No.
10732, §§ 1, 2, 11-17-09
   Ord. No. 10732 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No.
11224, §§ 1, 2, 12-9-14
   Ord. No. 11224 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No.
11696, §§ 1, 2, 10-10-19
   Ord. No. 11696 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No.
11737, §§ 1, 2, 3-3-20
   Ord. No. 11696 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No.
11863, §§ 1, 2, 8-10-21
Sec. 20-145. Where fifty-five miles per hour speed limit imposed.
   The prima facie speed limit upon such streets, roads, highways or portions
thereof as may be designated by ordinance shall be fifty-five (55) miles per
hour, which speed limit shall be effective when signs are erected giving notice
thereof. Three (3) copies of current ordinances designating the streets
governed by this section shall be kept on file by the city clerk.
(Ord. No. 6185, § 1, 2-19-85)
   Editor's note – Fifty--sixty mile per hour limits have been established by
1953 Code, ch. 17, § 74d, as added by Ord. No. 2145, § 7, 2-20-61, and amended
by Ord. No. 2312, § 7, 7-2-62.
   The entire section was repealed by § 1 of Ord. No. 5931, adopted Dec. 19,
1983.
   Subsequently, Ord. No. 6185, § 1, adopted Feb. 19, 1985, added a new § 20-
145.
   The following ordinances designated specific streets:
      Ord. No. 6185, § 2, 2-19-85
      Ord. No. 6621, § 1, 1-5-87
   Ord. No. 6621 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No.
10413, §§ 1, 2, 6-12-07
   Ord. No. 10413 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No.
10733, §§ 1, 2, 11-17-09
   Ord. No. 10733 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No.
11225, §§ 1, 2, 12-9-14
   Ord. No. 11225 was repealed and new streets were designated by Ord. No.
11697, §§ 1, 2, 10-10-19
Secs. 20-145.1--20-145.4. Reserved.
   Editor's note – Sections 20-145.2--20-145.4, designating various speed
regulations, were, repealed by § 1 of Ord. No. 5931, adopted Dec. 19, 1983. The
following ordinances designated specific streets:
   Ord. No. 2968, § 1, 2-6-67
   Ord. No. 2969, § 1, 2-6-67
   Ord. No. 2970, § 2, 2-6-67
Sec. 20-146. Special speed restrictions on certain streets.
The speed permitted by state law outside of business and residence districts,
as applicable upon the streets or portions thereof designated by ordinance, is
greater than is reasonable or safe under the conditions found to exist upon
such streets. It is hereby declared that the prima facie speed limit shall be
as set forth when signs are erected giving notice thereof by the city traffic
engineer.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 75; Ord. No. 9893, § 1, 9-15-03)
   Editor's note – As of the time of this recodification, there have been no
streets designated under the provisions codified as §
20-146.
Sec. 20-146.1. Special speed limit reductions in temporary traffic control
zones.
The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to establish a temporary reduced
speed limit, within temporary traffic control zones, for the duration of
roadway construction or maintenance if the current speed limit set by ordinance
is not reasonable nor safe under the existing conditions. Such reduced speed
limits shall be effective when signs are erected giving notice thereof, and the
current speed limit signs are removed, covered or turned.
(Ord. No. 7331, § 1, 1-2-90; Ord. No. 9436, § 1, 8-7-00; Ord. No. 9893, § 2, 9-
15-03)
Sec. 20-146.2. Special speed limit reductions during nighttime hours.
The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to establish a reduced speed
limit, during nighttime hours, sunset to sunrise, if the current speed limit
set by ordinance is not reasonable nor safe under the existing conditions. Such
reduced speed limits shall be effective when signs are erected giving notice
thereof.
(Ord. No. 7710, § 1, 11-18-91; Ord. No. 9893, § 3, 9-15-03)
Sec. 20-146.3. Speeding in temporary traffic control zone prohibited.
A person shall not drive in a temporary traffic control zone at a speed greater
than the speed posted for that zone. Violation of this section shall constitute
a civil traffic violation punishable by a mandatory minimum fine of two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.00). No judge may suspend the imposition of the minimum
fine which shall be imposed in addition to any fines imposed for violation of
Arizona Revised Statutes Section 28-701. Such fines shall only be assessed if
signs have been erected upon or around the temporary traffic control zone which
are clearly visible from the highway and which state substantially the
following: Warning - $250.00 fine for speeding in this work zone.
(Ord. No. 9436, § 2, 8-7-00; Ord. No. 9488, § 2, 11-20-00)
Sec. 20-147. Regulation of speed by traffic signals.
The traffic engineer is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic signals so
as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner at speeds
slightly at variance from the speeds otherwise applicable within the district
or at intersections and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 76)
Sec. 20-148. Following fire or rescue apparatus.
The driver of any vehicle, except one on official business, shall not follow
any fire apparatus or fire rescue vehicle traveling in response to a fire alarm
or request for medical or rescue services closer than five hundred (500) feet.
Except when on official business, it is unlawful to drive a vehicle within five
hundred (500) feet of fire apparatus which has stopped in response to a fire
alarm.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 77; Ord. No. 5391, § 12, 8-3-81; Ord. No. 5931, § 12, 12-
19-83)
Sec. 20-149. Driving over fire hose.
No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of a fire department when
laid down, on any street, private driveway or alley, to be used at any fire or
alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire department official in command.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 78)
   State Law References: Similar Provisions, A.R.S. § 28-897.
Sec. 20-150. Permission required for processions and parades; compliance with
chapter.
No procession or parade shall occupy, march, or proceed along any street or
sidewalk except in accordance with written permission granted by the city
traffic engineer and such other regulations as are set forth in this chapter
which may apply. Written requests shall be made a minimum of fourteen (14) days
in advance. This section shall not apply to funeral processions, except that
the chief of police may regulate such processions as unreasonably interfere
with normal traffic flow or pose a threat to public peace or safety.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 79; Ord. No. 4667, § 1, 6-20-77; Ord. No. 6308, § 1, 9-
16-85)
Sec. 20-151. Reserved.
   Editors Note: Section 20-151, prohibiting driving through processions,
derived from the 1953 Code, ch. 17, § 80, was repealed by § 1 of Ord. No. 5931,
adopted Dec. 19, 1983.
Sec. 20-152. Method of driving in processions.
Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right-
hand edge of the roadway as practical and shall follow the vehicle ahead as
close as is practical and safe.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 81)
Sec. 20-153. Reserved.
   Editors Note: Section 20-153, prohibiting driving on sidewalks except at a
driveway, derived from the 1953 Code, ch. 17, § 82, was repealed by § 1 of Ord.
No. 5931, adopted Dec. 19, 1983.
Sec. 20-154. Operation of unsafe vehicles.
No person shall drive or move any motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer or
combination thereof on any street or highway when any such vehicle is in such
condition as to be a potential hazard to any other person or vehicles upon such
street or highway. This section is particularly directed against vehicles with
damaged, torn or loose fenders, doors or other parts likely or liable to injure
other persons, damage other vehicles or any other property.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 85)
Sec. 20-155. Limitations on U-turns.
The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle on a city street or
highway so as to proceed in the opposite direction:
   Sec. 20-155(1). At any intersection controlled by a traffic-control signal,
whether a green indication or a green arrow when signs are erected prohibiting
such turns. (Ord. No. 4508, § 2, 6-21-76)
   Sec. 20-155(2). Upon any street or highway in a business district, except
when on a divided highway or street, or part thereof.
   Sec. 20-155(3). Upon any street or highway other than divided highways,
except at intersections.
   Sec. 20-155(4). Except when such movement can be made on a street or highway
in safety and without interfering with other traffic. The driver shall yield
the right-of-way to any approaching vehicle that is so near as to be an
immediate danger. (Ord. No. 7645, § 1, 6-17-91)
   Sec. 20-155(5). At such places where such turns are prohibited pursuant to
and in the manner provided by section
20-115.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 87; Ord. No. 1921, § 1, 4-21-58; Ord. No. 2544, § 1, 11-
18-63)
Sec. 20-156. Obstructing intersections, crosswalks.
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is
sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to
accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of
other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic- control signal
indication to proceed.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 89)
Sec. 20-157. Reserved.
   Editors Note: Ord. No. 9985, § 1, adopted June 21, 2004, repealed §
20-157, which pertained to left turns prohibited and derived from Ord. No.
4000, § 1, 3-26-73; Ord. No. 4885, § 1, 10-16-78; Ord. No. 5001, §§ 1, 2, 6-25-
79; Ord. No. 5608, § 1, 6-28-82; Ord. No. 6307, § 1, 9-16-85; Ord. No. 7731, §
1, 12-9-91; Ord. No. 8160, § 1, 11-15-93; Ord. No. 8341, § 1, 8-1-94.
Sec. 20-158. Regulation of towing services.
   Sec. 20-158(1). The chief of police will supervise and regulate towing
services upon the streets and rights-of-way of the city for disabled, wrecked,
abandoned, stolen, unlawfully parked vehicles and vehicles seized as evidence.
When an operator or owner of a vehicle has no preference or is unable to
request a preference, the vehicle will be towed according to the provisions of
agreements procured by the purchasing agent through competitive bidding
governing towing services.
(Ord. No. 4117, § 1, 12-10-73; Ord. No. 4346, § 1, 4-21-75; Ord. No. 4957, §§
1--3, 4-9-79)
Sec. 20-159. Traffic signal preemptor devices.
   Sec. 20-159(1). It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by the
city traffic engineer to utilize any preemptor device to control an official
traffic-control device within the City of Tucson.
   Sec. 20-159(2). A civil sanction of not less than two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00), which shall not be suspended, shall be imposed on any person found
responsible for a violation of minor section (1).
(Ord. No. 5931, § 13, 12-19-83)
Sec. 20-160. Use of handheld mobile telephone or portable electronic device;
prohibited conduct; exceptions.
   A.   Definitions.
   1.   “Hands-free use” means the use of a mobile communication device or
portable electronic device without the use of either hand by employing an
internal feature of, or an attachment to, the device.
   2.   “Mobile communication device” and “portable electronic device” means a
wireless communication device that is designed to engage in calls; and/or
receive and transmit text, images, and/or data; but excludes devices that are
physically or electronically integrated into a motor vehicle and are operated
hands-free so that the user composes, sends, accesses, communicates or receives
messages or data without the use of a hand except to activate, deactivate or
initiate the hands-free use.
   3.   “Operating a motor vehicle” means being in actual physical control of a
motor vehicle on a highway or street and includes being temporarily stopped
because of traffic, a traffic light or stop sign or otherwise, but excludes
operating a motor vehicle when the vehicle has pulled over to the side of the
road or off an active roadway and has stopped at a location in which the
vehicle can safely remain stationary.
   B.   No person shall, except as otherwise provided in this section, use a
mobile communication device or portable electronic device while operating a
motor vehicle upon a street or highway, regardless of whether the motor vehicle
is in motion or not, unless that device is specifically designed or configured
to allow hands-free use and is used in that manner while operating a motor
vehicle.
   C.   Exemptions. This section shall not apply to:
   1.   The use of a mobile communication device or portable electronic device
for the sole purpose of communicating with any of the following regarding an
immediate emergency situation:
   a.   An emergency response operator;
   b.   An ambulance company;
   c.   Fire department and rescue service personnel;
   d.   Law enforcement personnel;
   e.   A hospital; or
   f.   A physician's office or health clinic.
   2.   The activation or deactivation of hands-free use, as long as the mobile
telephone or portable electronic device is securely configured and attached to
the vehicle or integrated into the vehicle.
   3.   Law enforcement and public safety personnel, and persons operating
authorized emergency vehicles, using a mobile communications device or portable
electronic device while operating a vehicle in the course and scope of his or
her duties.
   D.   Penalty.
   1.   A violation of this section is a civil traffic violation, and is a
primary offense, meaning that a law enforcement officer may initiate a stop and
issue a citation to a person operating a motor vehicle for a violation of this
section if the law enforcement officer has reasonable cause to believe there is
a violation of this section.
   2.   A person who violates this section and is not involved in a motor
vehicle collision is subject to a civil penalty of $50 for the first violation,
$100 for the second violation, and $200 for the third or any subsequent
violation.
   3.   A person who violates this section and is involved in a motor vehicle
collision is subject to a civil penalty of a minimum amount of $250.
(Ord. No. 11442, § 3, 3-21-17, eff. 5-1-17; Ord. No. 11520, § 1, 1-23-18, eff.
2-1-18)
Sec. 20-161.   Racing of vehicles prohibited; definitions; penalties.
   (a)   Racing motor vehicles prohibited. A person shall not drive a motor
vehicle or participate in any manner in a race, speed competition or contest,
drag race or acceleration contest, exhibition of speed or acceleration, or for
the purpose of making a speed record, on a street or highway.
   (b)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section:
      "Drag race" means either:
      (1)   The operation of two (2) or more motor vehicles from a point side
by side at accelerating speeds in a competitive attempt to outdistance each
other; or
      (2)   The operation of one (1) or more motor vehicles over a common
selected course and from the same point for the purpose of comparing the
relative speeds or power of acceleration of the motor vehicle or motor vehicles
within a certain distance or time limit.
      "Motor vehicle" has the same meaning as provided in Section 28-101 of the
Arizona Revised Statutes.
      "Race" or "racing" means the use of one (1) or more motor vehicles in an
attempt to outgain or outdistance another motor vehicle or prevent another
motor vehicle from passing.
   (c)   A person who violates this section is guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor.
In addition to any penalties otherwise provided by law, when any person is
arrested or given a citation for operating a motor vehicle in violation of this
section, a peace officer is authorized to impound the motor vehicle for thirty
(30) days.
   (d)   If a vehicle is impounded pursuant to this section, the impounding
agency shall follow the procedures set forth in A.R.S. §§ 28-3512- 3515, just
as if the vehicle had been impounded pursuant to A.R.S. § 28-3511.
(Ord. 11452, § 1, 4-19-17; Ord. 11821, § 1, 3-9-21)
Secs. 20-162--20-172. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI.
ONE-WAY STREETS AND STOP STREETS
Sec. 20-173. Signs required.
Whenever any provision of this Code or any ordinance of the city designates any
through street, one-way street or alley, the traffic engineer shall place and
maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be effective
unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful
traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of
traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 92)
Sec. 20-174. Through streets.
Those streets or portions of streets designated by ordinance shall be through
streets for the purpose of this section. Three (3) copies of current ordinances
designating such streets or portions of streets as through streets shall be on
file by the city clerk.
(Ord. No. 4070, § 1, 8-6-73)
   Editors Note: Ord. No. 4070, § 1, amended §
20-174 to read as herein set out. Through streets have been designated by 1953
Code, ch. 17, § 93 as supplemented in 1957 and as amended by:
   Ord. No. 1925, § 2, 2-19-62
   Ord. No. 1935, § 5, 8-3-59
   Ord. No. 2265, § 1, 2-19-62
   Ord. No. 2484, § 1, 7-8-63
   Ord. No. 2967, § 1, 2-6-67
   Ord. No. 3111, § 1, 4-15-68
   Ord. No. 3752, § 1, 12-23-71
   Ord. No. 4051, § 1, 7-9-73
   Ord. No. 4274, § 1, 1-20-75
   Ord. No. 4509, § 2, 6-21-76
   Ord. No. 4886, §§ 1, 2, 10-16-78
Sec. 20-175. Stop sign required at each intersection with through street.
Whenever any provision of this Code or any ordinance of the city designates and
describes a through street, it shall be the duty of the traffic engineer to
place and maintain a stop sign on each and every street intersecting such
through street or intersecting that portion thereof described and designated as
such by any ordinance of the city.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 94)
Sec. 20-176. Traffic engineer to designate hazardous intersections for "stop."
The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to determine and designate
intersections where particular hazard exists upon other than through streets
and to determine whether vehicles shall stop at one (1) or more entrances to
any such intersections, and shall erect a "stop" sign at every such place where
a stop is required.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 95; Ord. No. 1941, § 1, 8-17-59)
Sec. 20-176.1. Traffic to stop at intersection when traffic signals are out of
service.
When an intersection traffic signal is out of service for any reason, all
vehicles shall come to a complete stop upon any approaching roadway at any such
intersection and shall proceed only when safe to do so after yielding to any
vehicle on the right, or to any vehicle or pedestrian lawfully within the
intersection. This procedure shall be in effect until a traffic or police
officer establishes intersection point control.
(Ord. No. 7332, § 1, 1-2-90)
Sec. 20-177. Traffic engineer to designate hazardous intersections for "yield".
The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to determine and designate
intersections where a particular hazard exists and to determine whether
vehicles on one of the intersecting streets shall yield the right-of-way to
vehicles on the other street or streets and to erect a "yield right-of-way"
sign at every place where such a sign is needed.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 95; Ord. No. 1941, § 1, 8-17-59)
   State Law References: Location, specifications for stop signs. A.R.S. § 28-
855.
Sec. 20-178. Reserved.
   Editors Note: Section 20-178, requiring obedience to yield right-of-way
signs, derived from the 1953 Code, ch. 17, § 96, and Ord. No. 1941, § 2,
adopted Aug. 17, 1959, was repealed by § 1 of Ord. No. 5931, adopted Dec. 19,
1983.
Sec. 20-179. One-way streets and alleys.
   Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys described by
ordinance, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction when
signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every
intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited. Three (3)
copies of current ordinances designating the streets and alleys governed by
this section shall be kept on file by the city clerk.
   (1)   West on the east-west alley immediately north of the Mission Village
apartments at 7001 East Golf Links Road and between the drainageway east to the
western property line of the shopping center.
   (2)   East on the east-west alley between Chantilly Avenue and Van Buren
Avenue and between Broadway Boulevard and Twelfth Street.
   (3)   North on the alley immediately east of Alamo Wash between the Monterey
Village Shopping Center and Hawthorne Street.
   (4)   East on the alley immediately south of the Monterey Village Shopping
Center between the Alamo Wash and Rook Avenue.
   (5)   East on the east-west alley between Congress Street and Pennington
Street, connecting Sixth Avenue and Scott Avenue.
   (6)   West on the east-west alley between Congress Street and Broadway
Boulevard, connecting Sixth Avenue and Scott Avenue.
   (7)   West on the east-west alley between 3rd and 4th Avenues and between
24th and 25th Streets.
   (8)   Northeast on the northeast-southwest alley between Princeton Drive and
Rutgers Place from Lehigh Drive east to the north-south alleyway.
   (9)   South on the north-south alley east of Walter Douglas Elementary
School, connecting Mohave Road and Navajo Street.
   (10)   West on Alameda Street from Toole Avenue-Sixth Avenue intersection to
Church Avenue.
   (11)   South on Arizona Avenue from Thirteenth Street to Fourteenth Street.
   (12)   East on Broadway Boulevard between the west line of the Broadway
Boulevard underpass and the east line of the intersection of Granada Avenue and
Broadway Boulevard.
   (13)   West on Adams Street from approximately 150 feet west of Camilla
Boulevard to Camilla Boulevard.
   (14)   West on Congress Street from Herbert Avenue-Toole Avenue intersection
to Broadway Boulevard-Granada Avenue intersection.
   (15)   West on Corral Street from Scott Avenue to Stone Avenue.
   (16)   West on Eighth Street from First Avenue to Third Avenue. City of
Tucson Solid Waste vehicles exempt between the hours of 5:30 a.m. to 7:30 a.m.
   (17)   North on El Paso Avenue from Cushing Street to Simpson Street.
   (18)   North on Fifth Avenue from Twelfth Street to Thirteenth Street.
   (19)   North on Forgeus Avenue from Thirty-Sixth Street to Forgeus
Stravenue.
   (20)   South on Herbert Avenue from Sixth Street to Eighth Street.
   (21)   South on Herbert Avenue from Fifth Street to 215 feet south of Fifth
Street.
   (22)   North on Hoff Avenue from Eighth Street to Fifth Street.
   (23)   South on the southbound Kino Parkway on-ramp (Ramp A) from Twenty-
Second Street.
   (24)   North on the northbound Kino Parkway off-ramp (Ramp B) to Twenty-
Second Street.
   (25)   South on the southbound Kino Parkway off-ramp (Ramp C) to Twenty-
Second Street.
   (26)   North on the northbound Kino Parkway on-ramp (Ramp D) from Twenty-
Second Street.
   (27)   East on the south leg of Linden Street between Sixth Avenue and First
Avenue.
   (28)   West on the north leg of Linden Street between Sixth Avenue and First
Avenue.
   (29)   South on Meyer Avenue from Eighteenth Street to Twenty-Second Street.
   (30)   North on Mountain Avenue from Seventh Street to Sixth Street.
   (31)   East on Pennington Street from Congress Street to Scott Avenue.
   (32)   North on Rubio Avenue from Nineteenth Street to Eighteenth Street.
   (33)   North on Samaniego Avenue from Simpson Street to Carrillo Street.
   (34)   South on Scott Avenue from McCormick Street to Fourteenth Street.
   (35)   East on Sequoyah Street between Forgeus Avenue to Treat Avenue.
   (36)   West on Simpson Street from Stone Avenue to Meyer Avenue.
   (37)   East on Sixth Street between Country Club Road and the west end of
Fifth-Sixth Street transition.
   (38)   West on the alley between Sixth Street and Seventh Street, connecting
Mountain Avenue and Santa Rita Avenue.
   (39)   Speedway Boulevard underpass frontage roads: East of Union Pacific
Railroad, westbound on north frontage road to road connecting north frontage
road with south frontage road, south on this connecting road to south frontage
road, east on south frontage road to end of frontage road; west of Union
Pacific Railroad, east on south frontage road to road connecting south frontage
road with north frontage road, north on this connecting road to north frontage
road, west on north frontage road to end of frontage road.
   (40)   South on Stone Avenue from the south line of the intersection of
Stone Avenue, Toole Avenue and Franklin Street to the north line of Broadway
Boulevard.
   (41)   Northwest on Toole Avenue from Broadway to its intersection with
Fourth Avenue.
   (42)   West on Winsett Street from Treat Avenue to approximately 200 feet
west of Country Club Road.
(1953 Code, ch. 17, § 98; Ord. No. 1924, § 3, 7-6-59; Ord. No. 3653, § 1, 1-24-
72; Ord. No. 3753, § 1, 12-13-71; Ord. No. 4003, § 1, 4-2-73; Ord. No. 4132, §
1, 2-19-74; Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 6-21-76; Ord. No. 4275, § 1, 1-20-75; Ord. No.
5050, § 1, 10-15-79; Ord. No. 6120 § 1, 11-19-84; Ord. No. 6565, § 1, 11-3-86;
Ord. No. 6590, §§ 1 and 2, 12-8-86; Ord. No. 6705, §§ 1 and 2, 5-18-87; Ord.
No. 6797, §§ 1 and 2, 9-21-87; Ord. No. 6950, §§ 1 and 2, 5-16-88; Ord. No.
6974, §§ 1 and 2, 6-6-88; Ord. No. 7066, §§ 1 and 2, 10-17-88; Ord. No. 7080,
§§ 1 and 2, 10-24-88; Ord. No. 7137, §§ 1 and 2, 2-6-89; Ord. No. 7251, §§ 1
and 2, 8-7-89; Ord. No. 7442, §§ 1 and 2, 7-2-90; Ord. No. 7484, §§ 1 and 2, 9-
17-90; Ord. No. 7542, §§ 1 and 2, 1-7-91; Ord. No. 7750, §§ 1 and 2, 1-13-92;
Ord. No. 7903, § 2, 9-14-92; Ord. No. 7914, § 2, 10-5-92; Ord. No. 7972, §§ 1
and 2, 1-11-93; Ord. No. 7979, §§ 1 and 2, 2-1-93; Ord. No. 8342, § 2, 8-1-94;
Ord. No. 8687, § 2, 5-6-96; Ord. No. 8788, §§ 1 and 2, 12-16-96; Ord. No. 8927,
§§ 1 and 2, 9-2-97; Ord. No. 9133, § 2, 10-5-98; Ord. No. 9435, § 2, 8-7-00;
Ord. No. 9760, § 2, 9-3-02; Ord. No. 10181, § 1, 8-2-05; Ord. No. 10940, § 1,
10-25-11; Ord. No. 11091, § 2, 7-9-13; Ord. No. 11606, § 2, 12-4-18; Ord. No.
11728, § 2, 2-19-20; Ord. No. 11738, § 2, 3-3-20; Ord. No. 11887, § 2, 12-7-21;
Ord. No. 11938, § 2, 7-12-22; Ord. No. 12019, § 2, 7-18-23; Ord. No. 12191, §
2, 9-23-25)
Secs. 20-180--20-199. Reserved.
ARTICLE VII.
STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING*
__________
*   Editors Note: Ord. No. 9196, § 1, adopted Jan. 25, 1999, repealed the
former Art. VII, §§ 20-193--20-277, which pertained to stopping, standing and
parking, and enacted a new Art. VII, §§
20-200--
20-282 to read as herein set out. For more information, see the Code
Comparative Table.
__________
DIVISION 1.
GENERALLY
Sec. 20-200. Unlawful parking prohibited; classification; parking defined;
parties liable; applicability of regulations; continuous violations; mandatory
fines and fees; community service.
   (a)   Classification. Violation of any provision of this article which
regulates the time, place, or method of parking shall constitute a civil
infraction.
   (b)   Definition. Parking means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied
or not.
   (c)   Parties liable. The owner(s) of the vehicle and the person who parked
or placed the vehicle where the violation occurred shall be jointly and
individually liable for the violation and for the fine and fees prescribed
therefor.
   (d)   Applicability of regulations. The provisions of this article
prohibiting the standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at
those times herein specified or as indicated on official signs except when it
is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in
compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic-control
device.
   (e)   Continuous violations. Where parking is time restricted, each full
time period the vehicle is unlawfully parked beyond the posted time limit shall
constitute a separate violation. In all other cases, each day the violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
   (f)   Mandatory fines and fees. Unless otherwise specifically provided by
this article, the fines and fees for violating any provision of this article
shall be mandatory, no part of which may be suspended or waived by the court.
   (g)   Community service. Community service work may be substituted for fines
and fees in accordance with section 1-8(4) of this Code.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99; Ord. No. 10418, § 3, 6-12-07; Ord. No. 11400, §
3, 9-20-16)
Sec. 20-201. Reserved.
   Editors Note: Ord. No. 9492, § 3, adopted Nov. 27, 2000, repealed §
20-201, which pertained to administrative enforcement fee. See the Code
Comparative Table.
Sec. 20-202. Prima facie evidence of parking infraction.
No civil infraction may be established except upon proof by a preponderance of
the evidence; provided, however, that a parking violation notice, or copy
thereof, issued in accordance with this chapter and the Local Rules of Practice
and Procedure in City Court Civil Proceedings shall be prima facie evidence
thereof and shall be admissible in any judicial or administrative proceeding as
to the correctness of the facts specified therein.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99)
Sec. 20-203. Failure to respond to citation; default fee; booting and
impounding vehicle authorized, booting and impound fees; damages to boot.
   (a)   Arizona registered vehicles. When a citation is issued to a vehicle
registered within the State of Arizona, Park Tucson shall within seven (7)
working days send a citation letter to the owner address on file with the
Arizona Department of Motor Vehicles advising the owner of the citation and
containing the date, time, and location of the violation as well as the vehicle
description and violation description; or a duplicate copy of the citation.
   (b)   Failure to respond. If the owner or operator of the vehicle involved
in a civil parking violation or infraction fails to respond within thirty (30)
calendar days from the day the citation was issued by one (1) of the prescribed
methods in Rule 7 of the Local Rules of Practice and Procedure in City Court
Civil Proceedings, a $50.00 default fee pursuant to T.C.C. section
8-6.7 shall be assessed, and a $20.00 Time Payment Fee pursuant to A.R.S. 12-
116, and, a $20.00 Case Processing Fee pursuant to T.C.C. section
8-6.5(a), plus surcharge and the court shall within seven (7) working days of
the default date send a default letter to the owner address on file with the
Arizona Department of Motor Vehicles, advising the owner that the citation is
in default and that the vehicle may be subject to boot or impoundment as set
forth in subsection (d).
   (c)   Foreign registered vehicles. If the owner or operator of the vehicle,
registered in a state or jurisdiction other than Arizona, involved in a civil
parking violation or infraction fails to respond within thirty (30) calendar
days from the day the citation was issued by Park Tucson or one (1) of the
prescribed methods in Rule 7 of the Local Rules of Practice and Procedure in
City Court Civil Proceedings, a default fee pursuant to T.C.C. section
8-6.7 shall be assessed, and a $20.00 Time Payment Fee pursuant to A.R.S. 12-
116, and, a $20.00 Case Processing Fee pursuant to T.C.C. section
8-6.5(a) plus surcharge.
   (d)   [Booting, impoundment.] In addition to actions taken under section
20-203(b) or (c) above, the citing authority may boot, impound or cause to be
booted or impounded any motor vehicle owned by a person who has three (3) or
more unpaid civil parking infractions or has failed to respond to the civil
parking infractions as set forth in section
20-203(b) or (c), giving notice that there shall be a hearing before a limited
special magistrate within forty-eight (48) hours of the booting or impoundment,
excluding weekends and holidays. The owner of the vehicle which was booted or
impounded may post a bond in the amount of the booting and/or impound fees,
damages or replacement cost of the boot if any, and potential fines in order to
have the vehicle released pending the hearing. The limited special magistrate
shall conduct the hearing as follows:
   (1)   The limited special magistrate shall conduct a hearing where the sole
issue shall be to determine whether the vehicle was owned by the person at the
time of the civil parking infractions, determine whether the infractions have
been paid or otherwise responded to, and determine whether the boot was damaged
or taken from the vehicle.
   (2)   If the owner fails to appear as directed by the citing authority, the
limited special magistrate shall enter a default judgment in the amount of the
unpaid fines, booting fees, impound fees, other costs imposable under this
section and order the vehicle impounded until all fines, fees and other costs
imposable under this section are paid or the vehicle is disposed of pursuant to
sections
20-13 and
20-14 of this Code.
   (3)   For purposes of this hearing, the transference of title of the vehicle
from the owner of the vehicle when the civil parking infraction occurred to
another person after the vehicle was booted or impounded is not a defense to
nonpayment of the fines and the vehicle will not be released until the unpaid
fines, booting and/or impound fees and any other costs imposable under this
section are paid, except pursuant to subsections (d)(6) and (7) of this
section.
   (4)   If a continuance is granted to the defendant for good cause, the
booted or impounded vehicle may be released upon the posting of a cash bond in
the amount of the booting and/or impound fees, other costs imposable under this
section and potential fines. If a continuance is granted to the city for good
cause, the impounded or booted vehicle shall be released forthwith without the
necessity of a bond.
   (5)   If the case is continued, the limited special magistrate shall set the
hearing within thirty (30) days.
   (6)   If judgment is entered in favor of the owner, the booted/impounded
vehicle shall be released forthwith to the operator or owner of the vehicle,
unless the boot was damaged or taken, without any booting and/or impound fees,
and any bond posted shall be returned to the person posting the bond unless the
boot was damaged or taken, then the vehicle shall not be released nor the bond
released until the repair or replacement cost for the boot is paid.
   (7)   If judgment is entered in favor of the city, the limited special
magistrate shall order the payment of unpaid fines and fees booting and/or
impound fees and damages or replacement cost of the boot, if any. The limited
special magistrate may order the vehicle impounded until all fines, fees and
damages or replacement cost of the boot, if any, are paid or the vehicle
disposed of pursuant to sections
20-13 and
20-14 of this Code. The limited special magistrate may allow the vehicle
released if the owner shows good cause and agrees to make payments. However,
the booting and/or impound fees and any damages or replacement cost of the
boot, if any, shall be paid before the vehicle is released to the owner.
   (8)   The booting fee shall be in the amount of seventy-five dollars
($75.00) and the impound fee shall be in the amount of the towing or removal
costs plus storage fees. These fees are hereby declared to be cost recovery
measures, administrative in nature, separate from and in addition to any civil
penalty imposed.
   (9)   Any person who damages a boot on a vehicle either by attempting to
remove the boot or by trying to drive off with the boot or by taking the boot
is responsible for the repair or replacement cost of the boot. The limited
special magistrate shall order the repair or replacement cost of the boot be
paid before the release of any vehicle.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99; Ord. No. 10418, § 3, 6-12-07; Ord. No. 11324, §
1, 12-8-15; Ord. No. 11400, § 3, 9-20-16)
Sec. 20-204. Booting or impounding list.
   (a)   When a vehicle has three (3) or more unpaid civil parking infractions
or the vehicle owner has failed to respond to the civil parking infractions as
set forth in section
20-203(b) or (c), the city court shall place that vehicle on the booting/
impound list.
   (b)   After a vehicle has been placed on the booting/impound list, any other
vehicle owned by the owner of that vehicle is also subject to booting and/or
impoundment. Prior to the booting or impoundment of any vehicle registered in a
state or jurisdiction other than the State of Arizona, where such booting or
impoundment is based solely on section
20-204(b) or (c), a boot/impound notice shall be affixed to the vehicle at
least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of any booting or impoundment advising
the owner and/or operator of the vehicle that the vehicle has been placed on
the booting/impound list and is now subject to booting or impoundment without
further notice.
   (c)   Twenty-four (24) hours after a boot/impound notice has been affixed to
a vehicle pursuant to section
20-203(d), that vehicle, as well as any other vehicle owned by the same owner,
shall be subject to booting or impoundment without further notice.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99; Ord. No. 10418, § 3, 6-12-07)
Secs. 20-205--20-209. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 20-210. Director of transportation; duties; Park Tucson Administrator
duties; authorization to issue citations and collect violation fines.
   (a)   The director of transportation, or the director's designee, shall
establish, change, remove, or prohibit, as conditions may require, boulevard
stops, pedestrian lanes, parking spaces, parking time limits, safety and
loading zones, public carrier stands and other necessities of facilitating
parking.
   (b)   The Administrator of Park Tucson shall:
      (1)   regulate parking and may issue citations and collect violation
fines for any regulation relating to stopping, standing, or parking motor
vehicles contained in any chapter of this Code; and
      (2)   Establish and maintain a schedule of fees, approved by the Mayor
and Council, related to on-street and off-street parking permits and the fines
for violations thereof.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99; Ord. No. 10418, § 3, 6-12-07; Ord. No. 10918, §
2, 8-9-11; Ord. No. 11324, § 2, 12-8-15; Ord. No. 11513, § 1, 12-19-17)
Sec. 20-211. Administrative guidelines.
The director of transportation has authority to prepare such administrative
guidelines as may be deemed necessary and desirable to implement the provisions
of this article. Three (3) copies of these guidelines will be kept on file by
the city clerk.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99)
Sec. 20-212. Civilian volunteer police assist specialists authorized to issue
citations.
Civilian volunteer police assist specialists appointed at the discretion and
under the direction of the chief of police are hereby authorized to issue
citations enforcing any regulation relating to the stopping, standing or
parking of motor vehicles contained in any chapter of this Code.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99)
Sec. 20-213. Parking enforcement agents exempt.
Any stopping, standing or parking restrictions provided in this article shall
not apply to any police officer, peace officer, or parking enforcement agent
when such stopping, standing or parking is for the purpose of actual
performance of law enforcement duty.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99)
Secs. 20-214--20-219. Reserved.
DIVISION 3.
PARKING FOR INDIVIDUALS WITH PHYSICAL DISABILITIES
Sec. 20-220. Parking for individuals with physical disabilities; designation;
enforcement.
Parking spaces subject to these provisions shall be clearly and conspicuously
designated as being reserved for individuals with physical disabilities. Such
designation shall include a standard symbolic disabled parking sign bearing the
number of this section of this Code and conforming to specifications for design
and placement as approved by the director of transportation, or the director’s
designee. The posting of such sign or signs shall authorize enforcement of the
provisions of this division and shall thereby constitute consent by the owner
of the property to enforcement of this division.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99; Ord. No. 11400, § 3, 9-20-16)
Sec. 20-221. Penalty.
Unless otherwise specifically provided, the penalty for violating any ordinance
or provision of article VII, division 3, which regulates the time, place, or
method of parking a vehicle shall be a mandatory base fine of two hundred
eleven dollars and forty-eight cents ($211.48), no part of which may be
suspended or waived by the court, plus any assessments imposed under state law.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99; Ord. No. 9492, § 3, 11-27-00; Ord. No. 9867, § 1,
6-23-03; Ord. No. 11295, § 1, 8-5-15; Ord. No. 11324, § 3, 12-8-15)
Sec. 20-222. Parking prohibited in spaces reserved for individuals with
physical disabilities.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle, other than one bearing
a license plate with the international wheelchair symbol or displaying a
placard issued under state law for this purpose, in a parking space reserved
for use by individuals with physical disabilities whether on public property or
private property available for public use, when such space is designated as
described in section
20-220 above.
   (b)   If the owner or operator of the vehicle involved in a violation of
this section, subsequently produces to Park Tucson administrator or to Tucson
City Court proof of possession of a valid placard issued under state law for
these purposes, the fine shall be reduced to twenty dollars ($20.00), no part
of which may be suspended or waived by the court. This fine includes any
assessments imposed under state law.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99; Ord. No. 9492, § 3, 11-27-00; Ord. No. 11400, §
3, 9-20-16)
Sec. 20-222.1. Parking prohibited in access aisles of spaces reserved for
individuals with physical disabilities.
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle, including one with a disabled plate or
placard, to park in the access aisle of such space as designated by diagonal
white or yellow lines spaced at approximately two-foot intervals.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99)
Sec. 20-222.2. Paratransit loading zones.
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, it is unlawful to stop, stand, or
park a vehicle in any provisional paratransit loading zone. The provisions of
this section shall not apply to vehicles bearing a license plate with the
international wheelchair symbol or displaying a placard issued under state law
for this purpose, or to authorized commercial paratransit vehicles, when any
such vehicles are actively engaged in loading or unloading of passengers. In no
case shall the stop for the loading or unloading of passengers exceed twenty
(20) minutes.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99)
Sec. 20-223. Wheelchair curb access ramps.
It is unlawful to stop, stand, or park a vehicle in such a manner as to block
or deny access to a wheelchair curb access ramp. A violation of this section is
punishable by a fine of one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) and such fine
shall not be suspended. This fine includes any assessments imposed under state
law.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99; Ord. No. 9492, § 3, 11-27-00; Ord. No. 11400, §
3, 9-20-16)
Sec. 20-224. Reserved.
DIVISION 4.
BASIC PARKING CONTROLS
Sec. 20-225. Penalty.
Unless otherwise specifically provided, the penalty for violating any provision
of article VII, division 4, which regulates the time, place, or method of
parking a vehicle shall be a mandatory base fine of fourteen dollars and
seventy-five cents ($14.75), no part of which may be suspended or waived by the
court, plus any assessments imposed under state law.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99; Ord. No. 9492, § 3, 11-27-00; Ord. No. 9867, § 2,
6-23-03; Ord. No. 11324, § 4, 12-8-15)
Sec. 20-226. Designation of places angle parking permitted.
The director of transportation, or the director's designee, shall determine
upon what streets angle parking shall be permitted and shall mark or sign such
streets, but such angle parking shall not be indicated upon any federal aid or
state highway within the city unless the state highway commission has
determined by resolution or order entered in its minutes that the roadway is of
sufficient width to permit angle parking without interfering with the free
movement of traffic.
Angle parking shall not be intended or permitted at any place where passing
traffic would thereby be caused or required to drive upon the left side of a
two-way street.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99; Ord. No. 11400, § 3, 9-20-16)
Sec. 20-226.1. Obedience to angle parking signs, marking.
Upon those streets which have been signed or marked by the director of
transportation, or the director's designee, for angle parking, it is unlawful
to park a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway
indicated by such signs or marking.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99; Ord. No. 11400, § 3, 9-20-16)
Sec. 20-226.2. Parking at angle to load or unload merchandise.
When a vehicle is stopped for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise,
it is unlawful to park such vehicle at an angle to the curb or freight curb
loading zone designated by appropriate signs and markings for such purpose.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99)
Sec. 20-226.3. Angle parking.
Where signs are posted specifying the direction of a vehicle for angle parking,
it shall be unlawful to park a vehicle not in accordance with the signs.
(Ord. No. 9434, § 1, 8-7-00)
Sec. 20-226.4. Angle parking, direction.
Unless signs are posted directing otherwise, vehicles shall pull into angled
parking spaces while traveling in the same direction as the travel flow of the
nearest traffic lane and shall park facing the curb.
(Ord. No. 10418, § 3, 6-12-07)
Sec. 20-227. Designation of common-carrier passenger vehicle stands.
The director of transportation, or the director's designee, is hereby
authorized and required to establish bus stops and stands for other passenger
common-carrier motor vehicles other than taxicabs on such public streets, in
such places and in such number as the director of transportation, or the
director's designee, shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and
convenience to the public; and every such bus stop or other stand shall be
designated by appropriate signs.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99; Ord. No. 11400, § 3, 9-20-16)
Sec. 20-228. Taxicab stands--application for; location; signs required.
Upon receipt of a written application, the director of transportation is hereby
authorized to determine the location of taxicab stands and shall place and
maintain appropriate signs and/or markings indicating same. The written
application shall define the area wherein the taxicab stand is requested, the
size of zone requested, the hours of day during which the zone is needed, and
such other pertinent information as may be necessary for the director of
transportation to determine whether the application should be granted.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99)
Sec. 20-228.1. Same--Revocation.
The director of transportation may at any time, without notice, remove,
relocate or alter any taxicab stand issued under this section.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99)
Sec. 20-229. Time limit parking.
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, it is unlawful to park a vehicle
for longer than the time period posted. It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle
in the same time restricted space, or same type time restricted space within
the same block, for any portion of two (2) consecutive time periods.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99; Ord. No. 10418, § 3, 6-12-07)
Sec. 20-230. Designation of parking meter zones; authority to create, alter,
eliminate.
For the purposes of this division, the term “parking meter zones” means zones,
areas, or streets established or designated by the mayor and council where
parking meters may be installed by the Park Tucson administrator. The Park
Tucson administrator may convert existing time limit parking zones into parking
meter zones. The mayor and council may create, expand, change, or eliminate any
such zones.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99; Ord. No. 10918, § 3, 8-9-11; Ord. No. 11400, § 3,
9-20-16)
Sec. 20-230.1. Park Tucson administrator shall install within designated zones.
The Park Tucson administrator may cause parking meters to be installed in such
parking meter zones established by mayor and council for the purpose of and in
such numbers and at such places as may be necessary to regulate and control the
parking of vehicles therein.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99; Ord. No. 10918, § 3, 8-9-11; Ord. No. 11400, § 3,
9-20-16)
Sec. 20-230.2. Temporary suspension of operation--When granted.
   The Park Tucson administrator may temporarily suspend the operation of
parking meters upon request by contractors, merchants, or others, for bona fide
reasons if such suspension shall be in the interest of public safety, traffic
control, health, or the general welfare.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99; Ord. No. 10918, § 3, 8-9-11; Ord. No. 11400, § 3,
9-20-16)
Sec. 20-230.3. Same--Fees.
Request for suspension of parking meters shall be made upon forms supplied by
the city and filed with the director of transportation. Before meters are
suspended, the following fees shall be paid in full:
For each day, or part thereof:
The full parking fee that would otherwise be charged within a twenty-four-hour
time period.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99)
Sec. 20-230.4. Location; legend.
Parking meters installed in parking meter zones shall be placed at the curb
immediately adjacent to the individual parking spaces hereinafter described,
and each parking meter shall be so constructed and adjusted as to show or
display a signal that the space adjacent to which it is established is or is
not legally in use.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99)
Sec. 20-230.5. Spaces to be marked; parking in spaces.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle across any line or marking
designating the parking space for which a parking meter is used, or to park a
vehicle in such a position that the same shall not be entirely within the space
designated by such lines or markings.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle at a metered space in such a
way as to prevent another vehicle from parking in any adjacent space.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99; Ord. No. 9434, § 2, 8-7-00)
Sec. 20-230.6. Overtime parking prohibited; "feeding" meters prohibited.
   (a)   It is unlawful to park a vehicle in any space upon any street within a
parking meter zone adjacent to which a parking meter is established for more
than the length of time indicated on signs or meters maintained on the street
pursuant to this chapter, or for any time during which the meter is displaying
a signal indicating that such space is illegally in use, except during the time
necessary to set the meter to show legal parking.
   (b)   Overtime parking prohibited; "feeding" meters prohibited. It is
unlawful to add additional time to a parking meter beyond the maximum length of
time indicated on signs. It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle in the same
time restricted space for any portion of two (2) consecutive time periods.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99; Ord. No. 9434, § 3, 8-7-00; Ord. No. 10418, § 3,
6-12-07)
Sec. 20-230.7. Effective days and hours.
Time limit parking restrictions in metered zones, including effective days and
hours, shall be clearly posted on meters and/or signs.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99)
Sec. 20-230.8. Prima facie evidence of overtime parking.
The parking or standing of any motor vehicle in a parking meter space at which
zone the parking meter is displaying the flag, sign or signal showing that such
space is not legally in use shall constitute prima facie evidence that the
vehicle has been parked or allowed to stand in such zone for a period longer
than permitted by the provisions of this division.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99)
Sec. 20-230.9. Meters to show parking compliance.
Parking meters, when installed, shall be so adjusted as to show legal parking
upon the deposit of United States coins or other legal payment method in the
amounts indicated on such meters, during the periods of time stated on such
meters.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99)
Sec. 20-230.10. Deposit of slugs prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to deposit, or cause to be deposited, in any parking
meter, any slug, device or metallic substitute for coins of the United States.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99)
Sec. 20-230.11. Residential parking permit meter exemption.
The holder of a valid residential parking permit issued pursuant to §§
20-255 et seq. shall be authorized to park at any parking meter located in the
designated area for which the residential parking permit is issued, without
having to pay the metered rate and without being found in violation of any time
limitations otherwise imposed. This exemption shall not apply to parking at any
meters located outside of the designated area for which the permit has been
issued, including other residential parking permit areas.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99)
Sec. 20-230.12. Parking rates.
   (a)   Based on the advisory recommendations of the Park Tucson Commission
and the Park Tucson administrator, parking rates are subject to approval by
Mayor and Council.
   (b)   Two (2) copies of the current parking rate schedules and all future
rate schedules established under this section shall be filed with the city
clerk.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for persons occupying parking metered spaces to
fail to pay in accordance with the payment mechanisms posted on the meters and
the rates posted on the meters and approved by Mayor and Council.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99; Ord. No. 10418, § 3, 6-12-07; Ord. No. 10918, §
3, 8-9-11; Ord. No. 11400, § 3, 9-20-16)
Sec. 20-231. Police/fire vehicle parking.
Where signs are erected, giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful to park a
vehicle, other than a marked police or fire vehicle.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99)
Sec. 20-232. Government plated vehicles.
Where signs are erected, giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful to park a
vehicle not bearing government plates.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99)
Sec. 20-233. Specific vehicle type restrictions (RV, motorcycle, etc.).
Where signs are erected, giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful to park a
vehicle of body style, or type, different than that body style, or type of
which the signs(s) indicate.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99)
Sec. 20-234. Hazard flashers mandatory.
Where signs are erected, giving notice thereof, it shall be illegal to park a
vehicle without utilizing the vehicle's emergency hazard flashers. This
restriction may be posted in conjunction with, and in addition to, any other
section of this article.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99)
Sec. 20-235. Public parking prohibited in parking lots or spaces reserved for
city officers or employees.
   (a)   It is unlawful for any person not an officer or employee of the city
to stand or park a vehicle on city parking lots or parking spaces reserved for
or allocated to city employees or officers.
   (b)   It is unlawful for any officer or employee of the city to stand or
park a vehicle on city parking lots or parking spaces reserved for or allocated
to another city employee or officer without that officer's or employee's
permission.
   (c)   The provisions of this chapter relating to parking meters, and to the
enforcement of parking violations set forth in section
20-230, unless the context otherwise requires, shall apply to public use
designated parking spaces on such lots having city parking meters.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99)
Sec. 20-236. Height limit restriction.
It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle of height in excess of the clearly and
conspicuously posted height limit of an off-street parking facility.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99)
Sec. 20-237. Obedience to markings; double parking prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle in off-street parking facilities,
designed and maintained in accordance with Tucson Code chapter
23, except within the individually marked parking spaces. It shall be unlawful
to park a vehicle in such a manner as to block ingress or egress to another
legal parking space.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99)
Secs. 20-238--20-245. Reserved.
DIVISION 5.
NUISANCE PARKING CONTROLS
Sec. 20-246. Penalty.
Unless otherwise specifically provided, the penalty for violating any provision
of article VII, division 5, which regulates the time, place, or method of
parking a vehicle shall be a mandatory base fine of twenty-five dollars and
sixty-eight cents ($25.68), no part of which may be suspended or waived by the
court, plus any assessments imposed under state law.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99; Ord. No. 9492, § 3, 11-27-00; Ord. No. 9867, § 3,
6-23-03; Ord. No. 11295, § 2, 8-5-15; Ord. No. 11324, § 5, 12-8-15)
Sec. 20-247. Parking for certain purposes prohibited.
It is unlawful to park a vehicle upon any roadway for the purpose of:
   (1)   Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except for immediate
repairs necessitated by an emergency and necessary to be made before the
vehicle can be moved; or
   (2)   Displaying commercial exhibits, except by special permit lawfully
issued by the city.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99)
Sec. 20-248. Parking regulations for peddlers.
No peddler shall park a vehicle or alternating vehicles or series of vehicles
on any public street for the purpose of peddling food or wares for a period in
excess of sixty (60) continuous minutes, or in excess of one hundred twenty
(120) minutes in any 24-hour period at one (1) location. The parking of such
vehicle within a distance of three hundred (300) feet from the original parking
space shall be deemed one (1) location. No service from such vehicle to the
public shall be made from the traffic side or the side of the vehicle which
faces the center of the public street. However, such vehicle may park for such
purposes in the vicinity of a special event, such as a football game or other
sporting event, circus, fair, rodeo or parade, during the period of the event,
plus one (1) hour, prior to and after the event.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99)
Sec. 20-248.1. Parking regulations for peddlers in certain central business
district streets and at Silverbell Road/Camino del Cerro.
   (a)   Peddlers may not park a vehicle for the purpose of peddling food or
wares in the central business district upon Stone Avenue between Franklin
Street and 14th Street, and upon Congress Street and upon Pennington Street
between Sixth Avenue and Church Avenue, except in the red painted street zones
at the following designated areas:
   (1)   North side of Pennington Street, east of Stone Avenue;
   (2)   West side of Stone Avenue, north of Pennington Street;
   (3)   South side of Congress Street, east of Stone Avenue.
   (b)   Peddlers may park a vehicle for the purpose of peddling food or wares
at the northeast corner of the intersection of Silverbell Road and Camino del
Cerro in one of four designated stalls as assigned by the granted license
location.
   (1)   This pilot program shall sunset on July 1, 2027.
   Parking for such purposes at permitted areas is limited from 9:00 a.m. to 4:
00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and is not permitted on sidewalks.
   (c)   The permitted area may not be used for peddlers' vehicles all day on
special event days when the named streets are blocked off to vehicle traffic.
   (d)   Peddlers' vehicles must be removed immediately in event of an
emergency, and must be at least fifty (50) feet from any objecting business.
   (e)   Only one (1) peddler's vehicle is permitted for each permitted
designated area. The first peddler at the area each day shall have prior right
to the area until the vehicle is removed.
   (f)   The maximum size of a peddler's vehicle shall be forty-eight (48)
inches high, forty-eight (48) inches wide, and seventy-two (72) inches long.
   (g)   All items relating to the peddling activity must be kept in or under
the peddler's vehicle, and nothing placed on any public area adjacent to the
vehicle, including signs.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99; Ord. No. 12196, § 3, 10-21-25)
Sec. 20-249. Freight curb loading zones; location of provisional zones in
parking meter zones.
The director of transportation, or the director's designee, is hereby
authorized to determine the location of provisional freight curb loading zones
within any parking meter zone. The director of transportation, or the
director's designee, may at any time, without notice, remove, relocate or alter
any freight curb loading zone issued under this section.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99; Ord. No. 11400, § 3, 9-20-16)
Sec. 20-249.1. Same--When nonauthorized vehicles prohibited in provisional
zones.
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, it is unlawful to stop, stand or
park a vehicle in any provisional freight curb loading zone between the hours
of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday except public holidays,
however the provisions of this section shall not apply, when the vehicle's
hazard warning flashers are in operation, if the authorized commercial vehicle
or government-plated truck is parked in any provisional freight curb loading
zone for a period of time not to exceed thirty (30) minutes.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99)
Sec. 20-250. Parking on property of another prohibited without permission.
It is unlawful for the driver of a motor vehicle to park the vehicle in or upon
property of another without having in the driver's possession the written
permission of the person legally entitled to possession of the property.
However, a citation charging violation of this section shall be dismissed if
the aforesaid written permission is subsequently presented to the department of
transportation or to the city court.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99)
Sec. 20-251. Parking in parks and playgrounds.
It is unlawful to park a motor vehicle in or upon the parks and playgrounds of
the city except in designated and signed parking areas.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99)
Sec. 20-252. Parking on city-owned property.
No person shall park a motor vehicle in or on city-owned property, other than
public streets or alleys, when signs prohibiting or regulating parking have
been placed thereon by the director of transportation as authorized by this
chapter, unless in compliance with such erected signs.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99)
Sec. 20-253. Parking for purposes of sale on unpaved lots.
It is unlawful to park a motor vehicle for the purpose of sale upon any lot or
area which is not paved within the city. The display of any signs or other
markings indicating that a motor vehicle is for sale shall be prima facie
evidence that the motor vehicle has been parked for the purpose of sale. For
the purposes of this section, a lot or area which is not paved means the
absence of any of the surfacing methods described in chapter
23. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a maximum of one (1)
motor vehicle parked for the purpose of sale where the motor vehicle is owned
by the resident of the lot or area on which the motor vehicle is parked, and
the sale of such motor vehicle would come within the meaning of a casual
activity or sale as described in section
19-100.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99)
Sec. 20-254. Parking prohibited during certain hours on certain streets.
When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, it is unlawful to
park a vehicle between the hours as specified by the signs.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99)
Sec. 20-255. Neighborhood parking program.
   (a)   The Park Tucson division administrator may designate a residential
area or areas consisting of streets or portions of streets in high demand areas
on which the parking of motor vehicles may be restricted in whole or in part to
motor vehicles bearing a valid parking permit issued pursuant to these
provisions by the administrator and approved by mayor and council to residents
of the area so designated. The administrator shall provide for the issuance of
permits and cause parking signs to be erected in the area indicating the times
and conditions under which parking shall be by permit only. A permit shall be
issued upon application and payment of the applicable fee, to the owner or
operator of a motor vehicle who resides on property immediately adjacent to a
street within the residential permit parking areas. Permits may be manifested
either physically or electronically.
   Pursuant to this section, a "high demand area" is defined as one where more
than seventy-five percent (75%) of the legal curb parking spaces are occupied
on a recurring basis, and more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the vehicles
parked do not belong to residents of the area.
   (b)   Such designated areas may be initiated by the owners of real
residential property in a block-face, the area between cross-streets on one
side of the street. A petition bearing the verified signatures of, at minimum,
seventy-five percent (75%) of the property owners in the block-face, presented
to Park Tucson, is required to establish a designated neighborhood parking
program area. Park Tucson will verify that an overflow parking condition
exists, such that at least seventy-five percent (75%) of the physical on-street
parking spaces in the block-face are routinely occupied during weekday hours,
and that at minimum, twenty-five percent (25%) of those vehicles belong to
persons not residing in the block-face.
   (c)   The administrator may designate certain portions of residential areas
that are adjacent to nonresidential areas as shared parking areas and may
provide for the issuance of permits in these areas. Within shared parking
areas, eligible residents will be given priority to purchase permits to park
therein. If there is excess capacity within a particular shared parking area,
the administrator may issue permits to employees of businesses or organizations
located within five hundred (500) feet of such area. The administrator may
install meters, designate portions of such areas as being restricted only by
time-limit, or a combination of both. The permits shall exempt the permit-
holder from the requirement to pay for metered time or for adherence to the
posted time limit.
   (d)   The Park Tucson administrator may revoke restrictions on streets or
portions of streets within a residential on the basis of a lack of need,
demonstrated by either sufficiency of off-street parking for the adjacent
residents or lack of participation in the neighborhood parking program.
   (e)   It shall be unlawful for any person to:
   (1)   park a motor vehicle in a neighborhood parking program area during the
designated hours unless the vehicle displays a valid permit or valid visitor's
pass; or if an electronic record of such permit exists, and Park Tucson has the
means to validate such record for enforcement purposes.
   (2)   falsify information to obtain a neighborhood parking permit or
visitor's pass;
   (3)   fail to surrender a neighborhood parking permit or visitor's pass to
the Park Tucson administrator on demand if such permits or passes are used in
violation of these provisions or if the holder of the permit or pass is no
longer entitled to the pass or permit;
   (4)   knowingly park a motor vehicle displaying a neighborhood parking
permit or visitor's pass in a permit parking area during the designated hours
when the holder of the permit or pass is not entitled to possess the permit or
pass;
   (5)   use a neighborhood permit or visitor's pass outside of the designated
neighborhood permit parking area for which the neighborhood parking permit is
issued or outside of the five hundred (500) foot distance from the qualified
residence for which the visitor's pass is issued; or
   (6)   otherwise violate these regulations, including, but not limited to,
the issuance or use of neighborhood parking permits or visitor's passes.
   (f)   The owner of a vehicle may contest the revocation of a permit by
filing a written application for a hearing with the civil infractions division
of city court requesting that the court determine whether justification existed
for the revocation of the permit under the provisions of this article. The
application shall be filed within ten (10) days after the revocation of the
permit and not thereafter. The court shall set a time and date for a hearing to
be held no later than fifteen (15) days after receipt of the written
application for a hearing and shall notify both the applicant and the director
of transportation of the hearing date. At the hearing, the city shall prove by
a preponderance of evidence that the revocation of the permit was justified
pursuant to the provisions of this article.
   (g)   If the owner or operator of the vehicle cited for a violation of (e)
(1) of this section provides a valid neighborhood parking permit to the Park
Tucson administrator within thirty (30) calendar days of the violation, the
fine shall be waived for the first offense and reduced to twenty dollars
($20.00) for the second offense within a three hundred sixty-five (365) day
period of the first offense, no part of which may be suspended or waived by the
court. This fine includes any assessments imposed under state law.
   (h)   Notwithstanding the requirements of Section
20-263 as it pertains to commercial vehicles, residents within neighborhood
parking program areas who use commercial vehicles as personal vehicles may park
on the same block within such areas for periods of two (2) or more consecutive
calendar days, regardless of the type of restriction that applies to such area.
   (i)   The Park Tucson administrator may establish a neighborhood
reinvestment program for the purpose of expending funds generated through the
neighborhood parking program to participating neighborhoods to support
transportation and streetscape infrastructure improvements, promoting
pedestrian and/or bicycle access, traffic mitigation, and beautification.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99; Ord. No. 10918, § 4, 8-9-11; Ord. No. 11498, § 1,
10-24-17)
Sec. 20-257. Special events permit parking.
The director of transportation may designate special events parking permit
areas consisting of streets or portions of streets on which the parking of
motor vehicles may be restricted during posted specified hours to motor
vehicles bearing valid special events parking permits or visitor's passes
issued pursuant to these provisions. The director of transportation shall
provide for issuance of permits and shall place signs (which may be temporary)
which indicate the hours and conditions under which parking shall be by permit
or visitor's pass only.
It is unlawful for any person to:
   (a)   Park a motor vehicle in a special events parking permit area during
the designated hours unless the vehicle is equipped with a valid special event
permit or valid special event visitor's pass.
   (b)   Violate any regulations pursuant to section
20-255 relating to the issuance and use of parking permits.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99)
Sec. 20-258. Additional permit parking programs; fees; city manager may
establish additional permit parking programs and an annual parking permit fee.
   (a)   In addition to other permit parking programs authorized in this
article, the city manager may establish, subject to the advisory recommendation
of the Park Tucson Commission and the Park Tucson administrator, additional
Non-resident Permit Parking Programs as may be necessary and desirable to
control traffic in high demand areas within the city. Pursuant to this section
a "high demand area" is defined as one where more than seventy-five (75)
percent of the legal curb parking spaces are occupied on a recurring basis, and
more than twenty-five (25) percent of the vehicles parked do not belong to
residents of the area.
   (b)   Subject to the advisory recommendation of the Park Tucson commission
and Park Tucson administrator and the approval of Mayor and Council, the city
manager may establish an annual fee for such additional permit parking programs
to reduce parking in high demand areas and to promote alternate modes of
transportation.
   (c)   Two (2) copies of the designations of programs and fees established
under this section shall be listed within the administrative guidelines on file
with the city clerk.
   (d)   Mayor and council may, at their discretion, change, modify or
eliminate fees and/or permit parking programs established by the city manager.
   (e)   Vehicles parked within a designated parking permit area are subject to
all provisions of section
20-255 except that applicants are not required to reside on a property
immediately adjacent to the designated permit parking area in order to obtain a
valid parking permit.
   (f)   Notwithstanding the requirements of section
20-263 as it pertains to commercial vehicles, permit-holders within Non-
Resident Permit Parking Program areas who use commercial vehicles as personal
vehicles may park on the same block within Non-Resident Permit Parking Program
areas for periods of two (2) or more consecutive calendar days, regardless of
the type of restriction that applies to such area.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99; Ord. No. 10418, § 3, 6-12-07; Ord. No. 10918, §
4, 8-9-11; Ord. No. 11400, § 3, 9-20-16)
Sec. 20-259. Expired registration.
It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle on any city street that does not
conspicuously bear proof of a current registration. A citation charging
violation of this section may be dismissed if proof of current registration is
submitted to Park Tucson administrator or Tucson City Court.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99; Ord. No. 9434, § 4, 8-7-00; Ord. No. 11400, § 3,
9-20-16)
Sec. 20-260. Stopping, standing, parking prohibited between the curb and
sidewalk or in an unimproved pedestrian area impeding continuous pedestrian
use.
   It shall be unlawful to stop, stand or park a vehicle, whether posted or
not, in that area between the curb and a sidewalk or in an unimproved
pedestrian area such that it impedes continuous pedestrian use. Impeding
continuous pedestrian use is determined when the stopping, standing, or parking
of a vehicle leaves less than a four (4) foot wide unimproved pedestrian area.
Provided, unless the area is posted with "no-parking" signs, it shall not be
unlawful to stop, stand, or park a vehicle in an unimproved pedestrian area
adjacent to roadways less than or equal to twenty-six (26) feet wide.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99; Ord. No. 9434, § 5, 8-7-00; Ord. No. 11063, § 2,
3-27-13)
Sec. 20-261. Unattended and inoperable vehicles prohibited.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful to park, or leave unattended, on any street or
roadway or right- of-way thereof, any vehicle for a period in excess of twenty
four (24) hours.
   (b)   Any operable, currently registered, non-commercial, passenger vehicle
registered to a resident of a property immediately adjacent to the parked
vehicle shall be exempt from section
20-261(a) provided the vehicle is not in violation of any other section of this
code.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful to park or leave unattended, on any street or
roadway or right- of-way thereof, any vehicle exempt from section
20-261(a) as described in section
20-261(b) for a period in excess of seven (7) calendar days.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99; Ord. No. 10418, § 3, 6-12-07)
Sec. 20-262. Truck parking on streets not designated as truck routes
prohibited.
   (a)   It is unlawful to park any vehicle having a total gross vehicle weight
rating in excess of twenty thousand (20,000) pounds, including, but not limited
to, trucks, truck tractors, road tractors, trailers, semi-trailers, vehicle
transporters, or any combination of such vehicles:
   (1)   On a street not designated as a truck route under article I section
20-15 of this chapter; or
   (2)   On a street posted pursuant to section
20-15.1(b) with a sign or signs limiting the gross weight of vehicles permitted
on the street; or
   (3)   Within a residence district.
   (b)   Notwithstanding the prohibition in section
20-262(a) above, a restricted vehicle may park, except as otherwise prohibited
by this article:
   (1)   On any street within a business district, unless the street is posted
pursuant to section
20-15.1(b) with a sign or signs limiting the gross weight of vehicles on the
street; or
   (2)   On any street to perform the following activities, except that, upon
completion of such activity, the vehicle must return to the nearest designated
truck route:
   (i)   Deliver, pickup, load, or unload merchandise, materials, or equipment,
including furniture and other household goods; or
   (ii)   Provide construction, repair, or similar services to a property.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99; Ord. No. 9492, § 3, 11-27-00; Ord. No. 11400, §
3, 9-20-16)
   Note: Formerly §
20-272.
Sec. 20-263. Recreational vehicles; commercial vehicles.
It shall be unlawful to park any recreational vehicle, or any commercial
vehicle, on the same block of any street or roadway or right-of-way thereof for
any portion of any two (2) consecutive calendar days.
(Ord. No. 10418, § 3, 6-12-07)
Secs. 20-264--20-270. Reserved.
DIVISION 6.
SAFETY ISSUES
Sec. 20-271. Penalty.
Unless otherwise specifically provided, the penalty for violating any provision
of article VII, division 6, which regulates the time, place, or method of
parking a vehicle shall be a mandatory base fine of sixty dollars and eleven
cents ($60.11), no part of which may be suspended or waived by the court, plus
any assessments imposed under state law.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99; Ord. No. 9492, § 3, 11-27-00; Ord. No. 9867, § 4,
6-23-03; Ord. No. 11295, § 3, 8-5-15; Ord. No. 11324, § 6, 12-8-15)
Sec. 20-272. Reserved.
   Editors Note: Ord. No. 9492, § 3, adopted Nov. 27, 2000, renumbered the
provisions of former §
20-272 as current §
20-262. The user is directed to §
20-262 for provisions concerning truck parking on streets not designated as
truck routes prohibited. See the Code Comparative Table.
Sec. 20-273. Parking in alleys.
It is unlawful to park a vehicle within an alley, whether posted or not, except
for the loading or unloading of merchandise and materials, and then not unless
such loading or unloading can be accomplished without blocking the alley to the
free movement of vehicular traffic. Notwithstanding the foregoing provision,
the director of transportation may authorize limited alley blockage for periods
not to exceed twenty (20) minutes at locations where such blockage is necessary
for the immediate loading or unloading of persons, merchandise, or materials,
provided that vehicles shall remain attended at all times and shall be
immediately moved if necessary to accommodate the passage of emergency or city
service vehicles.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99; Ord. No. 9424, § 1, 7-10-00; Ord. No. 9434, § 6,
8-7-00)
Sec. 20-274. Hazardous areas adjacent to schools.
The director of transportation is authorized to erect signs indicating no
parking upon that side of any street adjacent to any school property where and
when such parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or create a
hazardous situation. When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon
such side of a street adjacent to any school property, it is unlawful to stop,
stand, or park a vehicle in any such designated place.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99)
Sec. 20-275. Standing or parking outside of business or residence district.
Upon any highway outside of a business or residence district, it is unlawful to
stand or park any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon the paved or
main-traveled part of the highway when it is practical to stand or park the
vehicle off that part of the highway, but in every event an unobstructed width
of the highway opposite the vehicle shall be left for the free passage of other
vehicles; and a clear view of the standing or parked vehicle shall be available
from a distance of two hundred (200) feet in each direction upon the highway.
This section shall not apply if the vehicle is disabled while on the paved or
main-traveled part of a highway and is disabled in such manner and to such
extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily leaving the
disabled vehicle in such position.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99)
Sec. 20-276. Buses stopping on crosswalks, within intersections prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any bus to stop within an intersection or on a
crosswalk for the purpose of receiving or discharging passengers.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99)
Sec. 20-277. Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in specified places.
   Except for public buses, which may stop in a no-parking zone marked or sign
posted as a bus loading zone, or authorized commercial vehicles or government-
plated trucks as defined in section
20-249 in freight curb loading zones, or disabled or handicapped vehicles in
disabled zones, or passengers or their effects in passenger curb loading zones,
it is unlawful to stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or to comply with law or directions of a police
officer or traffic-control device, in any of the following places:
   (1)   On a sidewalk.
   (2)   In front of a public or private driveway.
   (3)   On a crosswalk, whether marked or unmarked.
   (4)   Within twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk at the departing side of an
intersection whether marked or unmarked.
   (5)   In red zones.
   (6)   Where "no-parking" signs are specifically posted.
   (7)   Within five (5) feet of a driveway.
   (8)   Within ten (10) feet of an alleyway.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99; Ord. No. 11063, § 3, 3-27-13)
Sec. 20-278. Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in additional specified
places.
Except for public buses, which may stop in a no-parking zone marked or sign
posted as a bus loading zone, it is unlawful to stop, stand or park a vehicle,
except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or to comply with
law or directions of a police officer or traffic control device, in any of the
following places:
   (1)   Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant placed on public or private
property.
   (2)   Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station.
   (3)   Within or adjacent to a construction zone, behind or within a
barricaded area as permitted by the traffic engineer per Tucson Code 25-20 et
seq.
   (4)   Within an intersection.
   (5)   Within thirty (30) feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop
sign, yield sign or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway.
   (6)   Within thirty (30) feet of the approaching side of an intersection
either marked or unmarked.
   (7)   Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail of a railroad track, except
while a motor vehicle with motive power attached is loading or unloading
railroad cars.
   (8)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the end or
curb of a street.
   (9)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a
highway tunnel.
   (10)   On a controlled-access highway except for emergency reasons or except
in areas specifically designated for parking, such as rest areas.
   (11)   When any vehicle is left unattended upon a street or alley and is
parked in violation of the law or otherwise constitutes a definite hazard or
obstruction to the normal movement of traffic.
   (12)   Within a center left turn lane.
   (13)   When any vehicle stops, stands or parks on a laned street or roadway
and obstructs or stops traffic behind the vehicle.
   (14)   At a bus stop.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99; Ord. No. 9434, § 7, 8-7-00)
Sec. 20-279. Parallel parking.
Except as otherwise provided in this article, every vehicle stopped or parked
upon a roadway where there are adjacent curbs, and parallel parking is
authorized, shall be so stopped or parked with the curbside wheels of the
vehicle within eighteen (18) inches of the right-hand curb with the vehicle's
right wheels or on one-way streets only the left-hand curb with the vehicle's
left wheels. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, every vehicle
stopped or parked upon a roadway shall be stopped or parked facing in the same
direction as the traffic flow of the nearest travel lane.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99; Ord. No. 10418, § 3, 6-12-07)
Sec. 20-280. Parking near fire or rescue apparatus.
It is unlawful to park a vehicle within five hundred (500) feet of any fire
apparatus or fire rescue vehicle which has stopped in response to a fire alarm
or request for medical or rescue services.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99)
Sec. 20-281. Parking prohibited on certain streets and portions of streets.
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, it is unlawful to park a vehicle
at any time upon any of the streets or portions of streets.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99)
Sec. 20-282. Fire lanes.
When signs are erected as per Tucson Code 13-3 et seq. and the Uniform Fire
Code, giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful to park a vehicle in a
designated fire lane. The posting of such signs shall authorize the enforcement
of the provisions of this section and thereby constitute consent by the owner
of the property to enforcement of this section.
(Ord. No. 9196, § 1, 1-25-99)
Sec. 20-283. Law enforcement officers exempt from specified parking provisions.
The provisions of sections
20-260,
20-277 and
20-278 shall not apply to law enforcement officers while engaged in the
performance of law enforcement duties. For purposes of this section, law
enforcement officer shall include persons engaged in photo enforcement at the
direction of law enforcement.
(Ord. No. 10479, § 1, 11-20-07)
Secs. 20-284--20-299. Reserved.
ARTICLE VIII.
TAXICAB REGULATIONS*
__________
*   Cross References: Transporting for hire, §
19-475; motor vehicles and traffic, provisions re, §
20-212 et seq.
__________
Sec. 20-300. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to promote the safety and general welfare of the
public by regulating certain aspects of the taxicab business.
(Ord. No. 8051, § 2, 5-17-93)
Sec. 20-301. Definitions.
In this article, unless the context requires otherwise, the following words
shall have the definitions respectively set forth:
   Ambulance means any motor vehicle especially designed and constructed or
modified and equipped to be used, maintained or operated for the transportation
of individuals who are sick, injured, wounded or otherwise incapacitated or
disabled.
   Bus means a motor vehicle designed for carrying more than fifteen (15)
passengers and used for the transportation of individuals for hire with a
driver provided.
   Business means engaging in the activity of carrying passengers for profit.
   Executive sedan (VIP) service means the providing of the same motor vehicle
for use in a dual service capacity. At times the executive sedan (VIP) motor
vehicle will be operated and associated with such services as provided by
taxicab companies and at other times the same vehicle will be used for such
services more commonly associated with those provided by a limousine service.
The provisions of this article regulating taxicabs apply equally to executive
sedans (VIP's), except that rates need not be posted on the vehicle's exterior
nor are dome lights required.
   Limousine service means the providing of a motor vehicle designed by its
manufacturer and identified by its vehicle registration as a limousine and in
which both the limousine and a driver are provided for hire solely by
individual agreement and which service is not available for open solicitation
by passengers on streets or at taxicab stands.
   Meter means any mechanical, electrical or electronic device maintained in a
taxicab for the purpose of computing the fare for passenger trips based on
distance, time, or a combination of both and on which the charge is plainly
displayed.
   Motor vehicle means any self-propelled vehicle.
   Person means any individual, person, firm, corporation, association, joint
venture, partnership or other lawful form of business combination.
   Taxicab means a motor vehicle other than a bus, an ambulance, an executive
sedan (VIP) or a limousine which is held out to the general public through
either private or public solicitation or notice as being available to carry a
person or persons along a route, all or a part of which is within the city,
from any point to any other point for hire with the driver provided and which
is not operated on a schedule.
   Taxicab company means a person engaging in the taxicab business.
   Vehicle means a device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a public street or highway.
(Ord. No. 8051, § 2, 5-17-93)
Sec. 20-302. Taxicab businesses and executive sedan services regulated.
No person shall engage in the taxicab business or executive sedan (VIP) service
or operate as a taxicab company or an executive sedan (VIP) service on public
rights of way within the city without complying with the requirements of this
article.
(Ord. No. 8051, § 2, 5-17-93)
Sec. 20-303. Exterior display of fare and other information.
Except as provided in section
20-303(5), no person, owner, lessee, company or operator of a motor vehicle
shall allow, operate or cause to be operated, a motor vehicle as a taxicab on
the city streets of the City of Tucson, unless:
   (1)   The vehicle displays outside in a permanent manner, readily visible to
both prospective and actual passengers in letters not less than one (1) inch in
height, the schedule of rates to be charged (such as the flag drop rates,
additional mile fares, distance rates, hourly rates, waiting time rates charged
per hour or other rates used to charge a passenger for services), which rates
shall [be] permanently affixed by sign or painted on the exterior door panel
but which may not be placed or permanently affixed in any manner to the
exterior door glass.
   (2)   The vehicle displays outside the vehicle in a permanent manner,
readily visible to both prospective and actual passengers, in letters not less
than two (2) inches in height, the name of the company on each front door of
the vehicle in English and in a clear and legible manner. Magnetic signs are
not permitted for the requirements under this subsection.
   (3)   Every vehicle shall be equipped with a dome light not less than four
(4) inches in height, permanently affixed to the roof, bearing the word "TAXI"
or the company name.
   (4)   All outside display information shall be of such color as to contrast
clearly with its background. The taxicabs or executive sedans (VIP's) may
display the company logo or advertising matter if such does not interfere with
the visibility of the information required by this section.
   (5)   The provisions of section
20-303(1) and (3) only, shall not apply to any motor vehicle used in executive
sedan (VIP) services.
(Ord. No. 8051, § 2, 5-17-93)
Sec. 20-304. Interior display of fare and other information.
No person, owner, lessee, company or operator of a motor vehicle shall allow,
operate or cause to be operated the motor vehicle as a taxicab or as an
executive sedan (VIP) on the city streets of the City of Tucson, unless:
   (1)   The vehicle displays on the dashboard or sunvisor of each vehicle,
readily visible to the passenger, a 5 x 8 inch laminated card, with a 3 x 4
inch picture of the driver, the name of the taxicab company or the executive
sedan (VIP) service, the number of the vehicle (if more than one) and the
address and phone number of the taxicab company or the executive sedan (VIP)
service.
   (2)   The vehicle displays inside at locations readily visible to the
passenger, the schedule of rates of charges (such as the flag drop rates,
additional mile fares, distance rates, hourly rates, waiting time rates charged
per hour or other rates used to charge a passenger for services and a statement
that liability insurance is required to be maintained on the vehicle with the
Motor Vehicle Division of the Arizona Department of Transportation.
(Ord. No. 8051, § 2, 5-17-93)
Sec. 20-305. Meters, fares, charges.
   (a)   No taxicab company, executive sedan (VIP) service or operator of a
taxicab or an executive sedan (VIP) shall operate or cause to be operated such
vehicles on city streets unless such vehicles are equipped with meters
maintained in accurate working order and certified by any registered service
agency (RSA) which has been approved by the State of Arizona, Department of
Weights and Measures.
   (b)   No taxicab company, executive sedan (VIP) service or operators of such
vehicles, shall charge more than the amount shown on the meter unless there is
a specific agreement to the contrary with the passenger or passengers prior to
the commencement of the fare. In the case of a specific agreement to the
contrary, no more than the agreed fare shall be charged.
(Ord. No. 8051, § 2, 5-17-93; Ord. No. 9166, § 1, 11-23-98)
Sec. 20-306. Direct routes required.
No taxicab company or executive sedan (VIP) service or operator of such taxicab
or such executive sedan (VIP) shall transport any passenger for hire from any
point within the City of Tucson to any other point within the city by any route
or method which is other than the most reasonably direct and rapid method
available except at the specific direction and request of the passenger.
(Ord. No. 8051, § 2, 5-17-93)
Sec. 20-307. Two-way radios required.
Each taxicab or executive sedan (VIP) shall be equipped with a Federal
Communication Commission (FCC) licensed radio/receiver/transmitter (mobile
station or two-way radio) which is an integral part of an FCC mobile service
system. Said service shall be operational on a 24-hour basis and in compliance
with FCC requirements. No taxicab or executive sedan shall be operated unless
such radio/receiver or transmitter is maintained in accurate working order.
(Ord. No. 8051, § 2, 5-17-93)
Sec. 20-308. Civil infraction.
   (a)   Any person, any taxicab company, executive sedan (VIP) service or
operator of a taxicab or an executive sedan (VIP) who violates the provisions
of this article shall be deemed liable for a civil infraction. Such person or
persons shall be subject to the penalties for a civil infraction imposed
pursuant to section
8-6.1.
   (b)   Whenever a taxicab or an executive sedan (VIP) is used in violation of
the provisions of this article, the person or persons responsible for the
violation shall be jointly and severally liable.
(Ord. No. 8051, § 2, 5-17-93)
Sec. 20-309. Police department and Park Tucson enforcement agents authorized to
issue citations.
The police department officers and the Park Tucson administrator or such
traffic agents designated by the administrator as responsible for enforcing
article VII (stopping, standing or parking) provisions of this chapter, may
issue citations enforcing any provisions concerning taxicabs or executive
sedans (VIP's) contained in this article.
(Ord. No. 8051, § 2, 5-17-93; Ord. No. 10918, § 5, 8-9-11; Ord. No. 11400, § 3,
9-20-16)
Secs. 20-310--20-399. Reserved.
ARTICLE IX.
TROLLEYS
Sec. 20-400. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to promote the safety and general welfare of the
public by regulating the operation of trolleys and motor vehicles so that both
may be operated upon the public roadways in safety.
(Ord. No. 8139, § 1, 10-11-93)
Sec. 20-401. Definition.
In this article, trolley means every vehicle which is propelled by electric
power obtained from overhead trolley wires and which is operated upon fixed
rails within the city.
Sec. 20-402. Application of law.
Every person operating a trolley on any street or highway within the city is
granted all of the rights and is subject to all of the duties applicable to the
operator of a motor vehicle as prescribed in this chapter and in A.R.S. title
28, except as to those provisions which by their nature have no application.
(Ord. No. 8139, § 1, 10-11-93)
Sec. 20-403. Operation of motor vehicles.
No person operating a motor vehicle shall:
   (1)   Drive to the left of any trolley for the purpose of overtaking or
passing said trolley.
   (2)   Drive to the right of any trolley for the purpose of overtaking or
passing said trolley at any time that the trolley is stopped to receive or
discharge passengers.
(Ord. No. 8139, § 1, 10-11-93)
Sec. 20-404. Civil infraction.
Violations of this article shall be deemed civil infractions subject to the
penalties imposed pursuant to section
8-6.1.
(Ord. No. 8139, § 1, 10-11-93)
Sec. 20-405. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the officers of the police
department.
(Ord. No. 8139, § 1, 10-11-93)
Secs. 20-406--2-499. Reserved.
ARTICLE X.
TRAFFIC MEDIANS
Sec. 20-500. Purpose and intent; legislative findings.
   It is the purpose and intent of this article to protect the safety of
pedestrians and occupants of motor vehicles, and to promote the orderly flow of
vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
   Mayor and Council find that the practice of pedestrians occupying traffic
medians for any purpose other than as a place of temporary refuge while
lawfully crossing a street creates the danger of physical injury to both the
pedestrian and the occupants of vehicles, interrupts traffic flow and increases
traffic delays. The danger of physical injury or death is particularly high on
streets with higher speed limits. The crosswalk portion of a traffic median
serves as a safety island to those pedestrians who are crossing the street.
Medians also promote the safety of occupants of motor vehicles by serving as an
unoccupied buffer between opposing lanes of traffic. Pedestrian and motor
vehicle safety is jeopardized when crosswalk and median areas are occupied by
persons who are at that location for any reason other than the lawful crossing
of a street. Further, persons on medians and roadways who interact with
motorists distract and disrupt vehicular traffic and create a safety risk. The
city's interest in protecting the welfare of pedestrians and occupants of motor
vehicles is compelling.
(Ord. No. 9058, § 1, 5-18-98; Ord. No. 9479, § 1, 10-23-00; Ord. No. 12149, §
1, 3-18-25)
Sec. 20-501. Prohibited conduct; definitions; exemptions.
   (a)   No person shall stand upon or otherwise occupy or remain upon a
traffic median on any roadway where the posted speed limit is thirty miles per
hour (30 mph) or greater, except that a pedestrian may, for no more than one
traffic signal cycle length, occupy such a median at a signalized intersection
as a temporary refuge when lawfully crossing a street in a crosswalk in
accordance with applicable traffic and safety laws. Stopping, standing, or
otherwise occupying a traffic median through two consecutive opportunities to
cross in accordance with applicable traffic and safety laws is prima facie
evidence of a violation of this Section.
   (b)   Definition. For the purposes of this Section, traffic median means any
area separating traffic lanes on a roadway. A traffic median includes, but is
not limited to, any paved or unpaved, marked or unmarked, landscaped or non-
landscaped, portions of a roadway which exist between lanes of traffic.
   (c)   Exemptions. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the following:
      (1)   Law enforcement, fire and rescue, or other government employees or
contractors acting within the scope of their lawful authority;
      (2)   A person lawfully conducting inspection, construction, maintenance,
repair, survey, or other similarly authorized services.
(Ord. No. 9058, § 1, 5-18-98; Ord. No. 9479, § 2, 10-23-00; Ord. No. 12149, §
1, 3-18-25)
Sec. 20-502. Classification and penalty.
   Violation of section
20-501 shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by community service or fines
in an amount up to two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), or by imprisonment not
to exceed twenty-four (24) hours, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. No. 9058, § 1, 5-18-98; Ord. No. 12149, § 1, 3-18-25)
Chapter 21
PARKS AND RECREATION*
__________
*   Charter References: Department of parks and recreation,
ch. XXXI.
__________
Art. I.   Operation and Regulation of Parks, §§ 21-1--21-18.1
Art. II.   Randolph Park Golf Courses, §§ 21-19--21-37
Art. III.   Reserved, §§ 21-38--21-50
Art. IV.   Gene Reid Park Zoo Admittance Fees, §§ 21-51--21-54
Art. V.   Reserved
Article I. Operation and Regulation of Parks
Sec.
21-1.   Definitions.
Sec.
21-2.   Operation of parks under director; fees.
Sec.
21-3.   Regulations regarding park use.
Sec.
21-4.   Permits, licenses and reservations.
Sec.
21-5.   Regulation of activities in areas adjacent to or affecting parks.
Sec.
21-6.   Enforcement.
Sec.
21-7.   Penalties.
Sec.
21-8.   Consumption of spirituous liquor.
Sec.
21-9.   Adult sports; fees; rosters; minimum number of players per sponsor
team; disposition of fees.
Sec.
21-10.   Fees--Tennis courts.
Sec.
21-11.   Handball courts.
Sec.
21-12.   Swimming pool admission, swim lesson, competitive swimming program,
and synchronized swimming program fees and rental rates.
Sec.
21-13.   Recreational classes.
Sec.
21-13.1.   Program registration fees – KIDCO.
Sec.
21-13.2.   Fees--Senior trip programs.
Sec.
21-14.   Use of equipment – fees.
Sec.
21-14.1.   Use of recreation centers and their facilities; fees.
Sec.
21-14.2.   Reserved.
Sec.
21-14.3.   Hi Corbett Stadium Use.
Sec.
21-15.   Non-city resident rates.
Sec.
21-16.   Use of certain meeting rooms; reservation fee for ramadas, reserved
park areas, special interest areas, sport fields, volleyball courts,
bandshells, outdoor performance centers, rodeo grounds, park special events,
and fees for special maintenance.
Sec.
21-17.   Authorization to waive or discount fees and charges.
Sec.
21-18.   Wasting or abusing athletic facility lighting; fines and penalties.
Sec.
21-18.1.   Administrative fees.
Article II. City Municipal Golf Courses
Sec.
21-19.   Damaging, defacing property.
Sec.
21-20.   Selling, soliciting on courses.
Sec.
21-21.   Permit to play required.
Sec.
21-22.   Rates for city carts; rental agreement required.
Sec.
21-23.   Rates for use of private carts.
Sec.
21-23.1.   Driving range golf ball rental fees.
Sec.
21-24.   General regulations.
Sec.
21-25.   Reserved.
Sec.
21-25.1.   Regular greens fees.
Sec.
21-25.2.   Special golf rates/green fees.
Sec.
21-25.3.   Reserved.
Sec.
21-25.4.   Reserved.
Sec.
21-25.5.   Fees for shotgun start tournaments.
Sec.
21-25.6.   Reserved.
Sec.
21-25.7.   Authorization to discount golf rates.
Sec.
21-25.8.   Authorization to establish food, beverage and merchandise prices.
Sec.
21-25.9.   Reserved.
Sec.
21-25.10.   Authorization to establish reservation policies.
Sec.
21-25.11.   Authorization to establish frequent user discount policies.
Sec.
21-26.   Collection of fees.
Sec.
21-27.   Violations, penalty.
Sec.
21-28.   Reserved.
Sec.
21-29.   Reserved.
Secs.
21-30--21-37.   Reserved.
Article III. Reserved
Secs.
21-38--21-50.   Reserved.
Article IV. Gene Reid Park Zoo Admittance Fees
Sec.
21-51.   Schedule.
Sec.
21-52.   Reserved.
Secs.
21-53, 21-54. Reserved.
Article V. Gene Reid Park Zoo Improvement Fund
Sec.
21-60.   Gene Reid Park Zoo improvement fund.
ARTICLE I.
OPERATION AND REGULATION OF PARKS*
__________
*   Editors Note: Ord. No. 4610, § 1, adopted Jan. 10, 1977, specifically
amended the Code by repealing §§
21-1--21-8. Those sections, which contained general provisions, had been
derived from 1953 Code, ch. 18, §§ 40a, 47a--49, 58, and Ord. No. 2369, § 1,
adopted Nov. 19, 1962. Section 2 of Ord. No. 4610 revised the title of art. I
and added new §§
21-1--
21-7 as herein set out.
__________
Sec. 21-1. Definitions.
   In this article, unless the context otherwise requires:
   Sec. 21-1(1). Camp means set up or remain at any place in a park where
tents, shade structures, boxes, furniture, mattress or other materials are used
for the purpose of establishing or maintaining a temporary place to live; or
where any stove or fire is placed for the purpose of maintaining a temporary
place to live.
   Sec. 21-1(2). Director means the director of parks and recreation.
   Sec. 21-1(3). License means a permit for more than a one-time event.
   Sec. 21-1(4). Park means any public park or recreation or playground area
within or outside the corporate limits of the city, that is established,
operated or administered by the city as a public park or public recreation or
playground area.
   Sec. 21-1(5). Park ranger means a city employee under the supervision of the
director, authorized by his commission to enforce all park rules and
regulations and all criminal and traffic laws within a park.
   Sec. 21-1(6). Permit means authority issued by the director granting a named
person or persons permission to perform a specified activity in a parks and
recreation department facility or any portion thereof.
   Sec. 21-1(7). Pollution means the contamination or other alteration of the
physical, chemical or biological properties of park waters, including change in
temperature, taste, color, turbidity or odor of the waters, or discharge of any
liquid, gaseous, solid radioactive or other substance into any park waters as
will or is likely to create a public nuisance or render park waters harmful,
detrimental or injurious to public health, safety or welfare, or to domestic,
recreational or other beneficial uses, or to wild animals, birds, fish or other
aquatic life.
   Sec. 21-1(8). Reservation means authority issued by the director for named
persons to use a parks and recreation department facility or any portion
thereof for a specified time and purpose.
   Sec. 21-1(9). Resident is hereby defined as any person who is in possession
of a valid proof of residency within the Tucson city limits pursuant to the
rules and regulations established by the director of parks and recreation.
Persons qualified as residents as set forth shall be permitted to use any city-
owned parks and recreation department facility and fee based programs upon
payment of the resident fee, proper identification as determined by the
director of parks and recreation.
   Sec. 21-1(10). Vehicle means any wheeled conveyance, whether motor-powered,
animal- drawn, or personally propelled, including any trailer in tow of any
size, kind or description. Not included are baby carriages, vehicles in the
service of the city, and vehicles authorized and properly equipped for
emergency duties.
(Ord. No. 4610, § 2, 1-10-77; Ord. No. 9850, § 1, 5-12-03; Ord. No. 12144, § 1,
2-4-25; Ord. No. 12181, § 1, 6-17-25)
Sec. 21-2. Operation of parks under director; fees.
   (a)   Powers of the director. The control, supervision, and operations of
all parks is vested in the director of parks and recreation. The director or
his or her deputy may make such reasonable rules and regulations as are
necessary to manage, control, supervise, operate, use, preserve and govern park
property and activities, and may designate hours of operation and opening and
closing times of the various parks which may be different as to individual
parks.
   (b)   Closed Areas. Any section or part of any park or parks and recreation
department facility may be declared closed to the public by the director at any
time and for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular and stated
intervals (daily or otherwise), and either entirely or merely to certain uses,
as the director shall find in the public health, safety or welfare, or for
proper operation of the park or facility.
   (c)   Fees. The use of certain park facilities and services requires payment
of fees by the user(s). Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, fees for
the use of park facilities and services, including but not limited to fees and
rates for the use of the city's golf courses, shall be in the amounts as
established in fee schedules approved by the mayor and council. The fee
schedules approved by the mayor and council will be maintained by the city
clerk and the director of parks and recreation for public view and inspection.
(Ord. No. 4610, § 2, 1-10-77; Ord. No. 9850, § 2, 5-12-03; Ord. No. 11331, § 4,
12-8-15; Ord. No. 12114, § 1, 8-7-24)
Sec. 21-3. Regulations regarding park use.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions set forth
in the following series of this section:
   Sec. 21-3(1). Relating to park grounds and park property. No person in a
park shall:
   (1)   Disfigure or remove buildings, structures or facilities. Wilfully
mark, deface, disfigure, injure, destroy, tamper with, or displace or remove
any building, bridge, table, bench, fireplace, railing, paving or paving
material, waterline or other public utility or parts or appurtenances thereof;
sign, notice or placard whether temporary or permanent; monument, stake, post
or other boundary marker; or other structure or equipment, facility or park
property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal.
   (2)   Restrooms and washrooms. Enter any restroom or washroom to engage in
any unlawful act or to use the facilities for other than their primary purpose;
or use the restrooms and washrooms designated for the opposite sex, unless
under six (6) years of age.
   (3)   Natural resources. Dig, remove or damage soil, rock, stones, trees,
shrubs or plants, down-timber or other wood or materials, or make any
excavation by tool, equipment, blasting, or other means or agency.
   (4)   Erect structures, install utility services. Construct or erect any
building or structure of whatever kind, whether permanent or temporary in
character, or run or string any public service utility into, upon or across
park land.
   Sec. 21-3(2). Relating to wild animals. No person in a park shall:
   (1)   Hunting. Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease, shoot
or throw missiles at any animal, reptile or bird or fish; the young of any wild
animal; or the eggs or nest, or young of any reptile, bird or fish.
   (2)   Feeding. Give or offer, or attempt to give to any animal, reptile,
bird or fish any tobacco, alcohol or other noxious substances.
   (3)   Fishing. Fish, fishnet, spear or catch in any manner fish in any
waters in a park without proper licensing as required by the director or the
Arizona Fish and Game Department.
   Sec. 21-3(3). Relating to sanitation. No person in a park shall:
   (1)   Pollution of waters. Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to
be placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream or other body of
water in a park any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which may
result in the pollution of park waters.
   (2)   Refuse and trash. Dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass,
paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage or refuse, or other trash
unless placed in the proper receptacles where provided; where receptacles are
not so provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried for its presence
and properly disposed of elsewhere.
   (3)   Glass beverage containers. Have a glass beverage container in his
possession.
   (4)   Throwing or breaking glass. Throw, toss or otherwise propel, or either
knowingly or recklessly break any glass object. (Ord. No. 5558, §§ 1, 2, 5-3-
82)
   Sec. 21-3(4). Relating to traffic. No person in a park shall:
   (1)   Motor vehicles laws apply. Violate any state and city motor vehicle
laws relating to traffic on highways, which laws shall apply to all persons,
vehicles and bicycles while on park property; provided that no person shall
drive a vehicle in a park at a speed exceeding fifteen (15) miles per hour,
except upon such roads as the director may designate, by posted signs, for
speedier travel. No person shall drive a vehicle on any park area except the
paved park roads or parking areas, or such other areas as may on occasion be
specifically designated as temporary parking areas by the director.
   (2)   Parking.
      (a)   Designated areas. Park a vehicle in other than established or
designated parking areas, and such use shall be in accordance with the posted
directions thereat.
   (3)   Designation of parking areas. The director may cause to be designated
and posted any park area in which parking is prohibited for a limited or a
permanent time.
   Sec 21-3(5). Relating to recreation. No person in a park shall:
   (1)   Bathing and swimming.
      (a)   Designated areas. Swim, bathe or wade in any waters or waterways in
a park, except in such waters and at such places as are provided therefor, and
in compliance with such rules and regulations as may be set forth or hereafter
adopted by the director. Frequent any waters or places customarily designated
for the purpose of swimming or bathing, or congregate thereat when such
activity is prohibited by the director upon finding that such use of the water
would be dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare.
      (b)   Designated hours. Frequent any waters or places designated for the
purpose of swimming or bathing, or congregate thereat, except between such
hours of the day as shall be designated by the director for such purposes for
each individual area.
      (c)   Boating. Sail, row or use or propel any boat, raft or other vessel
on any waters in a park where such activity is limited, restricted or
prohibited by the director or a state or federal agency.
   (2)   Hunting and firearms.
      (a)   Hunt, trap, or pursue wildlife at any time or shoot from or into
park areas.
      (b)   Except as provided in subparagraphs (c) and (d), use, carry or
possess:
         (i)   Firearms as defined in A.R.S. § 13-3101 without possession of a
concealed weapons permit issued pursuant to A.R.S. § 13-3112,
Note – Pursuant to a memo issued by the City Attorney, dated Dec. 29, 2006, the
statute cited in this subsection was changed from A.R.S. § 13-1301 to A.R.S. §
13-3101.
         (ii)   Air rifles, spring guns, bows and arrows, slings, or any other
form of weapon potentially injurious to wildlife and dangerous to human safety,
         (iii)   Any instrument that can be loaded with and fire blank
cartridges, or
         (iv)   Any kind of trapping device.
      (c)   The limitation imposed by subparagraph (b)(i) upon the possession
of firearms shall not apply to a person legally transporting, carrying,
storing, or possessing a firearm in a vehicle.
      (d)   A person without possession of a concealed weapons permit but
otherwise lawfully in possession of a firearm may be present in Sunset/El
Presidio and Jacome Parks for the sole purpose of ingress to and egress from
city hall and the Joel Valdez Main Library to store their firearm in city
provided gun lockers located therein as follows:
         (i)   Such person may enter Sunset/El Presidio Park from the sidewalks
along Alameda and Pennington Streets onto the paved walkways leading directly
to and from the north and south entrances of city hall.
         (ii)   Such person may enter Jacome Park from the sidewalks along
Church and Stone Avenues onto the paved walkways leading directly to and from
the entrances to Joseph Valdez Library.
   (3)   Explosives and pyrotechnics. Process or explode or cause to be
exploded any explosive or pyrotechnical device without a written permit from
the director.
   (4)   Camping. Camp, unless special written permit be obtained seventy-two
(72) hours in advance from the director.
   (5)   Golfing.
      (a)   Hitting balls. Hit golf balls or take practice swings with a golf
club, or strike a simulated golf ball except at Randolph Municipal Golf Course,
El Rio Golf Course or other municipal golf courses, or at practice areas
designated therein, or other areas set aside by the director for such purposes.
      (b)   Playing golf. Play golf upon Randolph Municipal Golf Course or El
Rio Golf Course or any municipal golf course without having paid the fees
stipulated by the director for that purpose.
      (c)   Carrying permit. Play golf without carrying a permit or fail to
display such permit upon request by any authorized employee of the parks and
recreation department or police officer.
   (6)   Tennis. Walk, play upon or otherwise use any park area designated for
the purpose of playing tennis, unless such person is wearing flat, soft tennis
shoes without raised heels of any kind; or skate or ride a bicycle, or drive
any vehicle upon any tennis court; or give tennis lessons when such lesson or
lessons are given for compensation or fees of any sort, except when lessons are
offered as part of a recreation program sponsored by the city.
(Ord. No. 5204, § 1, 8-4-80; Ord. No. 6595, § 1, 12-8-86; Ord. No. 9417, § 1,
7-10-00; Ord. No. 9987, § 1, 6-21-04)
   Sec. 21-3(6). Relating to commercial activities. No person in a park shall:
   (1)   Merchandising, advertising and signs. Utilize any park property for
any commercial or political purposes, except by permit issued by the director.
   (2)   Vending and peddling. Expose or offer for sale any article or thing;
station or place any stand, cart or vehicle for the transportation, sale or
display of any article or thing. A regularly licensed concessionaire acting by
and under the authority and regulation of the director, and vendors of food and
refreshments who are in possession of a current vendor's permit issued by the
director are excepted from this provision.
   (3)   Advertising. Announce, advertise or call the public attention in any
way to any article or service for sale or hire, except by such regulations as
may be designated by the director.
   (4)   Signs. Paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard,
advertisement or inscription.
   (5)   Handbills. Distribute or attempt to distribute business or commercial
literature to persons, or place them upon vehicles. (Ord. No. 5678, § 1, 11-8-
82)
   Sec. 21-3(7). Relating to miscellaneous activities. No person in a park
shall:
   (1)   Domestic animals. Bring or escort a dog or any other domestic animal
or pet into any area within park boundaries which is clearly marked by signs
bearing the words: "Domestic Animals and Pets Prohibited in This Area." This
provision shall not be construed as permitting the running of dogs, domestic
animals or pets at large. Bring in or escort any dog, domestic animal or pet in
those areas where such animals are permitted unless restrained at all times on
leashes not to exceed six (6) feet in length and unless they wear a collar and
display thereon a valid city license.
   (2)   Fires. Build, or attempt to build, kindle or ignite a fire except in
such areas and under such rules and regulations as may be designated by the
director; or drop, throw or otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning
cigarettes or cigars, charcoal or coals, or other flammable or flaming
materials within any park area.
   (3)   Closed areas. Enter or remain in any park or park facility, or place
or leave any items or objects in any park or park facility, where such park or
facility is posted as "Closed to the Public," or posted "No Trespassing;" or
use or abet the use of any park area or facility in violation of posted
notices, unless otherwise expressly permitted by the director pursuant to
section
21-2 or
21-4 of this chapter.
   (4)   Interfere with permittees. Disturb or interfere unreasonably with any
person or party occupying any area, or participating in any activity, under the
authority of a permit license or reservation.
   (5)   Excreta.
   (a)   Emit, eject or cause to be deposited any excreta of the human body,
except in those places designated for such purposes.
   (b)   Permit to be deposited and allow to remain in a park any untreated
solid excreta of a dog, domestic animal or pet, except in those places which
may be designated for such purposes.
   (6)   Improper admission. Gain admission to, attempt admission to, to make
use of park facilities for which a charge is made without paying the fixed
charge or admission, unless otherwise authorized by the director.
   (7)   Athletic events. Interfere with any of the authorized participants of
any game, contest or athletic event conducted on any playing field from the
time the event starts until its conclusion, and any time in between.
   (8)   Horses and livestock. Bring or permit horses, cattle or any other
livestock in a park without advanced written permit from the director. (Ord.
No. 5204, § 2, 8-4-80)
(Ord. No. 4610, § 2, 1-10-77; Ord. No. 11331, § 4, 12-8-15; Ord. No. 12181, §
2, 6-17-25)
Sec. 21-4. Permits, licenses and reservations.
   (a)   Permit. A person seeking issuance of a permit, license or reservation
for use of a park area or facility shall make such request in writing to the
director/district administrator. The request shall state the park name, date
and time of use and all information pertaining to the proposed use of the park
facility.
   (b)   Issuance. A permit, license or reservation for use shall be obtained
from the director/district administrator by persons conducting, operating,
presenting or managing any of the following activities:
   (1)   Picnics, outings or gatherings, sponsored by an organization or
individuals that are attended by two hundred (200) or more persons; or
   (2)   An organization or individual holding a special event in the park.
Special events include contests, exhibits, dramatic performances, spectacles,
plays, motion pictures, radio or television broadcasts, fairs, circuses,
jumping castles, shows, musical events such as a band, glee club, choir or
orchestra concert, the use of public amplification systems, or any similar
event; or
   (3)   The sale of alcoholic beverages as a regularly licensed concessionaire
at Tucson City golf courses, Reid Park Zoo and Hi Corbett field; or
   (4)   The sale, distribution or service of food, beverages, or any other
articles or things to the public in any park or on any street, sidewalk or
other public property adjacent to a park if the event is intended to attract,
does attract, or is likely to attract ten (10) or more people; and subject to
the additional requirement that in the case of the sale, distribution or
service of food or beverages that requires a separately obtained health permit
from the Pima County Health Department, the person shall also provide proof of
obtaining that permit. No fee shall be charged for a permit issued under this
subsection for distribution of food, beverages or other things to the public
for free. A permit issued under this subsection for the distribution of food,
beverages or other things to the public for free will be valid for a period of
ten (10) days, and will automatically renew for five (5) additional consecutive
ten (10) day periods, without the need for a new permit request, unless the
director or the director's designee determines that renewal of the permit would
not satisfy the standards for issuance described in subsection (c) below, in
which instance the director or designee will notify the permitee that the
permit is not renewed and is no longer in effect. No permit is required for the
distribution of food, beverages or other things to the public for free on
Easter, Thanksgiving, or Christmas; or for the free distribution of water on
any date; or
   (5)   Announce, advertise or call to the public's attention articles or
services for hire; or
   (6)   The reservation of any park facilities for a certain person or group
of persons to the exclusion of others.
   (c)   Standards for issuance. The director/district administrator shall
issue a permit, license or reservation on a city form upon making the following
findings:
   (1)   That the proposed activity or use of the park will not unreasonably
interfere with or detract from the general public enjoyment of the park or
cause annoyance or the disturbance of any other person's reasonable use of park
facilities, or cause annoyance or disturb the peace of persons residing near
the park, or interfere with the maintenance of the park or its facilities;
   (2)   That the proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere
with or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety and
recreation. In making this finding in connection with any permit for the sale,
distribution or service of food or beverages, the director shall consider the
existing conditions of the park and adjacent properties, including any
unsanitary or otherwise unsafe conditions that are attributable to the proposed
activity or would be caused by the proposed activity; and shall consider any
complaints submitted to the city relating to public health, welfare and safety
associated with the proposed activity;
   (3)   That the proposed activity or use is not unreasonably anticipated to
incite violence, crime or disorderly conduct;
   (4)   That the proposed activity will not entail unusual, extraordinary or
burdensome expense or police supervision by the city. If an activity requires
additional expense or security, the sponsor/promoter shall pay the additional
costs.
   (5)   That the facilities desired have not been reserved for other use at
the day and hour required in the application;
   (6)   In the case of vendors of food and refreshments who are not regularly
licensed concessionaires, the required fees have been paid. Those fees shall be
as established in the fee schedules as approved by the mayor and council and
maintained by the director.
   (7)   In the case of fairs, for-profit vendors have paid required fees.
Those fees shall be as established in the fee schedules as approved by the
mayor and council and maintained by the director.
   (d)   Appeal. If the permit is denied the director shall notify the
applicant in writing within thirty (30) days after receipt of the request for
permit of the reasons for refusing a permit or reservation. An aggrieved person
may either appeal in writing within fourteen (14) days to the city manager, who
shall consider the application under the standards set forth in subsection (c)
above and sustain, modify, or overrule the director's decision within fourteen
(14) days.
   (e)   Effect of Permit. Any person using a permit, reservation or license
shall be bound by all park rules and regulations and all applicable state
statutes and the city codes as fully as though they were inserted in the form.
The applicant shall retain the form in his possession at all times while
utilizing the park and shall show the form to any authorized Parks and
Recreation Department representative or peace officer upon request.
   (f)   Liability of Permittee. The person or persons to whom a permit,
license or reservation is issued shall be liable for any loss, damage or injury
to any person or property whatever by reason of negligence of the person or
persons, their agents or employees, to whom such permit, license or reservation
shall have been issued.
   (g)   Revocation. The director may revoke a permit, license or reservation
upon finding of violation of this Code, state statute, or a park rule or
regulation, or upon good cause shown. All reservations are voidable if the
reserved area is not in use within thirty (30) minutes after the reservation
period starts.
(Ord. No. 4610, § 2, 1-10-77; Ord. No. 5678, §§ 2, 3, 11-8-82; Ord. No. 7104, §
1, 12-12-88; Ord. No. 9261, § 1, 8-2-99; Ord. No. 9341, § 1, 1-31-00; Ord. No.
9757, § 1, 8-5-02; Ord. No. 9850, § 3, 5-12-03; Ord. No. 10260, § 1, 3-7-06;
Ord. No. 11331, § 4, 12-8-15; Ord. No. 11413, § 1, 11-22-16; Ord. No. 12114, §
2, 8-7-24)
   Editors Note: It should be noted that § 15 of Ord. No. 10260 provides for an
effective date of July 1, 2006.
Sec. 21-5. Regulation of activities in areas adjacent to or affecting parks.
No person shall;
   (1)   Sanitation. Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed
in any tributary, stream, storm sewer or drain adjacent to any park or flowing
into park waters any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which may
result in the pollution of park waters.
   (2)   Bathing and swimming. Swim, bathe, wade in any waters or waterways
adjacent to any park that lie in public areas except in areas designated for
such purposes.
   (3)   Signs. Erect or cause to be erected any sign on any public land or on
highways or roads adjacent to a park except with permission from the director.
   (4)   Fires. Build, or attempt to build, kindle or ignite a fire, or drop,
throw or otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning cigarettes or cigars,
charcoal or coals, or other flammable or lighted materials on any highway, road
or street or public property adjacent, abutting or contiguous to a park except
in areas designated for such purposes.
(Ord. No. 4610, § 2, 1-10-77; Ord. No. 9757, § 2, 8-5-02)
Sec. 21-6. Enforcement.
   (a)   Officials. The director, an authorized Parks and Recreation Department
representative, and peace officers may enforce this article, this Code, state
laws and park rules and regulations, and may when deemed necessary call upon
the city police or other law enforcement officers and agencies for assistance.
   (b)   Ejectment. The director, an authorized Parks and Recreation Department
representative, and peace officers may eject from the park any person acting in
violation of this article.
   (c)   Seizure of property. The director, an authorized Parks and Recreation
Department representative, and peace officers may seize and confiscate any
property, thing or device in the park used in violation of this article.
   (d)   No limitation. No provision in this article shall preclude any peace
officers from the enforcement of any law, statute or provision of this Code in
the routine performance of their duties.
(Ord. No. 4610, § 2, 1-10-77; Ord. No. 9757, § 3, 8-5-02)
Sec. 21-7. Penalties.
   (a)   Any person violating any provision of this article or the rules and
regulations relating to parks established by the director and filed with the
city clerk, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or
by imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, by not more than three (3)
years probation or by any combination thereof. In addition, a person convicted
of a violation of section
21-3(3)(3),
21-3(3)(4) or
21-8 shall be punished by a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00); and no
judge may suspend the imposition of this minimum fine.
   (b)   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection
21-7(a), a violation of section
21-4 shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by community service or fines
not to exceed two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00), by imprisonment not to
exceed ten (10) days, and by probation not to exceed one (1) year or both such
fine and imprisonment. The rate of substitution of community service work for
the fine amount shall be calculated at ten dollars ($10.00) per hour.
   (c)   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection
21-7(a), possession of a firearm in violation of section
21-3(5)(2) shall constitute a class two misdemeanor and shall be punishable by
a fine of not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) and not exceeding seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), by imprisonment of not more than four (4)
months, by not more than two (2) years probation or by any combination thereof.
No judge may suspend the imposition of the minimum fine prescribed herein.
(Ord. No. 5558, § 4, 5-3-82; Ord. No. 9341, § 2, 1-31-00; Ord. No. 9417, § 1,
7-10-00; Ord. No. 9757, § 4, 8-5-02)
Sec. 21-8. Consumption of spirituous liquor.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to consume or have in their
possession any spirituous liquor in a public park. "Spirituous liquor" includes
alcohol, brandy, whiskey, rum, tequila, mescal, gin, wine, porter, ale, beer,
any malt liquor or malt beverage, absinthe, a compound or mixture of any of
them or of any of them with any vegetable or other substance, alcohol bitters,
bitters containing alcohol, any liquid mixture or preparation, whether patented
or otherwise, which produces intoxication, fruits preserved in ardent spirits,
and beverages containing more than one-half of one per cent of alcohol by
volume.
   (b)   "Malt beverage" includes any beverage containing more than one-half of
one (0.5) percent of alcohol by volume obtained by the alcoholic fermentation,
infusion or decoration of barley malt or hops, including but not limited to
beer, ale and malt liquor.
   (c)   Subsection (a) shall not apply to the consumption or possession of
wine, beer or malt beverage by those persons or groups who possess a valid
permit under subsection (f) below.
   (d)   Notwithstanding subsection (b) of this section, it is unlawful for any
person to consume or have an open container of any spirituous liquor within
parking lots or vehicles within a city park.
   (e)   The following areas are exempt from this section:
   (1)   City golf courses during established hours of operation;
   (2)   Hi Corbett Field;
   (3)   Reid Park Zoo.
   (f)   The parks director is empowered to issue permits authorizing the
consumption and possession of wine and malt beverages in public parks and to
adopt rules and procedures for the issuance of such permits.
(Ord. No. 5558, § 3, 5-3-82; Ord. No. 7530, § 1, 12-17-90; Ord. No. 9261, § 2,
8-2-99; Ord. No. 9757, § 5, 8-5-02; Ord. No. 9850, § 4, 5-12-03; Ord. No.
11331, § 4, 12-8-15; Ord. No. 11749, § 1, 5-5-20)
Sec. 21-9. Adult sports; fees; rosters; minimum number of players per sponsor
team; disposition of fees.
   Sec. 21-9(1). The adult sports programs shall be self-supporting as far as
direct costs of personnel, space rental, and supplies are involved. Therefore,
once each year, or more often in the discretion of the department of parks and
recreation, the department shall publish and make available to members of the
general public a schedule of team and player fees for the adult sports
programs.
   For all adult sports leagues, the fees shall be as established in the fee
schedules as approved by the mayor and council and maintained by the director.
Placement of teams in divisions shall be in accordance with regulations or
rules of the city parks and recreation director. All fees shall be received by
the city on or before the annual league inception date.
(Ord. No. 5213, § 1, 8-4-80; Ord. No. 6758, § 1, 8-3-87; Ord. No. 9261, § 3, 8-
2-99; Ord. No. 9757, § 6, 8-5-02; Ord. No. 9850, § 5, 5-12-03; Ord. No. 10260,
§ 2, 3-7-06; Ord. No. 10748, § 1, 1-5-10; Ord. No. 12114, § 3, 8-7-24)
   Sec. 21-9(2). The minimum number of players for sponsored league teams shall
be at the discretion of the parks director. (Ord. No. 6758, § 1, 8-3-87)
   Sec. 21-9(3). On or before the league inception date, the city parks and
recreation director shall receive from each team a roster of participants from
whom a fee is required by this section. The director shall be promptly notified
of any changes in the roster during the season; and no person shall play who
has not paid the required fee, or who is a replacement for such person and
notice thereof has not been so given the director. No team shall utilize city
facilities until these roster requirements have been fulfilled. Appropriate
league sanction shall be imposed for any violation of this minor section and
shall include forfeiture of any game in, or in connection with which, such
violation occurred. A second violation of this minor section during a league
season shall result in immediate expulsion from the league of that team and
forfeiture of all sponsor and participant fees paid to the city.
   Sec. 21-9(4). All fees paid pursuant to this section shall be deposited in
the general fund. (Ord. No. 9757, § 6, 8-5-02)
(Ord. No. 3557, § 1, 11-23-70; Ord. No. 4466, § 1, 4-12-76; Ord. No. 9757, §§
5, 6, 8-5-02; Ord. No. 9850, § 5, 5-12-03)
Sec. 21-10. Fees--Tennis courts.
   The fees for use of city tennis courts at the Randolph Tennis Center, the
Ft. Lowell Park, and the Himmel Park tennis courts, and for other courts as may
be established by the director, shall be as established in the fee schedules as
approved by the mayor and council and maintained by the director.
(Ord. No. 4348, § 1, 5-12-75; Ord. No. 4658, § 1, 5-23-77; Ord. No. 5785, § 1,
6-13-83; Ord. No. 7104, § 2, 12-12-88; Ord. No. 7859, § 1, 7-6-92; Ord. No.
9261, § 4, 8-2-99; Ord. No. 9757, § 7, 8-5-02; Ord. No. 11000, § 1, 6-26-12,
eff. 7-1-12; Ord. No. 12114, § 4, 8-7-24)
Sec. 21-11. Handball courts.
   The fees for use of city handball courts at the Randolph Park center and/or
at other parks shall be as established in the fee schedules as approved by the
mayor and council and maintained by the director.
(Ord. No. 4348, § 1, 5-12-75; Ord. No. 4658, § 2, 5-23-77; Ord. No. 5213, § 2,
8-4-80; Ord. No. 5785, § 2, 6, 3.83; Ord. No. 7104, § 3, 12-12-88; Ord. No.
7859, § 2, 7-6-92; Ord. No. 9261, § 5, 8-2-99; Ord. No. 12114, § 5, 8-7-24)
Sec. 21-12. Swimming pool admission, swim lesson, competitive swimming program,
and synchronized swimming program fees and rental rates.
   Fees for admission to and use of city swimming pools and swim lessons shall
be as established in the fee schedules as approved by the mayor and council and
maintained by the director.
(Ord. No. 4466, § 2, 4-12-76; Ord. No. 4657, § 1, 5-23-77; Ord. No. 5213, § 3,
8-4-80; Ord. No. 7104, § 4, 12-12-88; Ord. No. 7210, § 1, 6-5-89; Ord. No.
7859, § 3, 7-6-92; Ord. No. 8065, § 1, 6-14-93; Ord. No. 8338, § 1, 8-1-94;
Ord. No. 9261, § 6, 8-2-99; Ord. No. 9757, § 8, 8-5-02; Ord. No. 9850, § 6, 5-
12-03; Ord. No. 10260, § 3, 3-7-06; Ord. No. 10748, § 1, 1-5-10; Ord. No.
11000, § 2, 6-26-12, eff. 7-1-12; Ord. No. 12114, § 6, 8-7-24)
Sec. 21-13. Recreational classes.
   A listing of all instructional recreational classes offered by the
department shall be published and made available to members of the general
public, which program schedule shall state the fee per person enrolled in the
program. The fees per person for the lessons or classes shall be established by
the director based on the direct costs of the program plus an overhead charge
of one hundred (100) percent for program supervision, registration and
department administrative costs.
(Ord. No. 4466, § 2, 4-12-76; Ord. No. 4657, § 2, 5-23-77; Ord. No. 5213, § 4,
8-4-80; Ord. No. 7104, § 5, 12-12-88; Ord. No. 7859, § 4, 7-6-92; Ord. No.
9261, § 7, 8-2-99; Ord. No. 9757, § 9, 8-5-02; Ord. No. 9850, § 7, 5-12-03;
Ord. No. 12114, § 7, 8-7-24)
Sec. 21-13.1. Program registration fees – KIDCO.
   The fees for KIDCO Youth Recreation Program shall be as established in the
fee schedules as approved by the mayor and council and maintained by the
director.
(Ord. No. 9757, § 10, 8-5-02; Ord. No. 9850, § 8, 5-12-03; Ord. No. 10260, § 4,
3-7-06; Ord. No. 10748, § 1, 1-5-10; Ord. No. 11000, § 3, 6-26-12, eff. 7-1-12;
Ord. No. 12114, § 8, 8-7-24)
Sec. 21-13.2. Fees--Senior trip programs.
   In connection with the senior trip program, the fees per person for each
senior trip shall be established by the director based upon fifty (50) percent
of the direct cost of providing each trip, divided by the number of
participants.
(Ord. No. 7860, § 1, 7-6-92; Ord. No. 9757, § 11, 8-5-02; Ord. No. 9850, § 9,
5-12-03; Ord. No. 10260, § 5, 3-7-06; Ord. No. 12114, § 9, 8-7-24)
   Editors Note: It should be noted that § 15 of Ord. No. 10260 provides for an
effective date of July 1, 2006.
Sec. 21-14. Use of equipment – fees.
   The fees for use of event equipment (for example, display booths, staging,
P.A. systems and more) by civic, social, religious, charitable, commercial or
other users shall be as established in the fee schedules as approved by the
mayor and council and maintained by the director. The fee schedules also will
establish any associated initial minimum rental period, as well as additional
rental fees for extended periods; and will establish any non-refundable
deposits that are required.
(Ord. No. 4466, § 2, 4-12-76; Ord. No. 4657, § 3, 5-23-77; Ord. No. 8046, § 2,
5-10-93; Ord. No. 8302, §§ 1, 2, 6-13-94; Ord. No. 8494, §§ 1, 2, 5-1-95; Ord.
No. 9261, § 8, 8-2-99; Ord. No. 9757, § 12, 8-5-02; Ord. No. 10260, § 6, 3-7-
06; Ord. No. 10748, § 1, 1-5-10; Ord. No. 11000, § 4, 6-26-12, eff. 7-1-12;
Ord. No. 12114, § 10, 8-7-24)
Sec. 21-14.1. Use of recreation centers and their facilities; fees.
   Various parks include recreation centers (e.g. Archer, Quincie Douglas, El
Rio, Freedom, Northwest, Randolph, Santa Rosa, Clements, El Pueblo, Udall) that
have facilities such as gymnasiums, weightrooms, indoor tracks, racquetball
courts, locker rooms, game areas and other recreational amenities that require
the payment of fees for use. The fees for the use of these recreation center
facilities shall be as established in the fee schedules as approved by the
mayor and council and maintained by the director. Those schedules may establish
fees for daily passes, multi-use passes, annual or quarterly passes, gymnasium
rental, court rental, etc.; and may establish different fees for family, adult,
youth, seniors and other categories.
(Ord. No. 7104, § 8, 12-12-88; Ord. No. 9225, § 1, 5-10-99; Ord. No. 9757, §
13, 8-5-02; Ord. No. 9850, § 10, 5-12-03; Ord. No. 10260, § 7, 3-7-06; Ord. No.
10748, § 1, 1-5-10; Ord. No. 12114, § 11, 8-7-24)
Sec. 21-14.2. Reserved.
Sec. 21-14.3. Hi Corbett Stadium use.
   The fees for use of Hi Corbett Stadium shall be as established in the fee
schedules as approved by the mayor and council and maintained by the director.
In addition, the parks and recreation director is authorized to negotiate
charges for a percentage of parking or concessions revenue to be generated by
an event, and to charge for additional costs based on required staff time
including an appropriate overhead rate.
(Ord. No. 9261, § 9, 8-2-99; Ord. No. 9757, § 15, 8-5-02; Ord. No. 10260, § 9,
3-7-06; Ord. No. 10748, § 1, 1-5-10; Ord. No. 12114, § 13, 8-7-24)
Sec. 21-15. Non-city resident rates.
   Program and service fees and charges for non-city residents shall be
established by the director. Rates shall not exceed the direct cost of the
program or service plus twenty-five (25) percent for administrative overhead.
Each fiscal year the director of parks and recreation shall publish a schedule
of fees and charges for programs and services defining the non-city resident
rate structure.
(Ord. No. 9850, § 12, 5-12-03; Ord. No. 12114, § 14, 8-7-24)
Sec. 21-16. Use of certain meeting rooms; reservation fee for ramadas, reserved
park areas, special interest areas, sport fields, volleyball courts,
bandshells, outdoor performance centers, rodeo grounds, park special events,
and fees for special maintenance.
   (1)   The fees required for use of certain meeting rooms; reservation fee
for ramadas, reserved park areas, special interest areas, sport fields,
volleyball courts, skating rinks, bandshells, outdoor performance centers,
rodeo grounds, park special events, and fees for special maintenance shall be
as established in the fee schedules as approved by the mayor and council and
maintained by the director.
   (2)   For meeting rooms, the director is authorized to negotiate meeting
room rental rates for commercial organizations based on market comparisons.
   (3)   For special events, the director is authorized to negotiate special
event rates for events at any parks and recreation facility. Special event
rates shall be based on nature of the event, costs incurred in supporting the
event, lost revenues resulting from the event, and market comparisons. The
parks and recreation director is authorized to establish maintenance, damage,
and event refundable deposits based on the nature of the event.
   (4)   For the rodeo grounds, the director is authorized to negotiate food
and beverage concession charges in connection with the use of the rodeo
grounds, which will be one (1) percent to five (5) percent of the net proceeds
from an event after taxes. The director is authorized to establish maintenance,
damage, and special event refundable deposits in connection with the use of the
rodeo grounds based on the nature of the event, as well as ticket surcharges.
All revenue generated by the rodeo grounds will be deposited into a rodeo
grounds revenue account to be utilized for rodeo grounds operations and
improvements.
   (5)   For outdoor performance areas, the director is authorized to negotiate
and require fees and deposits for events; and to negotiate food and beverage
concession charges based on market comparisons; and to negotiate ticket
surcharges (for example, $1 per ticket sold) based on size, length of event,
and market comparisons.
   (6)   The users of any park facility referred to in this chapter may request
special maintenance of any athletic facility referred to in this chapter. The
request shall be in writing at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the
requested special maintenance. In writing, the department shall advise the
party requesting special maintenance at the time the request is made, the cost
of providing the special maintenance. The costs shall be an estimate of the
actual cost to the city of providing a service and shall be paid for in
advance.
(Ord. No. 4466, § 2, 4-12-76; Ord. No. 4657, § 4, 5-23-77; Ord. No. 5172, § 1,
6-23-80; Ord. No. 5213, § 6, 7, 8-4-80; Ord. No. 5373, §§ 3, 4, 5, 5-18-81;
Ord. No. 5678, § 4, 11-8-82; Ord. No. 7104, § 7, 12-12-88; Ord. No. 7390, § 1,
4-2-90; Ord. No. 8578, § 1, 10-2-95; Ord. No. 9261, § 10, 8-2-99; Ord. No.
9757, § 17, 8-5-02; Ord. No. 9850, §§ 13, 14, 15, 16, 5-12-03; Ord. No. 10260,
§§ 10, 11, 12, 13, 3-7-06; Ord. No. 10594, § 5, 10-7-08; Ord. No. 10748, § 1,
1-5-10; Ord. No. 11000, § 5, 6-26-12, eff. 7-1-12; Ord. No. 12114, § 15, 8-7-
24)
Sec. 21-17. Authorization to waive or discount fees and charges.
   (a)   The parks and recreation director, with the approval of the city
manager, is authorized to waive fees and charges and to establish a sliding
scale discount program based upon family size and income of household.
   (b)   The parks and recreation director, with the approval of the city
manager, is authorized to discount fees and issue passes for free admission to
the adaptive recreation center to such persons or members of such organizations
that make substantial contributions to the adaptive recreation center in money,
property or services.
(Ord. No. 4466, § 2, 4-12-76; Ord. No. 9757, § 18, 8-5-02; Ord. No. 10148, § 1,
4-26-05)
Sec. 21-18. Wasting or abusing athletic facility lighting; fines and penalties.
   (a)   The person or persons who fail to extinguish the lights after use of
any parks and recreation department athletic facility shall be subject to the
following fines or penalties:
   First offense: A minimum of a forty dollar ($40.00) fine.
   Second offense: A minimum of a eighty dollar ($80.00) fine.
   Third offense: Revocation of the privilege of being able to reserve any
athletic facilities for nighttime use for a period of one (1) year.
   (b)   In those parks in the city that have a posted hour of closing, it
shall be unlawful to continue to use lighted athletic facilities after the hour
of closing without authorization from the director of parks and recreation.
This shall subject the individual or individuals utilizing the facility to the
following fines or penalties:
   First offense: A minimum of a forty dollar ($40.00) fine.
   Second offense: A minimum of a eighty dollar ($80.00) fine.
   Third offense: Revocation of the privilege of being able to reserve any
athletic facilities for nighttime use for a period of one (1) year.
(Ord. No. 4657, § 5, 5-23-77; Ord. No. 9757, § 19, 8-5-02)
   Editors Note: Ord. No. 4657, § 5, adopted May 23, 1977, specifically amended
the Code by repealing former §
21-18 and adopting in lieu thereof a new §
21-18 as herein set out. Former §
21-18 had pertained to fees for adult tennis, slimnastics, self-defense and
fencing lessons, and had been derived from Ord. No. 4466, § 2, adopted Apr. 12,
1976.
Sec. 21-18.1. Administrative fees.
   Certain administrative fees shall apply to all fee transactions involving
parks facilities, including but not limited to a refund processing fee;
returned check fee; and declined credit card payment fee. These administrative
fees shall be as established in the fee schedules as approved by the mayor and
council and maintained by the director.
(Ord. No. 11000, § 6, 6-26-12, eff. 7-1-12; Ord. No. 12114, § 16, 8-7-24)
ARTICLE II.
CITY MUNICIPAL GOLF COURSES*
__________
*   Editors Note: Ord. No. 9334, § 1, adopted Dec. 13, 1999, amended Art. II,
in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said
ordinance, Art. II pertained to Randolph Park Golf Courses. See the Code
Comparative Table.
__________
Sec. 21-19. Damaging, defacing property.
No person shall post or display any sign, banner or advertisement, write upon,
cut, mutilate or deface or otherwise disturb any building, bench, ornament,
flower in parks and recreation property or facilities.
(Ord. No. 9334, § 1, 12-13-99; Ord. No. 9850, § 17, 5-12-03)
Sec. 21-20. Selling, soliciting on courses.
No person shall sell or solicit upon city municipal golf courses without the
written permission of the director of parks and recreation.
(Ord. No. 9334, § 1, 12-13-99)
Sec. 21-21. Permit to play required.
Every person must secure a permit before commencing each round of play on any
golf course. Such permit must remain in the possession of the player during
play and must be shown upon demand to any person authorized to inspect the
same.
(Ord. No. 9334, § 1, 12-13-99)
Sec. 21-22. Rates for city carts; rental agreement required.
   Sec. 21-22(1). Rates. The schedule of rates for the rental of city-owned
golf carts used on all city municipal golf courses shall be as established in
the fee schedules as approved by the mayor and council and maintained by the
director.
   Sec. 21-22(2). Rental agreement. Lessees of carts shall sign a rental
agreement prescribed by the director and shall furnish any information
requested by the director or the director's authorized representative.
(Ord. No. 9334, § 1, 12-13-99; Ord. No. 10070, § 1, 10-25-04; Ord. No. 12114, §
17, 8-7-24)
Sec. 21-23. Rates for use of private carts.
   The schedule of rates for the use of privately-owned golf carts used on all
city municipal golf courses shall be as established in the fee schedules as
approved by the mayor and council and maintained by the director.
(Ord. No. 9334, § 1, 12-13-99; Ord. No. 10070, § 2, 10-25-04; Ord. No. 12114, §
18, 8-7-24)
Sec. 21-23.1. Driving range golf ball rental fees.
   The schedule of driving range golf ball rental fees shall be as established
in the fee schedules as approved by the mayor and council and maintained by the
director.
(Ord. No. 9334, § 1, 12-13-99; Ord. No. 10070, § 2, 10-25-04; Ord. No. 12114, §
19, 8-7-24)
Sec. 21-24. General regulations.
The following rules are established for all municipal golf courses:
   Sec. 21-24(1). Players holding up the normal progress of play shall be
required at the request of any authorized employee of the parks and recreation
department to immediately move to the next hole when the group of golfers
directly ahead has completed play on the next hole. Failure to move to the next
hole when required will result in the immediate forfeiture of the player's
daily greens permit for play on the municipal golf course.
   Sec. 21-24(2). The director of parks and recreation is authorized to
establish other rules and regulations governing the operation of play on
municipal golf courses.
   Sec. 21-24(3). Use of one (1) set of clubs by more than one (1) player is
prohibited.
   Sec. 21-24(4). Golf carts shall not be permitted to run over aprons, greens
and tees, and shall be kept at least ten (10) feet from the edge of all greens.
   Sec. 21-24(5). Golf bags shall not be laid on the greens.
   Sec. 21-24(6). Players stopping to search for lost balls shall signal
waiting players behind them to play through and then wait until they have
progressed beyond the normal range of the next shot before resuming play.
   Sec. 21-24(7). Players holding up the normal progress of play shall be
required at the request of any authorized employee of the parks and recreation
department to immediately move to the next hole when the group of golfers
directly ahead has completed play on the next hole. Failure to move to the next
hole when required will result in the forfeiture of the player's daily greens
fee permit for play on the municipal golf course.
(Ord. No. 9334, § 1, 12-13-99)
Sec. 21-25. Reserved.
Sec. 21-25.1. Regular greens fees.
   The schedule of maximum greens fees for all municipal golf courses shall be
as established in the fee schedules as approved by the mayor and council and
maintained by the director.
(Ord. No. 9334, § 1, 12-13-99; Ord. No. 10070, § 3, 10-25-04; Ord. No. 12114, §
20, 8-7-24)
Sec. 21-25.2. Special golf rates/green fees.
   The director is authorized to establish and maintain special golf rates/
green fees at discounted rates (for example, discounted rates for seniors,
military, youth, etc.), subject to the approval by the mayor and council of
these special rates/fees. Any approved special golf rates/green fees will be
included in the fee schedules and maintained by the city clerk and the director
of parks and recreation for public view and inspection.
(Ord. No. 9334, § 1, 12-13-99; Ord. No. 10070, § 4, 10-25-04; Ord. No. 12114, §
21, 8-7-24)
Sec. 21-25.3. Reserved.
Sec. 21-25.4. Reserved.
Sec. 21-25.5. Fees for shotgun start tournaments.
The following fees formula is hereby established for golf tournaments utilizing
shotgun starts at all city municipal golf courses.
   Shotgun formula: Resident greens fees, plus cart rental, plus potential
revenue from lost play resulting from the scheduling of the shotgun tournament.
Fees will vary depending upon the starting time of the tournament.
(Ord. No. 9334, § 1, 12-13-99)
Sec. 21-25.6. Reserved.
Sec. 21-25.7. Authorization to discount golf rates.
The director of parks and recreation, with the approval of the city manager, is
authorized to establish golf rate specials, at rates lower than provided in
Article II, City Municipal Golf Courses, when excess golf course capacity
exists or golf market conditions warrant.
(Ord. No. 9334, § 1, 12-13-99)
Sec. 21-25.8. Authorization to establish food, beverage and merchandise prices.
The director of parks and recreation, with the approval of the city manager, is
authorized to establish prices for food, beverage and merchandise sold at city
municipal golf courses.
(Ord. No. 9334, § 1, 12-13-99)
Sec. 21-25.9. Reserved.
Sec. 21-25.10. Authorization to establish reservation policies.
The director of parks and recreation, with the approval of the city manager, is
authorized to establish reservation policies for individuals, clubs, groups and
tournaments for play at city municipal golf course courses, including policies
for non-compliance.
(Ord. No. 9744, § 1, 8-5-02)
Sec. 21-25.11. Authorization to establish frequent user discount policies.
The director of parks and recreation, with the approval of the city manager, is
authorized to establish discount policies for frequent users of city municipal
golf courses. The discount policy shall be on file in the city clerk's office.
(Ord. No. 10070, § 8, 10-25-04)
Sec. 21-26. Collection of fees.
The appropriate fee shall be collected from every player before a permit to
play on city municipal golf courses is issued, unless the issuance of a permit
without payment of fee is authorized by the director of parks and recreation
with the approval of the city manager.
(Ord. No. 9334, § 1, 12-13-99)
Sec. 21-27. Violations, penalty.
Any violation of this article shall be a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by
a fine of not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than fifty dollars
($50.00) for each offense.
(Ord. No. 9334, § 1, 12-13-99)
Sec. 21-28. Reserved.
Sec. 21-29. Reserved.
   Editors Note: Ord. No. 10070, § 9, adopted Oct. 25, 2004, repealed §
21-29, which pertained to locker rental fees and derived from Ord. No. 9334, §
1, adopted Dec. 13, 1999.
Secs. 21-30--21-37. Reserved.
ARTICLE III.
RESERVED*
__________
*   Editors Note: Section 1 of Ord. No. 7114, adopted Dec. 19, 1988, repealed
art. III, §§ 21-38--21-49, entitled "Baseball Commission." The article was
derived from 1953 Code, ch. 2, §§ 30-39; and Ord. No. 3074, 3076, 3393, 5172,
5982, 6382.
__________
Secs. 21-38--21-50. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV.
GENE REID PARK ZOO ADMITTANCE FEES*
__________
*   Editors Note: Ord. No. 3579, § 12, enacted Jan. 4, 1971, repealed former
art. IV, "Zoological Commission," §§ 21-51--21-56, derived from Ord. No. 3361,
§ 1, enacted Nov. 17, 1969. Ord. No. 3812, §§ 1--3, adopted Mar. 27, 1972,
amended this Code by adding a new art. IV, §
21-51(1)--(4). At the discretion of the editor, art. IV was entitled "Gene Reid
Park Zoo Admittance Fees"; catchlines were added for purposes of indexing and
reference; and §§ 21-51(1)--(3) and 21-54(4) were codified as §§
21-51,
21-52. Ord. No. 3812, §§ 2, 3, directory and effective date provisions, were
omitted.
__________
Sec. 21-51. Schedule.
   (a)   The following schedule of fees is hereby established for admittance to
Gene Reid Park Zoo:
 
               December 1,
Category       2023 - June July 1, 2024 July 1, 2025 July 1, 2026 July 1, 2027
               30, 2024
Adult (ages    $10.50      $11.25       $12.00       $12.75       $13.50
15-61)
Senior
Citizens (ages $8.50       $9.25        $10.00       $10.75       $11.50
62 and over)
Children (ages $6.50       $7.00        $8.50        $9.00        $9.50
2-14)
Reserved       Free        Free         Free         Free         Free
school groups
Children under Free        Free         Free         Free         Free
age 2
Discount for
EBT            $4.00       $4.75        $5.50        $6.25        $7.00
Cardholders
 
   (b)   Passes for free admission to the zoo may be issued by the director of
the department of parks and recreation to such persons or members of such
organizations that make substantial contributions to the zoo in money,
property, or services.
(Ord. No. 3812, § 1, 3-27-72; Ord. No. 4149, § 1, 3-11-74; Ord. No. 4164, § 1,
4-8-74; Ord. No. 4401, § 1, 10-13-75; Ord. No. 5172, § 3, 6-23-80; Ord. No.
7054, § 1, 10-3-88; Ord. No. 7859, § 6, 7-6-92; Ord. No. 8319, § 1, 7-5-94;
Ord. No. 9261, § 11, 8-2-99; Ord. No. 9757, § 20, 8-5-02; Ord. No. 10304, § 1,
7-6-06; Ord. No. 10748, § 1, 1-5-10; Ord. No. 11000, § 7, 6-26-12, eff. 7-1-12;
Ord. No. 11367, § 1, 6-7-16, eff. 7-1-16; Ord. No. 11485, eff. 8-8-17; Ord. No.
12063, § 1, 12-12-23)
Sec. 21-52. Reserved.
   Editors Note: Ord. No. 9757, § 21, adopted Aug. 5, 2002, repealed §
21-52, which pertained to disposition. See the Code Comparative Table.
Secs. 21-53, 21-54. Reserved.
ARTICLE V.
GENE REID PARK ZOO IMPROVEMENT FUND***
__________
***   Editors Note: Ordinance No. 9000, § 1, adopted December 15, 1997,
repealed §§ 21-55, 21-56. Formerly, such sections pertained to community center
recreation: public ice skating permitted; fees for public ice skating; penalty
and derived from Ord. No. 4390, §§ 1, 2, 9-8-75.
__________
Sec. 21-60.   Gene Reid Park Zoo improvement fund.
   (a)   The director of the department of finance shall establish the Gene
Reid Park Zoo (Zoo) improvement fund (fund). The fund shall consist of all
revenues collected from the tax authorized under Tucson Charter (TC)
Chapter IV, Section 5 as well as any interest earned on those monies. The
director shall deposit all monies in the fund and all accounts therein as
provided by TC
Chapter 19. The director shall credit monies earned from these investments to
the fund.
   (b)   Money deposited in the fund shall:
   (1)   be used for capital improvements, operations, and maintenance at the
Zoo;
   (2)   be appropriated by the mayor and council only for the purposes set
forth in this Section; and
   (c)   Supplement and not supplant the monies that would otherwise be
appropriated by the mayor and council to the Zoo.
(Ord. No. 11518, § 2, 1-23-18)
Chapter 22
PENSIONS, RETIREMENT, GROUP INSURANCE, LEAVE BENEFITS AND OTHER INSURANCE
BENEFITS*
__________
*   Editors Note: Ord. No. 10294, § 1, adopted June 27, 2006, amended the title
of ch.
22 to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, ch.
22 was entitled, "Pensions, Retirement and Group Insurance." It should be noted
that said ordinance is effective June 20, 2006.
The 1953 Code, ch. 20, §§ 1--24, provided for pensions and retirement. These
sections were repealed by Ord. No. 1420, § 1, enacted Nov. 30, 1953. Terms and
conditions of the repeal, appearing as ch. 20, §§ 25 and 26 in the 1957
supplement to the 1953 Code, have not been included in this Code because fully
executed and rights thereunder are guarantee by the present supplement
retirement systems, §
22-34 et seq.
   Charter References: Civil service generally,
ch. XXII.
   Cross References: Civil service generally, ch.
10.
__________
Art. I.   In General, §§ 22-1--22-12
Art. II.   Social Security, §§ 22-13--22-29
Art. III.   Tucson Supplemental Retirement System, §§ 22-30--22-77
   Div. 1. Types of Retirement and Benefits, §§ 22-30--22-43.1
   Div. 2. Administration of the System, §§ 22-44--22-77
Art. IV.   Group Insurance and Medical Health Plans, §§ 22-78--22-89
Art. V.   Leave Benefit Plan, §§ 22-90--22-99
Art. VI.   Other Insurance Benefits, §§ 22-100--22-104
Article I. In General
Sec.
22-1   Contributions to the public safety personnel retirement system.
Secs.
22-2 – 22-12. Reserved.
Article II. Social Security
Sec.
22-13.   Short title.
Sec.
22-14.   Purpose.
Sec.
22-15.   Execution of application and agreement authorized.
Sec.
22-16.   Effect of membership.
Sec.
22-17.   Director of finance to pay city contributions.
Sec.
22-18.   Funds for city contributions for current services.
Sec.
22-19.   Funds for city contributions for past services.
Sec.
22-20.   Employee contributions for current services.
Sec.
22-21.   Employee contributions for past services.
Sec.
22-22.   Collection of employee contributions for past services.
Sec.
22-23.   Duties of director of personnel.
Secs.
22-24--22-29.   Reserved.
Article III. Tucson Supplemental Retirement System
Division 1. Types of Retirement and Benefits
Sec.
22-30.   Definitions.
Sec.
22-31.   Trust fund.
Sec.
22-32.   Exclusive benefit.
Sec.
22-33.   Membership.
Sec.
22-34.   Membership contributions.
Sec.
22-35.   City contributions.
Sec.
22-36.   Accumulation of credited service.
Sec.
22-37.   Retirements.
Sec.
22-38.   End of service program.
Sec.
22-39.   Disability retirement.
Sec.
22-40.   Death benefits.
Sec.
22-41.   Refund of accumulated contributions accounts; transfers to other
systems.
Sec.
22-42.   Retirement benefit payment options.
Sec.
22-43.   Administration of benefit payments; benefit calculations.
Sec.
22-43.1.   System approved domestic relations orders.
Division 2. Administration of the System
Sec.
22-44.   Board of trustees.
Sec.
22-45.   Investments.
Sec.
22-46.   Finance director duties.
Sec.
22-47.   Human resources director duties.
Sec.
22-48.   System administrator.
Sec.
22-49.   Indemnification.
Sec.
22-50.   Miscellaneous administrative provisions.
Sec.
22-51.   Alteration, amendment, repeal of the system.
Sec.
22-52.   Effective date.
Sec.
22-53.   Reserved.
Sec.
22-54.   Reserved.
Sec.
22-55.   Reserved.
Article IIIA. Deferred Compensation Retirement Plans
Sec.
22-56.   Purpose.
Sec.
22-57.   Definitions.
Sec.
22-58.   Exclusive benefit.
Sec.
22-59.   Eligibility and participation.
Sec.
22-60.   DC plan contributions.
Sec.
22-61.   Management board.
Sec.
22-62.   Administration of DC plans.
Sec.
22-63.   Indemnification.
Sec.
22-64.   Applicable laws.
Sec.
22-65.   Amendment and termination of DC plans.
Secs.
22-66 – 22-77. Reserved.
Article IV. Group Insurance and Medical Health Plans
Sec.
22-78.   Short title.
Sec.
22-79.   Purpose.
Sec.
22-80.   Coverage authorized; coverage optional.
Sec.
22-81.   Establishment of Self-Insured Health Benefits Trust.
Sec.
22-82.   Board of trustees for Self-Insured Health Benefits Trust.
Sec.
22-83.   Manner of financing Self-Insured Health Benefits Trust.
Sec.
22-84.   City's premium costs; finance director to pay premiums.
Sec.
22-85.   Duties of human resources director; employees' premium costs.
Sec.
22-86.   Expenditure of funds held in Self-Insured Health Benefits Trust.
Sec.
22-87.   Effective date of Self-Insured Health Benefits Trust.
Sec.
22-88.   Medical insurance incentive allowance.
Sec.
22-89.    Reserved.
Article V. Leave Benefit Plan
Sec.
22-90.   Providing for leave benefit plan.
Sec.
22-91.   Duties of the human resources director and city manager.
Sec.
22-92.   Peace officer recruitment incentive.
Sec.
22-93.   Conditions for annual sick leave payment to fire department
commissioned personnel.
Sec.
22-94.   Conditions for annual sick leave payment to police department
commissioned personnel.
Sec.
22-95.   Reserved.
Sec.
22-96.   Transfer and accrual of sick leave and vacation for City of Tucson/
Pima County Household Hazardous Waste Program employees entering city service.
Sec.
22-97.   Living donor leave.
Sec.
22-98.   Public safety bridge leave.
Sec.
22-99.   Reserved.
Article VI. Other Insurance Benefits
Sec.
22-100.   Reserved.
Sec.
22-101.   Death benefit for employee group eligible for representation by TPOA.
Sec.
22-102.   Death benefit for employee group eligible for representation by IAFF.
Sec.
22-103.   Death benefit for employee group eligible for representation by
AFSCME.
Sec.
22-104.   Death benefit for employee group eligible for representation by CWA/
TACE.
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL
Sec. 22-1   Contributions to the public safety personnel retirement system.
   Effective February 1, 2010, the City will not subsidize employee
contributions to the Public Safety Personnel Retirement System. Employees who
are members of the Public Safety Personnel Retirement System shall contribute
as provided in Arizona Revised Statutes Title 38, Chapter 5, Article 4.
(Ord. No. 10751, § 1, 1-5-10, eff. 2-1-10)
Secs. 22-2 – 22-12. Reserved.
ARTICLE II.
SOCIAL SECURITY
Sec. 22-13. Short title.
This article may be cited as the Tucson Social Security Ordinances.
(1953 Code, ch. 20, § 27)
Sec. 22-14. Purpose.
It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this article to authorize and
provide old-age and survivors insurance coverage for certain officers and
employees of the city who are eligible therefor under the provisions of title
II of the Federal Social Security Act, as amended, and implemented by chapter
126, Arizona Laws of 1951, as amended, being A.R.S. title 38, chapter 5,
article 1.
(1953 Code, ch. 20, § 28)
Sec. 22-15. Execution of application and agreement authorized.
The mayor is hereby authorized and directed to negotiate and sign in behalf of
the city an application and agreement, hereinafter called the agreement, with
the Employment Security Commission of Arizona, hereinafter referred to as the
state agency, containing such terms and conditions as may be required under the
provisions of chapter 126, Arizona Laws of 1951, as amended, being A.R.S. title
38, chapter 5, article 1, and the regulations and requirements issued pursuant
thereto, whereby such state agency shall be authorized and directed to take the
necessary steps to extend old age and survivor's insurance coverage as provided
under title II of the Federal Social Security Act, as amended, to the eligible
officers and employees designated by such agreement; however, no such
agreement, or any modification thereof, shall be signed unless and until the
same is authorized and approved by an appropriate resolution of the mayor and
council.
(1953 Code, ch. 20, § 29)
Sec. 22-16. Effect of membership.
Approval of the aforementioned agreement, or any modification thereof, by the
state agency and the inclusion of the officers and employees designated thereby
in any federal-state agreement now in effect, or hereafter entered into, or any
modification thereof, between the state and the federal department of health,
education and welfare pursuant to section 218 of the Federal Social Security
Act, shall have the effect of making all such officers and employees eligible
for old-age and survivors insurance benefits on the same basis as though the
services they rendered constituted employment within the meaning of title II of
the Federal Social Security Act. The liability for the payment of such
benefits, however, shall not constitute obligations of the city; and such
officers and employees and their beneficiaries shall look solely to such
federal agency as may now be or may hereafter become liable for the payment of
such benefits under applicable federal law or laws.
(1953 Code, ch. 20, § 30)
Sec. 22-17. Director of finance to pay city contributions.
The director of finance is hereby authorized and directed to pay to the state
agency such sums as may from time to time be due and payable to such agency in
accordance with the agreement and applicable federal and state laws and
regulations and requirements issued pursuant thereto. Such payments, except as
hereinafter provided, shall be made from the appropriate fund of the city
quarterly or at such time or times as the state agency may hereafter prescribe.
(1953 Code, ch. 20, § 31)
Sec. 22-18. Funds for city contributions for current services.
The contributions required of the city under the agreement equal to the maximum
amount imposed, or which may hereafter be imposed, by section 1410 of the
Federal Revenue Code on employers of persons engaged in employment as defined
in section 1426 of such code, for the period beginning December 16, 1953, and
ending June 39, 1954, together with the city's pro rata share of the cost of
administering the provisions of chapter 126, Arizona Laws of 1951, shall be
paid from funds budgeted and authorized to be contributed during the fiscal
year ending June 30, 1954, as the city's contribution to the Tucson City
Employees' Retirement Fund, being chapter
20 of the Code of the City of Tucson, 1953, abolished by Ordinance No. 1420.
Beginning with the fiscal year 1954-55, and each year thereafter, the city
manager shall cause an amount sufficient to pay such employer contributions to
be included in the annual budget request made to the mayor and council. For the
purpose of providing funds to meet such employer contributions and
administrative expenses, the city council shall annually levy, in addition to
all other taxes levied by the city, a tax clearly sufficient to provide the
total amount of all such items in the budget, however, the council may
appropriate from any other available funds all or part of the total of such
amounts in the budget, in which event the tax levy to be made for such purposes
shall be clearly sufficient to provide the difference between the amounts so
appropriated and the total amount of all such items in the budget.
(1953 Code, ch. 20, § 33)
Sec. 22-19. Funds for city contributions for past services.
The director of finance shall compute the contribution required of the city
under the agreement equal to the amount of the tax on which would have been
imposed on the city as an employer by section 1410 of the Federal Internal
Revenue Code, if the services of officers and employees included in the
agreement rendered to the city subsequent to January 1, 1951, and prior to
December 16, 1953, had constituted employment as defined by section 1426 of
such code. This contribution shall be paid as follows:
   Sec. 22-19(1). The amount due and payable on the salary or wages of officers
and employees who were members of the Tucson City Employees' Retirement System,
being chapter
20 of the Code of the City of Tucson, 1953, abolished by Ordinance No. 1420,
and certified by the director of finance shall be paid from the assets of that
system credited to fund B established by section
22-1 of this [that] chapter. The board of trustees, created by section 22-2 [of
former chapter
20], is hereby authorized and directed to convert such portion of the assets of
the abolished system credited to fund B as may be necessary to effect the
payment of the amount required as to such officers and employees, and the
director of finance is hereby authorized and directed to transfer the same to
the general fund of the city to be disbursed therefrom in accordance with
section
22-17 of this chapter.
   Sec. 22-19(2). The amount due and payable on the salary and wages of
officers and employees who were not members of the Tucson Employees' Retirement
System shall be paid from funds budgeted and authorized to be contributed
during the fiscal year ending June 30, 1954, as the city's contribution to the
Tucson City Employees' Retirement Fund, abolished by Ordinance No. 1420.
(1953 Code, ch. 20, § 33)
Sec. 22-20. Employee contributions for current services.
In consideration of an officer's or employee's retention in or entry upon
employment with the city on and after the effective date of the inclusion of
his office or position under old-age survivors insurance coverage, the director
of finance, pursuant to the authority granted the city in chapter 126, Laws of
1951, of the State of Arizona, being A.R.S. title 38, chapter 5, article 1, is
hereby directed to deduct and withhold for each and every payroll period from
the compensation of such officer and employee a sum equal to the maximum amount
imposed, or which may hereafter be imposed, by section 1400 of the Federal
Internal Revenue Code on persons engaged in employment as defined by section
1426 of such code. The amounts so withheld shall be paid to the state agency as
provided by section
22-17; however, failure of the director of finance to withhold such sums shall
not relieve such officer or employee from whose compensation such sums are not
withheld from the liability thereof. If more or less than the correct amount is
deducted in any payroll period, proper adjustments, or refund if adjustment is
impracticable, shall be made, without interest, in such manner and at such
times as the state agency may prescribe.
(1953 Code, ch. 20, § 32)
Sec. 22-21. Employee contributions for past services.
On December 16, 1953, or as soon thereafter, as may be practicable, the
director of personnel is hereby authorized and directed to give all officers
and employees occupying, or on authorized leave from, offices and positions
included in the agreement as of the date old-age and survivors insurance
coverage becomes effective as to their offices and positions the following
notice in writing:
"You are hereby notified that the mayor and council of the City of Tucson,
pursuant to the authority granted by chapter 126, Arizona Laws of 1951, has
entered into an agreement with the employment security commission of Arizona
providing for the extension of old-age and survivors insurance coverage as
provided by title II of the Federal Social Security Act to certain officers and
employees of the city. This agreement includes the office or position occupied
by you, or from which you hold an authorized leave, to be effective December 1,
1953, such coverage being retroactive to January 1, 1951. Your continuation in
office or occupancy of your position, or retention of the right to reoccupy
your position on expiration of leave therefrom, after such date shall
constitute acknowledgment on your part of your ability for the payment to the
director of finance of an amount equal to the tax which would have been imposed
upon you for salary or wages received by you as an employee of the city by
section 1400 of the Federal Internal Revenue Code if your services to the city
subsequent to January 1, 1951, and prior to December 15, 1953, had constituted
employment as defined by section 1426 of such code. You will be notified
subsequently of the amount of this contribution which will be due and payable
within sixty (60) days after the effective date of such coverage."
(1953 Code, ch. 20, § 32)
Sec. 22-22. Collection of employee contributions for past services.
The director of finance shall compute and take the necessary steps to collect
amounts due from each officer and employee under the provisions of section
22-21. Officers and employees entitled to withdraw their accumulated
contributions to the abolished retirement system as provided under section
22-1(9) [of the 1953 Code], may discharge their liability under section
22-21, in whole or in part, by filing with the board of trustees, established
by section 22-2 [of the 1953 Code], an assignment in writing, in such form as
shall be deemed legally sufficient by the city attorney, authorizing and
directing the director of finance to transfer and apply all or such portion
thereof as may be necessary of the amount standing to their credit in trust
fund A established by section
22-1(8) [of the 1953 Code]. Such board of trustees is hereby authorized and
directed to convert such portion of the assets of the abolished system credited
to fund A as may be necessary to effect the payment of the amounts so assigned;
and the director of finance is hereby authorized and directed to transfer the
same to the general fund of the city, together with such other amounts as may
he collect directly form such officers and employees in discharge of the
liability imposed under the provisions of section
22-21, to be disbursed therefrom in accordance with the provisions of section
22-17.
(1953 Code, ch. 20, § 32)
Sec. 22-23. Duties of director of personnel.
The director of personnel is hereby charged with the duty of causing all
officers and employees of the city included under the agreement to be informed
as to their obligations and rights under such agreement and old-age and
survivors insurance coverage.
(1953 Code, ch. 20, § 34)
Secs. 22-24--22-29. Reserved.
ARTICLE III.
TUCSON SUPPLEMENTAL RETIREMENT SYSTEM*
__________
*   Editors Note: Ord. No. 10657, §§ 1--6, adopted April 28, 2009, effective
July 1, 2009, amended Art. III in its entirety to read as herein set out.
Former Art. III, §§
22-34--22-55, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No.
9645, § 2, adopted Dec. 17, 2001; Ord. No. 9701, § 1, adopted April 15, 2002;
Ord. No. 9754, § 1, adopted August 5, 2002; Ord. No. 9776, §§ 1--4, adopted
Oct. 7, 2002; Ord. No. 9826, § 1, adopted March 24, 2003; Ord. No. 10011, §§ 1,
2, adopted August 2, 2004; Ord. No. 10047, § 1, adopted Oct. 11, 2004; Ord. No.
10093, § 1, adopted Dec. 6, 2004; Ord. No. 10157, § 1, adopted June 7, 2005;
Ord. No. 10158, § 1, adopted June 7, 2005; Ord. No. 10283, §§ 1--3, adopted
June 6, 2006; Ord. No. 10284, §§ 1--4, adopted June 6, 2006; Ord. No. 10303, §
1, adopted July 6, 2006; Ord. No. 10320, § 1, adopted Sept. 19, 2006; Ord. No.
10322, § 1, adopted Sept. 26, 2006; Ord. No. 10428, § 1, adopted June 26, 2007;
Ord. No. 10445, § 1, adopted Sept. 5, 2007; Ord. No. 10483, §§ 1--4, adopted
Nov. 27, 2007; Ord. No. 10489, § 1, adopted Jan. 8, 2008; Ord. No. 10511, § 1,
adopted March 25, 2008.
__________
DIVISION 1.
TYPES OF RETIREMENT AND BENEFITS
Sec. 22-30. Definitions.
   Sec. 22-30(a). "Accrued benefit" means the amount of the retirement benefit
that the member has earned as of any particular date, based on the member's
average final monthly compensation and credited service as of the date of the
calculation.
   Sec. 22-30(b). "Accrued service" means a member's service credit under the
system for vesting and benefit accrual purposes which is earned (1) for
personal service rendered to the city in exchange for compensation (including
certain approved leaves of absence), (2) for accrued and unused leave earned
during employment with the city prior to entering the end of service program
(subject to the restrictions set forth in section
22-36(b)(2)), or (3) in connection with a direct trustee-to-trustee transfer
from the Arizona State Retirement System pursuant to section
22-36(c)(1). With regard to the accrued service earned pursuant to (1) or (2)
above, a member shall earn 1/2080 of a year of service credit for each hour of
compensation. A member who is compensated on less than a full-time basis shall
receive credit for a proportionate part of a full year of accrued service.
Accrued service shall be expressed as whole and fractional years.
   Sec. 22-30(c). "Accumulated contributions account" means the sum of all
member contributions made by the employee, not to include employer
contributions, and the interest credited to the member contributions during the
period the member contributions are on deposit with the Tucson Supplemental
Retirement System.
   Sec. 22-30(d). "Actuarial Equivalent" means a Retirement Benefit payment
option of equal value to another Retirement Benefit payment option, computed on
the basis of appropriate actuarial assumptions. The Board shall determine, in
accordance with Section
22-44(h), the applicable mortality table and interest rates, which shall be
used in making Actuarial Equivalent determinations under the System, upon
receipt of advice and experience analysis from the System actuary. The
actuarial assumptions approved by the Board shall be set forth in an "Addendum
to TSRS Code Sec.
22-30(d) – TSRS Actuarial Assumptions" (the "Addendum") which shall be updated
by the Board from time to time as necessary. The Addendum shall be maintained
in the offices of the System Administrator.
   Sec. 22-30(e). "Additional service" means whole and fractional years of
additional service credit which is purchased by the member in accordance with
section
22-36(c)(2) through section
22-36(g). Additional service is recognized for benefit accrual and benefit
eligibility purposes hereunder, but is not recognized for vesting purposes.
   Sec. 22-30(f). "Adjusted income base" means, for the purposes of section
22-39(f), the member's compensation as of the member's termination date,
adjusted thereafter for each fiscal year of disability retirement to
approximate the average compensation increase for active employees of the city.
The member's termination date compensation shall be adjusted annually by the
sum of (1) the actual city wide cost of living percentage increase for active
employees funded by the city in the applicable fiscal year, plus (2) a three
and eight-tenths percent (3.8%) average merit increase for any fiscal year
during which merit increases for active employees are funded by the city. The
adjusted income base shall be determined by the board, in its discretion and on
a uniform and non-discriminatory basis, for any disabled member.
   Sec. 22-30(g). "Alternate payee" means member's spouse, former spouse or
dependent children/step-children or person identified as an alternate payee in
a plan approved domestic relations or child support order.
   Sec. 22-30(h). "Annual required contribution" or "ARC" means the annual
amount necessary to fund all employee segment normal cost amounts plus that
amount necessary to satisfy the annual amortization requirements for the
system's unfunded accrued liability, as determined by the system's actuary in
accordance with sound actuarial principles, and as set by the board on a fiscal
year basis. The annual required contribution is expressed as a percentage of
the city's active member payroll costs for a fiscal year. Changes in accrued
liabilities and actuarial experience may increase or decrease the annual
required contribution.
   Sec. 22-30(i). "Average final monthly compensation" or "AFMC" means the
member's average compensation for the applicable employment period, as defined
below, within the one hundred twenty (120) months immediately preceding the
member's termination date, during which the member's compensation was the
highest. The "applicable employment period" for a tier I member shall be a
period of thirty-six (36) consecutive calendar months of employment with the
city and the "applicable employment period" for a tier II member shall be a
period of sixty (60) consecutive calendar months of employment with the city.
If the member has less than the number of consecutive calendar months of
employment required for the applicable employment period calculation (thirty-
six (36) months or sixty (60) months), the AFMC shall be the average of the
compensation earned by the member during the period of employment with the
city. For tier I members, accumulated unused vacation and sick leave hours
shall be included in the thirty-six (36) month period at the member's final pay
rate, with an equal number of hours subtracted from the beginning of the
thirty-six (36) month period, provided that the member contribution
requirements of section
22-34(f) are satisfied and that the inclusion of the accumulated unused
vacation and sick leave hours does not result in a decrease in the AFMC.
Accumulated unused vacation and sick leave hours shall not be included in the
calculation of average final monthly compensation for tier II members. The
calculation of average final monthly compensation is subject to the special
adjustment rules set forth in section
22-43(b) (part-time employment) and section
22-43(c) (unpaid authorized leave). For the period beginning on July 1, 2009,
and ending on June 30, 2010, any active member who is subject to a reduction in
pay in lieu of furlough shall continue to receive compensation credit for
purposes of AFMC calculation during the reduction period at the rate of pay in
effect for the member immediately preceding the pay reductions in lieu of
furlough.
   Sec. 22-30(j). "Beneficiary" means any person(s), trust or estate entitled
to receive benefits under this article as designated by a member of the system
in accordance with section
22-33(f).
   Sec. 22-30(k). "Board" means the Tucson Supplemental Retirement System Board
of Trustees.
   Sec. 22-30(l). "Code" means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.
   Sec. 22-30(m). "Compensation" means base salary, vacation and sick leave pay
and worker's compensation pay equal to base salary for which an employee in a
covered position receives credited service. In certain cases and pursuant to
the provisions of this article, compensation may be imputed to hours included
in credited service for which no services are performed. Compensation cannot be
earned after retirement.
   Sec. 22-30(n). "Credited service" means the accrued service and additional
service to which the member or the member's beneficiary shall be entitled.
   Sec. 22-30(o). "Death benefit" means the cash lump sum payable upon the
death of a vested member and equal to two (2) times the value of the deceased
member's accumulated contributions account.
   Sec. 22-30(p). "Disability retirement benefit" means the retirement benefit
payable to a member who is qualified for disability retirement as set forth in
section
22-39(a) and which is calculated in accordance with section
22-39(c).
   Sec. 22-30(q). "Domestic relations order" means any judgment, decree, order
or approval of a property settlement agreement entered in a court of competent
jurisdiction and issued pursuant to a state domestic relations law that relates
to the provision of child support, alimony payments, or marital property rights
to a spouse, former spouse, child or other dependent of a member.
   Sec. 22-30(r). "Early retirement benefit" means the retirement benefit
payable to a member who is eligible for early retirement as set forth in
section
22-37(a)(1)(B) and which is calculated in accordance with section
22-37(b).
   Sec. 22-30(s). "Employee segment normal cost" means the annual amount
necessary to fund the benefits accrued under the system in a particular year
based on member service and compensation, by each employee segments eligible
for membership in the system for which the system actuary shall perform
employee segment normal cost calculations: (i) members hired by the city prior
to July 1, 2006, (ii) tier I members hired by the city on or after July 1,
2006, and (iii) tier II members.
   Sec. 22-30(t). "Employer contribution" means the difference between the
annual required contribution and the member contribution rate, determined on a
fiscal year basis.
   Sec. 22-30(u). "Interest" means the annual rate or rates of interest
declared by the board from time to time in accordance with the provisions of
section
22-44(h) and credited to the members' accumulated contributions accounts in
accordance with the board's declaration. Interest is credited as simple
interest with no compounding and is deposited two (2) times per year, subject
to the authority of the board to modify the Interest crediting method from time
to time.
   Sec. 22-30(v). "Legal or personal representative" means the court appointed
or duly authorized legal representative of an employee, a member, an estate or
a minor child.
   Sec. 22-30(w). "Member" means an employee who is eligible to accrue
retirement benefits under the system or, as the context may indicate, a former
employee who has accrued refund rights or retirement benefits under the system.
   Sec. 22-30(x). "Member contribution rate" means the portion of the annual
required contribution to be paid by the members in any particular fiscal year,
determined in accordance with section
22-34(a) or section
22-34(b), as applicable.
   Sec. 22-30(y). "Normal retirement age" means the age at which a member is
eligible for a normal service retirement. For tier I members hired by the city
prior to July 1, 2009, the normal retirement age is sixty-two (62). For tier I
members hired by the city on or after July 1, 2009, and prior to July 1, 2011,
the normal retirement age is the later of the member's sixty-second (62nd)
birthday or the date on which the member is credited with at least five (5)
years of accrued service. For tier II members, the normal retirement age is the
later of the member's sixty-fifth (65th) birthday or the date on which the
member is credited with at least five (5) years of accrued service.
   Sec. 22-30(z). "Normal retirement benefit" means the retirement benefit
payable to a member who is eligible for a normal service retirement as set
forth in section
22-37(a)(1)(A). For tier I members, the normal retirement benefit shall equal
two and twenty-five one hundredths (2.25) percent of the member's average final
monthly compensation multiplied by the number of years of the member's total
credited service. For tier II members, the normal retirement benefit shall
equal two and no one hundredths (2.00) percent of the member's average final
monthly compensation multiplied by the number of years of the member's total
credited service.
   Sec. 22-30(aa) "Prior government or military service" means time as an
employee of the United States government, a state of the United States, a
political subdivision of a state, this political subdivision, a tribal
government (with the exception of any services rendered to the tribal
government after January 1, 2007, which were commercial in nature), the Armed
Forces of the United States, a state's National Guard, the reserves of any
military establishment of the United States or any state whether on active or
reserve duty; and, such service is not treated as credited service with any
other retirement system for which the member is entitled to receive a benefit.
   Sec. 22-30(bb). "Qualified military service" means service in the uniformed
services of the United States, as defined in section 414(u)(5) of the Code.
   Sec. 22-30(cc). "Retirement benefit" means the monthly benefit payable to a
member who satisfies the conditions for normal retirement, early retirement,
deferred retirement or disability retirement.
   Sec. 22-30(dd). "Retirement points rule" means, for tier I members, the rule
of eighty (80). The rule of eighty (80) is defined as the sum of the member's
age and years of credited service equaling at least eighty (80). For tier II
members, the "retirement points rule" means the rule of eighty-five (85). The
rule of eighty-five (85) is defined as the sum of the member's age and years of
crediting service equaling at least eighty-five (85); provided, however, that
the member is at least sixty (60) years of age.
   Sec. 22-30(ee). "Spouse" means the lawfully recognized husband or wife of a
member. The term "spouse" also includes the domestic partner of a member,
provided that the member files a valid a domestic partnership registration
statement with the city's finance department, in accordance with chapter
17, article IX of the Tucson Code, as amended. With regard to domestic
partners, the system administrator may rely exclusively on the finance
department's domestic partnership records. In its discretion, the system
administrator may require any member or purported spouse to produce reasonable
documentation of an individual's status as a spouse hereunder.
   Sec. 22-30(ff). "System" means the Tucson Supplemental Retirement System, as
set forth in the chapter
22, article III of the Tucson City Code, as amended.
   Sec. 22-30(gg). "Termination date" means the member's last day of active
employment with the city as the result of resignation, discharge, layoff,
retirement, death or total and permanent disability.
   Sec. 22-30(hh). "Tier I member" means a member who was hired by the city
prior to July 1, 2011. A rehired member shall reenter the system as a tier I
member only if all of the following conditions are satisfied as of the date of
rehire: (1) The rehired employee was a tier I member of the system during the
employee's previous employment with the city, (2) the rehired employee was a
vested member as of the most recent termination date, and (3) the rehired
employee has not requested a refund of the member's accumulated contributions
account or a transfer of his accrued benefit in accordance with section
22-41. All other rehired members shall reenter the system as tier II members.
   Sec. 22-30(ii). "Tier II member" means a member who was hired by the city on
or after july 1, 2011, or a rehired member who is not entitled to be a tier I
member as set forth in section
22-30(gg).
   Sec. 22.30(jj). "Total and permanent disability" means the inability to
engage in any substantial gainful activity with the city by reason of any
medically determinable physical or mental impairment that can be expected to
result in death or continue for a long and indefinite duration. If the Social
Security Administration determines that a member is totally and permanently
disabled for purposes of Social Security Disability Insurance, the Social
Security Administration's determination shall be treated as strong evidence of
total and permanent disability; provided, however, that the Board shall make an
independent determination of the date on which any disability retirement
benefit shall commence in accordance with section
22-39(b).
   Sec. 22.30(kk). "Trust fund" means the custodial or trust account(s)
maintained under the system as set forth in section 22-31.
   Sec. 22-30(ll). "Vested" means a member who has accumulated a minimum of
five (5) years of accrued service. A vested member is entitled to receive a
retirement benefit under the system.
(Ord. No. 10657, § 1, 4-28-09, eff. 7-1-09; Ord. No. 10696, § 1, 8-5-09, eff.
7-1-09; Ord. No. 10711, § 1, 9-9-09, eff. 7-1-09; Ord. No. 10712, § 1, 9-9-09,
eff. 7-1-09; Ord. No. 10915, § 1, 6-21-11, eff. 7-1-11; Ord. No. 11020, § 1, 9-
11-12, eff. 7-1-09; Ord. No. 11062, §§ 1, 2, 3-27-13, eff. 7-1-13; Ord. No.
11327, § 1, 12-8-15, eff. 1-1-16; Ord. No. 11595, § 1, 10-23-18)
Sec. 22-31. Trust fund.
The trust fund maintained in connection with the system which is intended to
constitute a tax-qualified retirement plan trust fund as described in Section
401(a) and 501(a) of the Code and shall consist of all the assets of the system
to be held in trust for the benefit of its members and their beneficiaries. The
board shall select an appropriate custodial financial institution for deposit
of the system's trust fund.
(Ord. No. 10657, § 1, 4-28-09, eff. 7-1-09)
Sec. 22-32. Exclusive benefit.
The Tucson Supplemental Retirement system shall operate for the exclusive
purpose of providing benefits to the members and their beneficiaries. It is
prohibited for any part of the corpus or income of the trust fund to be used
for, or diverted to, purposes other than for the exclusive benefit of the
members or their beneficiaries.
(Ord. No. 10657, § 1, 4-28-09, eff. 7-1-09)
Sec. 22-33. Membership.
   Sec. 22-33(a). Mandatory membership. All permanent employees in the
classified service who are employed by the city on a full time basis shall be
contributing members of the system upon their date of hire by the city as a
condition of their employment. For purposes of this chapter, full time basis is
defined by the Tucson City Code Civil Service Rules and Regulations.
Additionally, certain permanent part-time employees hired by the city before
October 4, 2004, entered the system as contributing members and shall remain
grandfathered members pursuant to city Ordinance 10047. Permanent full time
employees who, without a break in service, elect to work less than full time
shall remain contributing members of the system.
   Sec. 22-33(b). Optional Membership. Full-time appointed officers, full-time
employees in the offices of the Mayor and City Council and full-time
unclassified employees in the City Manager's office (collectively, "appointed
positions") may elect membership in the system within ninety (90) days of their
formal appointment to an appointed position. Accrued service accrues from the
beginning of the first payroll period commencing after an application for
participation in the system has been accepted by the system administrator. An
individual who is appointed to a second or successive appointed position shall
be afforded an additional opportunity to apply for participation in the system
as a result of the second or successive appointment only if the individual
commences the new appointed position at least thirty (30) days after his most
recent termination date. Similarly, a member who transfers directly from a
mandatory membership position defined in section
22-33(a) above to an appointed position without a termination date may elect to
waive membership in the system within ninety (90) days of their formal
appointment to the appointed position. In the case of an individual who waives
membership while serving in an appointed position, accrued service and member
contributions shall cease on the effective date of the membership waiver, as
determined by the system administrator in a uniform and non-discriminatory
manner. A waiver of membership pursuant to this section shall not constitute a
termination of membership for purposes of determining a member's right to a
refund of accumulated contributions or entitlement to retirement benefits.
   Sec. 22-33(c). Termination of membership. Should any member leave city
employment with less than five (5) years of accrued service and for any reason
other than death, the member shall cease to be a member of the system and will
receive a refund of the member's accumulated contributions account in
accordance with section
22-41(b). As set forth in section
22-41(e), the refund of the accumulated contributions account triggers an
immediate forfeiture of credited service.
   Sec. 22-33(d). Exclusion from membership. The following individuals are
excluded from membership: (1) nonpermanent city employees and permanent part-
time city employees whose membership has not been grandfathered by the city in
accordance with section
22-33(a); (2) employees occupying positions covered by the State of Arizona
Public Safety Personnel Retirement System; (3) leased employees, as defined in
Section 414(n) of the Code, and (4) independent contractors.
   Sec. 22-33(e). Reentry into membership. Any former member who is reemployed
by the city in an eligible job classification shall become a member of the
system. The member contributions required from a rehired member shall be
determined in accordance with section
22-34(c) and credited service accrued by the rehired member shall be determined
in accordance with section
22-36(h). The accrued benefit earned by a rehired member shall be determined
based on the member's status as a tier I member or a tier II member, as those
terms are defined in section
22-30(hh) and
22-30(ii), respectively. The rules set forth herein regarding rehired members
shall apply to members who return to employment with the city following a
layoff or any other event which constitutes a termination date under section
22-30(gg).
   Sec. 22-33(f). Designation of beneficiary(ies). Each employee, or designated
legal representative, shall file a statement designating a beneficiary(ies) or
contingent beneficiary(ies) within thirty (30) days after becoming a member of
the system. Any member who is married and wishes to designate a non-spouse
beneficiary must provide spousal consent to the beneficiary designation in
accordance with paragraph (1) below. Until such statements are filed, any death
benefit, survivor annuity or refund of member contributions payable upon the
member's death shall be paid to the member's spouse, if the member was married
at death, or to the member's estate, if the member is not married at death.
   (1)   Spousal consent. Any member who is married and wishes to designate a
non-spouse beneficiary must provide spousal consent to the beneficiary
designation. The consent of a member's spouse to a beneficiary designation
shall be in writing, acknowledge the effect of such an election and be
witnessed by a notary public or a designated representative of the system
administrator. No spousal consent will be required if the system administrator
determines, in its sole discretion, that such consent cannot be obtained
because the spouse cannot be located or other circumstances exist that preclude
the member from obtaining such consent.
   (2)   Changes in marital status. Except as set forth herein, a member who
intends to change their beneficiary as a result of a change in marital status
must update the beneficiary designation to reflect the member's wishes. A
member's divorce generally does not impact the validity or enforceability of a
beneficiary designation on file with the system administrator. Beneficiary
designation provisions contained in a domestic relations order accepted by the
system administrator in accordance with section
22-43.1 will be enforced, however, notwithstanding any beneficiary designation
or provision of the system to the contrary. Effective with regard to deaths
occurring after December 31, 2018, the member's spouse will become the member's
default beneficiary even if the member enters into a marriage after having
filed a beneficiary designation with the system administrator, unless and until
the member files a new designation with the consent of the member's current
spouse.
   (3)   Designation of a trust as beneficiary. A trust may be designated as a
beneficiary only if the trust is established by the member, the trust is or
becomes irrevocable at the time of the member's death and both the member and
the trustee of the member's trust provide all requested information regarding
the trust to the system administrator.
   (4)   Finality of Designations. A designation of a beneficiary(ies) shall
become effective and shall remain effective upon receipt and acceptance of the
designation by the system administrator and except as set forth in paragraph
(1) above. If the system administrator does not receive sufficient information
to implement a member's beneficiary designation, the system administrator may
exercise its discretion to declare a designation invalid. Upon ratification by
the board of a member's application for retirement benefits, the member's
designation of a retirement benefit survivor shall become irrevocable with
regard to any joint and survivor annuity elected in accordance with section
22-42(c) or section
22-42(d). All other beneficiary designations become irrevocable upon the
member's death. There shall be no liability on the part of the city, the board
or the system administrator with respect to any payment made in accordance with
this section
22-33(f).
(Ord. No. 10657, § 1, 4-28-09, eff. 7-1-09; Ord. No. 10711, § 2, 9-9-09, eff.
7-1-09; Ord. No. 10712, § 2, 9-9-09, eff. 7-1-09; Ord. No. 10915, § 2, 6-21-11,
eff. 7-1-11; Ord. No. 11020, § 2, 9-11-12, eff. 7-1-09; Ord. No. 11327, §§ 2,
3, 12-8-15, eff. 1-1-16; Ord. No. 11595, § 2, 10-23-18)
Sec. 22-34. Membership contributions.
   Sec. 22-34(a). Fixed contribution rate. Each member hired prior to July 1,
2006, shall make mandatory member contributions to the system for every pay
period during which the member receives compensation in an amount equal to five
(5) percent of the member’s compensation. The finance director shall deduct
this amount and credit it to the member’s accumulated contributions account.
   Sec. 22-34(b). Variable Contribution Rates. Each member hired on or after
July 1, 2006 shall make mandatory member contributions to the system for every
pay period during which the member receives compensation in an amount equal to
the applicable percentage of the Employee Segment Normal Cost. For purposes of
this Section
22-34(b), the applicable percentage shall equal the percentage determined by
the City on an annual basis prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, and
which shall equal no less than fifty (50) percent and no more than one hundred
(100) percent; provided that the member's annual contribution rate (1) shall in
no event be less than five (5) percent of compensation and (2) shall be subject
to an annual fiscal year adjustment (increase or decrease) equal to no more
than two and one-half (2 1/2) percent of member compensation. The finance
director shall deduct the applicable member contributions from each member's
compensation and credit it to the member's accumulated contributions account.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, effective for the period beginning on July 1,
2020 and ending on June 30, 2023, the variable contribution rate calculation
provisions of this Section
22-34(b) are suspended and the Member Contribution Rates approved by the City
for Tier I Members and Tier II Members for the period beginning on July 1, 2019
and ending on June 30, 2020 shall continue through June 30, 2023. The variable
contribution rate calculation provisions of this Section are suspended
temporarily in light of the coronavirus pandemic and the continuing economic
consequences of the pandemic.
   Sec. 22-34(c). Contribution rates for rehired members. If a member separates
from employment with the city and is later re-hired, the rate of mandatory
member contributions applicable to the rehired member shall be determined in
accordance with this section. Any member who was originally hired by the city
prior to July 1, 2006, who was a vested member at the time of separation from
employment with the city and who does not request a refund of member
contributions in accordance with section
22-41 prior to his date of reemployment with the city shall make mandatory
member contributions to the system in accordance with section
22-34(a) above. All other rehired members shall make mandatory member
contributions in accordance with section
22-34(b) above.
   Sec. 22-34(d). Employer pick-up/member contributions. All member
contributions to the system are mandatory and are picked up by the city in
accordance with Code Section 414(h). As a result of the city’s pick-up
arrangement, the member contributions are contributed to the system on a pre-
tax basis and shall not be included in the member’s gross income until the
member requests a refund of contributions or receives retirement benefit
payments. All member contributions are deposited into the individual
accumulated contributions account maintained by the system administrator on
behalf of each contributing member.
   Sec. 22-34(e). Qualified military service. A member who leaves employment
for qualified military service and is timely reinstated by the city and meets
all other applicable requirements for benefits following qualified military
service including, without limitation, the requirements set forth in the city's
Administrative Directive 2.01-7G regarding military leave, as amended, shall be
permitted (but not required) to make up missed member contributions to the
system. Any reinstated member who wishes to make up missed member contributions
shall contribute all or a portion of the member contributions that would have
been made by the member but for the qualified military service, calculated at
the compensation rate in effect for the member immediately preceding the
commencement of the qualified military service and the member contribution rate
in effect during the qualified military service, and without interest or any
other adjustment. The missed member contributions shall be contributed to the
system during a period that begins on the date of reinstatement and ends on the
earliest of (1) the date that is five (5) years from the date of reinstatement;
(2) the date that marks the end of a period which is three (3) times the length
of the member's most recent period of qualified military service; or (3) the
member's termination date. Any and all member contributions made up pursuant to
this section shall be treated as regular member contributions made in
accordance with section
22-34(d). Following the contribution of missed member contributions to the
system, the system administrator shall take all steps necessary to increase the
member's accrued benefit to include the portion of the member's qualified
military service covered by the missed member contributions. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, to the extent the member is paid his full city salary during
military leave in accordance with Section IV of the city's Administrative
Directive 2.01-7G, as amended (Paid Military Leave Not to Exceed 30 Calendar
Days in any Two (2) Consecutive Federal Fiscal Years), member contributions
shall be deducted from the member's military leave pay on the same basis as
member contributions would be made by the member under section
22-34 if the member was actively employed.
   Sec. 22-34(f). Accrued vacation cash out. Except as set forth below, all
hours of accumulated vacation earned by a tier I member and cashed out by the
city as of the member’s termination date shall be included in a member’s
compensation for member contribution purposes, provided that member
contributions are made in accordance with this section. The member
contributions applicable to accumulated vacation shall be calculated using the
tier I member’s compensation and member contribution rate as in effect
immediately preceding the tier I member’s termination date. The calculation and
collection of member contributions under this section shall trigger the city’s
obligation to make corresponding employer contributions under section
22-35(a) for the accumulated vacation hours. Vacation leave earned by a tier I
member pursuant to the city's vacation leave carryover program ("VLCP") is not
subject to the compensation and member contribution rules set forth in the
first sentence of this section. Vacation leave earned pursuant to the VLCP and
cashed out by the city shall not be included in a member's compensation under
any circumstances.
   Sec. 22-34(g). Non-forfeiture and refund of contributions. It is the right
of each member to request a refund of the member’s accumulated contributions,
plus interest, upon separation from city service and the right of each
beneficiary to be paid the member’s accumulated contributions, plus interest,
upon the member’s death before retirement or unused contributions, plus
interest, upon the member’s death after retirement, whichever is applicable.
All refunds, and the related forfeiture of credited service, shall be
administered in accordance with section
22-41.
   Sec. 22-34(h). Employment status changes.  Effective July 1, 2011 and
notwithstanding any provision of the Code to the contrary, the mandatory member
contribution rate for an employee who first becomes a member in the system
after the employee's date of hire or rehire with the city will be determined
pursuant to this section. If an employee is hired or rehired by the city in an
employment position that does not qualify for membership in the system and
later becomes a member, the applicable member contribution rate shall be
determined as of the date on which the employee first satisfies the
requirements for membership under section
22-33, as opposed to the employee's date of hire or rehire. The member
contribution rate for a reemployed member shall be determined in accordance
with section
22-34(c).
(Ord. No. 10657, § 2, 4-28-09, eff. 7-1-09; Ord. No. 10915, § 3, 6-21-11, eff.
7-1-11; Ord. No. 11062, § 3, 3-27-13, eff. 7-1-13; Ord. No. 11243, § 1, 2-18-
15, eff. 7-1-15; Ord. No. 11327, §§ 4, 5, 12-8-15, eff. 1-1-16; Ord. No. 11349,
§ 1, 4-5-16, eff. 7-1-16; Ord. No. 11430, § 1, 1-24-17, eff. 7-1-17; Ord. No.
11529, 2-21-18, eff. 7-1-18; Ord. No. 11752, § 1, 5-19-20, eff. 7-1-20; Ord.
No. 11795, § 1, 10-20-20; Ord. No. 11837, § 1, 6-8-21, eff. 7-1-21; Ord. No.
11927, § 1, 5-3-22, eff. 7-1-22)
Sec. 22-35. City contributions.
   Sec. 22-35(a). Contribution by the city. At the end of each payroll period,
the finance director shall cause the city to contribute to the trust fund an
amount equal to the employer contribution for the particular payroll period,
plus any and all member contributions picked up by the city in accordance with
section
22-34(d) and section
22-36(g)(2).
   Sec. 22-35(b). Certification of rates and charges. The board shall certify
to the city manager, on a fiscal year basis, the annual required contribution,
the member contribution rate and the employer contribution for the system.
   Sec. 22-35(c). City's funding requirement for system. The city council shall
appropriate no less than one hundred (100) percent of the employer contribution
for a particular fiscal year.
   Sec. 22-35(d). Determination and deposit of employer contributions. The
finance director at the end of each pay period shall apply the appropriate
employer contribution and member contribution rates to the total compensation
of members for such period and shall transfer this amount to the trust fund.
(Ord. No. 10657, § 2, 4-28-09, eff. 7-1-09)
Sec. 22-36. Accumulation of credited service.
   Sec. 22-36(a). Credited service generally. A member will receive credited
service for purposes of determining the benefits to which the member or the
member's beneficiary(ies) will be entitled. Credited service is the total of
the member's accrued service and additional service. Accrued service shall be
used to determine whether a member is vested, as well as to determine the
member's accrued benefit. Additional service shall be considered for benefit
accrual purposes only.
   Sec. 22-36(b). Accrued service for city employment.
   (1)   Employment periods. A member shall earn 1/2080 of one (1) year of
accrued service credit for each hour of regular time compensation, including
authorized periods of absence for which the member receives compensation. A
member who is compensated for two thousand eighty (2,080) or more hours of
regular time during twelve (12) consecutive calendar months shall receive one
(1) year of accrued service. A member who is compensated on less than a full-
time basis shall receive credit for a proportionate part of a full year of
accrued service.
   (2)   Periods of leave. With regard to tier I members, all periods of leave
with pay, accrued and unused vacation and sick leave at the date of retirement,
workers compensation and qualified military service shall be used in
calculating a member's total accrued service. The accrued service of a tier I
member also shall include accumulated vacation cashed out by the city;
provided, however, that the member makes member contributions on the value of
the vacation leave that is cashed out by the city as set forth in section
22-34(f). Notwithstanding the foregoing, vacation leave earned by a tier I
member pursuant to the city's vacation leave carryover program and cashed out
by the city shall not be included in the calculation of a member's accrued
service under any circumstances. With regard to tier II members, all periods of
leave with pay, workers compensation and qualified military service shall be
used in calculating a member's total accrued service, but all accrued and
unused vacation and sick leave at the date of retirement and all accumulated
vacation that is cashed out by the city shall be excluded. Special rules
regarding qualified military service are set forth in subparagraph three (3)
below.
   (3)   Military leave during active employment.  An active city employee who
leaves employment to complete qualified military service, makes a timely return
to the city following an honorable discharge (as defined below), and who makes
up missed member contributions in accordance with section
22-43(e) may receive accrued service for periods of qualified military service.
Accrued service credited to a member who satisfies the conditions of this
section and section
22-43(e) shall not exceed sixty (60) months of accrued service for qualified
military service, plus accrued service for reasonable periods of absence from
employment which are necessitated by the qualified military service, except as
provided by applicable federal law. The member's return to city service shall
be deemed to be timely if the member is reinstated or requests reinstatement in
accordance with the following time frames: (A) The first full regularly
scheduled work period on the first full calendar day following completion of
the qualified military service for periods of qualified military service of
less than thirty-one (31) days; (B) not later than fourteen (14) days after
completing qualified military service for periods of qualified military service
of at least thirty (30) days and not more than one hundred eighty (180) days;
or (C) not later than ninety (90) days after completing qualified military
service for periods of qualified military service of more than one hundred
eighty (180) days. If the member is hospitalized for, or convalescing from, an
illness or injury incurred in, or aggravated during, the performance of
qualified military service, the member's return to city service shall be deemed
to be timely if the member returns as of the earlier of the end of the period
of recovery or the date which is two (2) years after the completion of
qualified military service. Notwithstanding the foregoing, an active city
employee who leaves employment for military leave in accordance with Section IV
of the city's Administrative Directive 2.01-7G, as amended (Paid Military Leave
Not to Exceed 30 Calendar Days in any Two (2) Consecutive Federal Fiscal Years)
shall be credited with accrued service for the period of military leave during
which member contributions are made, regardless of the employee's subsequent
return or failure to return to employment.
   (4)   Furlough. An active city employee who is subject to a city mandated
furlough during the period beginning on July 1, 2009, and ending on June 30,
2010, shall be credited with accrued service for the furlough period(s), up to
a maximum of seventy-two (72) hours of accrued service credit. This shall
include reductions in pay which correlate with furlough hours.
   Sec. 22-36(c). Transfers from other Arizona Systems.
   (1)   ASRS. A contributing member who has service credits in the Arizona
State Retirement System may have such retirement service credits transferred to
the system in accordance with Arizona Revised Statute Sections 38-730, as
amended. In no event shall any transfer of service credit processed in
accordance with this section create a significant detriment to the funded
status of the system. Any service credit transferred pursuant to this section
shall be accrued service hereunder.
   (2)   Other systems. A contributing member who has service credits in a
public retirement system maintained by the State of Arizona (other than ASRS)
or any municipality of the State of Arizona may have such retirement service
credits transferred to the system in accordance with Arizona Revised Statute
Sections 38-923 and 38-924, as amended. In no event shall any transfer of
service credit processed in accordance with this section cause the system to
incur any unfunded accrued liabilities as a result of the transfer. Any service
credit transferred pursuant to this section shall be additional service
hereunder.
   Sec. 22-36(d). Additional service--Unpaid authorized leave from city
employment. A member who has not requested a refund from the system in
accordance with section
22-41 may purchase up to one (1) year of additional service for any period of
unpaid authorized leave from city employment (excluding furloughs). To purchase
such additional service, a member shall pay to the system the contribution cost
associated with the leave period, determined based on the compensation imputed
in accordance with section
22-43(c) and the member and employer contribution rates in effect during the
leave period. Any election to purchase additional service pursuant to this
section must be completed within six (6) months of the termination of the leave
period. A member may pay the costs associated with a purchase of additional
service under this section by any method described in section
22-36(g) below.
   Sec. 22-36(e). Additional service – Prior government or military service.
Subject to the provisions of section
22-36(g), a member who has not requested a refund of the member's accumulated
contribution account or filed a retirement application may elect to purchase
additional service in the system for periods of prior government or military
service. Additional service will be used for benefit accrual purposes only, and
will not be considered in the determination of whether a member is vested. Any
member wishing to purchase additional service shall furnish all documentation
required by the system administrator, in its discretion, to substantiate the
prior service at the time of making an application to purchase the additional
service. This provision shall govern the repurchase of prior city service
credit forfeited upon receipt of a refund pursuant to section
22-41, subject to the special redeposit rules of section
22-36(h). It is the stated and declared purpose of this section to allow for
the purchase of all prior government or military service for which a member is
not entitled to receive, presently or in the future, a benefit from another
retirement system. To this end, the provisions of this section shall be
liberally construed.
   Sec. 22-36(f). Additional service – Nonqualified permissive service credit.
Subject to the provisions of section
22-36(g), any vested member who is actively contributing to the system may
purchase additional service for nonqualified service in accordance with Code
Section 415(n)(3). Effective January 1, 2011, the purchase of nonqualified
permissive service shall be limited to a total of five (5) years, regardless of
the member's payment method and notwithstanding the special rules set forth in
Code Section 415(n) regarding direct rollovers and transfers from Code Section
403(b) and 457 plans. For purposes of the foregoing five (5) year limitation on
permissive service purchases, additional service purchased by a member prior to
January 1, 2011, shall be taken into account.
   Sec. 22-36(g). Purchase terms for additional service. The cost and method of
purchasing any additional service in accordance with section
22-36(e) or section
22-36(f) above shall be determined pursuant to this section.
   (1)   Cost to purchase. Purchases of additional service are designed and
administered in a manner intended to prevent the system from incurring any
unfunded accrued liability as a result of the purchase. The cost for each year
of additional service purchased shall equal a percentage of the member's
highest annual salary, as determined in accordance with a purchase of service
credit table designed by the system's actuary and approved by the board. An
administrative fee as determined by the board shall be imposed for the
processing of purchase of service requests. The date of purchase shall be the
day the member delivers to the system administrator an executed irrevocable
purchase of service agreement.
   (2)   Payment for time purchased. A member may fund the purchase of
additional service with one or a combination of the following payment methods:
(A) payment of after-tax cash lump sum; (B) tax-deferred rollover contribution
from a tax-qualified retirement plan or individual retirement account(s) as
authorized by the Code; (C) after-tax payroll deduction agreement; or (D)
irrevocable pre-tax payroll deduction agreement designed to comply with the
employer pick-up arrangement requirements of Code Section 414(h)
   Sec. 22-36(h). Reentry into service. A former member who reenters service
shall become a member of the system in accordance with section
22-33(e). If the member's accumulated contributions account has not been
refunded and his accrued benefit has not been transferred in accordance with
section
22-41, credited service shall be given for all prior accrued and additional
service. A former member who reenters service within twenty-four (24) months
and who received a refund of his accumulated contributions account pursuant to
section
22-41 shall, upon redeposit of the amount withdrawn plus applicable interest,
as determined by the system administrator, be credited with all prior credited
service. Any redeposit made in accordance with this provision must be completed
within six (6) months of the former member's reentry into service.
(Ord. No. 10657, § 2, 4-28-09, eff. 7-1-09; Ord. No. 10696, § 2, 8-5-09, eff.
7-1-09; Ord. No. 10775, § 1, 4-6-10; Ord. No. 10915, § 4, 6-21-11, eff. 7-1-11;
Ord. No. 11327, §§ 6, 7, 12-8-15, eff. 1-1-16; Ord. No. 11795, § 2, 10-20-20)
   Editor's note – Section 8 of Ord. No. 10915, adopted June 21, 2011, provides
that the amendments made to Sec.
22-36(f) are effective retroactively to July 1, 2009.
Sec. 22-37. Retirements.
   Sec. 22-37(a). Retirements generally.
   (1)   Types of service retirements. Subject to the minimum requirements set
forth in paragraph (a)(2) below, there are three (3) types of service
retirements available under the system:
      (A)   Normal retirement. Members are eligible to receive a normal
retirement benefit upon attainment of the applicable (A) retirement points rule
or (B) normal retirement age.
      (B)   Early retirement. Tier I members are eligible to receive an early
retirement benefit after completing twenty (20) years of credited service and
attaining age fifty-five (55). Tier II members are eligible to receive an early
retirement benefit after completing twenty (20) years of credited service and
attaining age sixty (60).
      (C)   Deferred retirement. Vested members who experience a termination
date before reaching normal or early retirement eligibility are eligible for
deferred retirement and the member's accrued benefit is paid when the member
later becomes eligible for normal or early retirement.
   (2)   Minimum requirements. In addition to the standard eligibility
conditions set forth above, all members hired on or after July 1, 2009, must
complete at least five (5) years of accrued service before reaching normal or
early retirement eligibility under section
22-37(a)(1)(A) or (1)(B) above.
   Sec. 22-37(b). Early retirement. The early retirement pension shall be
calculated in the same manner as the normal retirement benefit and shall be
reduced in accordance with this paragraph to reflect the earlier and longer
benefit payment period. The early retirement reduction shall equal one-half of
one (0.5) percent for each month prior to the date the member would have
attained the applicable retirement points rule (rule of 80 or rule of 85). For
purposes of this section, the date the member would have attained the
applicable retirement points rule shall be determined based on the assumption
that the member will earn additional age related points but will not earn
additional points for years of credited service.
   Sec. 22-37(c). Deferred retirement. As of a termination date, a vested
member shall be deemed to have elected a deferred retirement calculated in the
same manner as the normal retirement benefit or the early retirement benefit
and payable upon the member's satisfaction of the conditions for normal or
early retirement, as set forth in paragraph (a) above. A member who is in
deferred retirement status and who has not reentered city service may request a
refund of his accumulated contributions account any time before the payment of
retirement benefits commence.
   Sec. 22-37(d). Payment of benefits; deferred commencement. Retirement
benefits are paid monthly in arrears. Generally, a member may delay the date
payments begin as permitted by law provided; however, that no actuarial
adjustment or retroactive adjustment shall be made to the retirement benefit as
a result of the delayed commencement. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if a
member delays commencement of retirement benefits beyond normal retirement age,
by affirmative election or failure to file a retirement application, an
actuarial adjustment to the retirement benefit shall be made to reflect only
the delayed commencement after the normal retirement age.
   Sec. 22-37(e). Retirement application; withdrawal of retirement application.
A member may submit an application for retirement benefits within ninety (90)
days of the member's proposed termination date or, if applicable, the member's
proposed end of service participation date, subject to the system
administrator's discretion to make nondiscriminatory timing exceptions as
necessary. Except as required by law, no retirement benefits shall commence
under the system until a member files a retirement application with the system
administrator and the retirement application is ratified by the board. The
board's ratification of any retirement benefit application may be based on a
reasonable estimate of the member's retirement benefit, as prepared by the
system administrator. In the event that a member's actual retirement benefit
varies significantly from an estimate presented to the board for ratification,
the system administrator shall present the actual retirement benefit
calculation to the board for its reconsideration as soon as administratively
feasible. Any application for an early, normal, deferred or disability
retirement may be withdrawn at any time prior to ratification by the board.
   Sec. 22-37(f). Post retirement benefit payments. The board shall determine,
pursuant to its formal policy and in its discretion, whether the system shall
fund an annual supplemental post retirement benefit payment to retired members
and beneficiaries. The board's formal policy shall include the methods and
procedures to be followed by the board in making its annual determination. The
policy shall include the requirements that allocations to a post retirement
benefits reserve shall not occur in years where any of the following conditions
occur: the actuarial target funded ratio for that year is not achieved, there
are no excess returns (based on the rolling average), or the allocation to a
post retirement benefits reserve would directly cause an increase in the annual
required contribution for that year.
   Sec. 22-37(g) Suspension of pension benefits upon reemployment. Retirement
benefits payable to a retired member shall be suspended during the retired
member's period of reemployment with the city unless (1) at least twelve (12)
months have elapsed between the member's retirement from the city and the
retired member's reemployment date; and (2) the retired member is engaged to
work in a non-permanent employment classification. The retired member shall be
permitted to work in consecutive or successive non-permanent employment
classifications without triggering a suspension of retirement benefits provided
that (A) the member satisfied the twelve (12) month break rule set forth above;
(B) the non-permanent employment classifications are separate and distinct
employment positions; and (C) the retired member's period of continuous
reemployment does not exceed eighteen (18) months. In no event shall any re-
employed retired member acquire credited service or credited compensation or
contribute to the system.
(Ord. No. 10657, § 2, 4-28-09, eff. 7-1-09; Ord. No. 10915, § 5, 6-21-11, eff.
7-1-11; Ord. No. 11327, §§ 8, 9, 12-8-15, eff. 1-1-16; Ord. No. 11515, § 1, 12-
19-17; Ord. No. 11595, §§ 3, 4, 10-23-18)
Sec. 22-38. End of service program.
   Sec. 22-38(a). Purpose. The end of service program allows retirement
eligible members to earn lump sum benefits in addition to the members'
retirement benefit, in exchange for a waiver of up to twelve (12) months of
additional benefit accruals under the system. The end of service program is
entirely voluntary.
   Sec. 22-38(b). Eligibility for end of service program. Any member eligible
for normal retirement may elect to participate in the end of service program by
entering into a participation agreement in accordance with section
22-38(c) and accepting the terms and conditions of the end of service program.
Participation in the end of service program shall remain open only until
December 31, 2010, and no members shall be permitted to enroll in the end of
service program after that date.
   Sec. 22-38(c). Irrevocable agreement to participate. A member's agreement to
participate in the end of service program is (1) a voluntary agreement to
forego benefit accruals under the retirement provisions of the system, (2) a
voluntary election to terminate from employment with the city before or upon
completion of the end of service program participation period and (3) a
retirement application for purposes of section
22-37(e). The member's participation election shall be evidenced by the
member's execution of the board's end of service program agreement and shall
include the member's proposed effective date of participation. The member's
effective date of participation in the end of service program shall be the
later of the first day of the month following the board's ratification of the
member's end of service participation agreement or the participation date
selected by the member and approved by the system administrator. The system
administrator may, in its discretion, adopt reasonable and uniform procedures
governing the deadlines for submission of end of service participation
agreements and the acceleration of end of service participation dates. A
member's agreement to participate in the end of service program shall be
irrevocable upon ratification by the board.
   Sec. 22-38(d). Cessation of benefit accrual. On the date the member begins
to participate in the end of service program, mandatory member contributions to
the system cease and all benefit accruals under the system terminate. A
member's final average monthly compensation and credited service are determined
as of the member's end of service participation date and shall not increase or
decrease thereafter. The member also is not entitled to receive any retirement
benefit increases implemented during the end of service participation period.
   Sec. 22-38(e). Accumulation of end of service benefits. End of service
program benefits will be credited to an end of service program account
established under the system and shall be paid to the member following the
member's termination date at the same time and in the same manner as otherwise
prescribed in this article. A member's end of service program participation
account shall be credited with the following:
   (1)   An amount, credited monthly, that is computed in the same manner as a
normal retirement benefit using the member's credited service, average final
monthly compensation and retirement benefit payment elections as of the
member's effective date of end of service program participation.
   (2)   An amount, credited monthly, that represents assumed earnings at a
rate determined by the board, annually at the beginning of the plan year. As of
the effective date of the end of service program, the earnings rate credited
pursuant to this section is the ninety-day treasury bill rate.
   Sec. 22-38(f). Termination of end of service program participation.
Participation in the end of service program terminates on the first occurrence
of either of the following: (1) twelve (12) months from the date of entry; or
(2) the member's termination date. If a member's participation in the end of
service program is terminated as a result of the city's just cause termination
of the member's employment and such just cause is later reversed, a member's
participation in the end of service program, minus any benefits previously
distributed pursuant to this article, shall be reinstated for the duration of
the original end of service program participation period designated by the
member on the appropriate end of service program participation form. Upon
termination of the member's end of service program participation, the
retirement benefit payable to any member who fails to terminate in connection
with the end of service program shall commence in accordance with the
retirement provisions of this article. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if a
member fails to terminate from employment with the city at the end of the
member's end of service program participation period, the member shall forfeit
all rights to any end of service benefits and assumed earnings and shall not
accrue any additional credited service during the end of service participation
period.
   Sec. 22-38(g) Payment of end of service program benefits. Following
termination of the member's participation, a member is entitled to receive a
lump sum distribution of all amounts credited to the member's end of service
program participation account. The end of service program distribution shall be
processed in accordance with section
22-43(g). The member also shall commence receipt of retirement benefits,
calculated and paid in accordance with the retirement provisions of the system.
If a member dies during the end of service program participation period, all
amounts in the member's end of service program participation account shall be
paid to the member's beneficiary. If the beneficiary(ies) predecease the
member, all distributions pursuant to the end of service program shall be paid
to the member's spouse, if the member was married at death, or to the legal
representative of the member's estate, if the member is not married at death.
(Ord. No. 10657, § 2, 4-28-09, eff. 7-1-09)
Sec. 22-39. Disability retirement.
   Sec. 22-39(a). Qualification. If a member is not yet eligible for normal
retirement, the member may apply for disability retirement benefits. To be
eligible to receive disability retirement benefits, the member must (1) apply
for disability retirement benefits within twelve (12) months of the date of
termination from employment; (2) be credited with ten (10) or more years of
accrued service, inclusive of accrued vacation and sick leave; (3) establish
that he or she terminated from employment with the city as a result of
disabling mental or physical impairment; and (4) be determined, in accordance
with applicable rules, to have a total and permanent disability.
   Sec. 22-39(b). Application process. An application for disability retirement
benefits may be filed by the member in accordance with the policies and
procedures of the system administrator. Unless waived by the board in light of
a Social Security Administration determination of total and permanent
disability, the board's physician shall examine the member and certify in a
written report to the board whether the member suffers from a total and
permanent disability. The report shall also state when the member should be
reexamined. If the board determines that the member should receive disability
retirement benefits, the disability retirement benefits shall commence as of
the date determined by the board in its discretion. Disability retirement
benefits shall not be paid for periods the member elects to receive sick and
vacation leave pay.
   Sec. 22-39(c). Disability benefit. Disability retirement benefits are
calculated in the same manner as normal retirement benefits, with no reduction
for early commencement.
   Sec. 22-39(d). Termination of disability benefit. A disability retirement
benefit shall be terminated by the board upon a determination that the member
no longer suffers from a total and permanent disability or upon the member’s
reemployment with the city. If the member reenters city service, any credited
service included in the calculation of the disability retirement benefit shall
be restored to the member’s credit; but the member’s accrued benefit shall be
subject to an actuarial reduction at the time of retirement based on the number
of months that the member received disability retirement benefits. The excess,
if any, of the member’s accumulated contributions as of the date of total and
permanent disability over the aggregate of the disability retirement benefits
received by the member shall be credited to the member’s accumulated
contributions account.
   Sec. 22-39(e). Requirements to maintain disability benefit. The member shall
provide to the system administrator no later than May 31 of each calendar year
all information requested by the system administrator regarding the member’s
total and permanent disability. The board may suspend disability retirement
benefits if the member fails to provide any of the required information.
Following the retirement of a member as the result of a total and permanent
disability, the board may require the member, prior to the member’s eligibility
for normal retirement and no more frequently than annually, to undergo a
medical examination by a licensed physician, as directed by the system
administrator. Should the member refuse, the member’s disability retirement
benefit shall be discontinued until such time as they submit to the required
examination. Should the refusal continue for one (1) year, all rights to any
further disability retirement benefits shall cease. Upon the member attaining
the age required for a normal retirement, no further medical exams will be
required.
   Sec. 22-39(f). Prior requirements to maintain disability benefit. Any member
who qualified for a disability retirement prior to July 1, 2009, is subject to
the benefit limitations and disability verification requirements of this
subsection, as well as the nondiscriminatory policies and procedures of the
system administrator.
   (1)   Disability verification requirements. Not later than May 31 of each
calendar year, the member shall provide to the system administrator all
information requested by the system administrator regarding the member’s earned
income (wages and self-employment income) for the previous calendar year. The
board may suspend disability retirement benefits if the member fails to provide
any of the required information. Following the disability retirement of a
member, the board may require the member to undergo a medical examination by a
licensed physician. Should the member refuse, the disability retirement benefit
shall be discontinued until such time as the member submits to the required
examination. Should the refusal continue for one (1) year, all rights to any
further disability retirement benefits shall cease. Upon the member’s
attainment of the age required for receipt of a normal retirement benefit, no
further medical exams or information relating to earned income will be
required.
   (2)   Disability benefit adjustments.
      (A)   Earned income based adjustment. Based on the verification
procedures described above, the disability retirement benefit may be subject to
annual adjustment in accordance with this section. If the member’s earned
income for the preceding calendar year exceeded fifty (50) percent of the
member’s adjusted income base for that calendar year, then the member’s
disability retirement benefit will be reduced during the twelve-month period
commencing on the effective date of the system administrator’s adjustment (the
“adjustment period”) as follows. The monthly disability retirement benefit
payable in the adjustment period will be reduced by one-twelfth (1/12) of the
excess of the member’s earned income for the preceding calendar year over fifty
(50) percent of the member’s adjusted income base. If the adjustment required
by the preceding sentence would reduce the monthly disability retirement
benefit to a negative amount, the disability retirement benefit shall be
suspended for the adjustment period and any excess amount not offset by the
disability retirement benefit suspension shall be taken into account in the
next annual adjustment procedure. From time to time, the board also may
increase or decrease the member’s disability retirement benefit to recapture
overpayments or to restore any deficiencies in payments to the member which may
have accrued prior to the board’s receipt of information under the disability
verification procedures. When a member becomes eligible for a normal retirement
benefit, no further adjustments shall be made.
      (B)   Earned income and/or worker’s compensation benefits. In the event a
disabled member receives earned income and/or worker’s compensation benefits
during the calendar year, that member’s disability retirement benefit may be
adjusted so that the member’s total income received from employer provided
benefits does not exceed 100% of the members’ adjusted income base. Any
adjustment made shall only be up to the amount of the full disability
retirement benefit paid by TSRS. For purposes of this paragraph, employer
provided benefits means social security benefits, worker’s compensation
payments, TSRS pension benefits or long term disability payments.
(Ord. No. 10657, § 2, 4-28-09, eff. 7-1-09; Ord. No. 10696, § 3, 8-5-09, eff.
7-1-09; Ord. No. 10775, § 2, 4-6-10, eff. 7-1-10; Ord. No. 11327, §§ 10, 11,
12-8-15, eff. 1-1-16)
Sec. 22-40. Death benefits.
   Sec. 22-40(a). Generally.
   (1)   If the member dies prior to the board's ratification of the member's
application for retirement benefits, if any, the death benefit or survivor
annuity payable as the result of the member's death shall be determined in
accordance with this section. If the member dies after the board has ratified
the member's application for retirement benefits, including an end of service
participation agreement, any survivor benefits payable as a result of the death
of the member shall be determined in accordance with the member's retirement
benefit payment election. Notwithstanding any other provision herein to the
contrary, a member who satisfied the conditions for normal or early retirement
and filed the appropriate paperwork with the system administrator to pre-select
retirement benefits prior to July 1, 2009, shall be treated as a member whose
application for retirement benefits has been ratified by the board for purposes
of this paragraph.
   (2)   If a member dies while performing qualified military service on or
after January 1, 2007, the member shall be treated as if he returned to
employment with the city on the day before the date of death.
   Sec. 22-40(b). Spouse as beneficiary. If the spouse is the member's
beneficiary and the spouse dies before the death benefit is paid, the available
death benefit shall be paid to the beneficiary of the spouse, and if none, then
to the legal representative of the spouse's estate.
   Sec. 22-40(c). Death before vested interest. Should a member with less than
five (5) years of accrued service die, the member's accumulated contributions
account balance, determined as of the member's date of death, shall be paid in
a lump sum to the member's beneficiary. If the beneficiary(ies) predeceases the
member, the member's accumulated contributions account balance shall be paid to
the member's spouse, if the member was married at death, or to the legal
representative of the member's estate, if the member is not married at death.
   Sec. 22-40(d). Death after vested interest. If a member who is credited with
five (5) or more years of accrued service dies before reaching normal or early
retirement, a death benefit will be paid to the member's beneficiary(ies). If
the beneficiary(ies) predeceases the member, the death benefit shall be paid to
the member's spouse, if the member was married at death, or to the legal
representative of the member's estate, if the member is not married at death.
   Sec. 22-40(e). Death while eligible for retirement. If a vested member dies
after attaining normal or early retirement eligibility (determined in
accordance with sections
22-37(a)(1)(A) or (B), as applicable) but prior to the board's ratification of
the member's application for retirement benefits, a death benefit or survivor
annuity will be paid as follows:
   (1)   Default for spouse. If the member's spouse is the beneficiary (and
except as set forth in paragraph (3) below), a survivor annuity will be paid to
the spouse and will equal the benefit the spouse would have received if the
member had retired on the day before death and had elected to receive a joint
and 100% survivor annuity. In determining the amount of the survivor annuity,
the retirement benefit payable on account of the member's presumed retirement
shall be calculated in accordance with the early retirement reduction
provisions of section
22-37(b), if applicable. The survivor annuity described in this paragraph is
payable only to a spouse of a deceased member.
   (2)   Default for single non-spouse beneficiary. If the member has
designated a single individual person other than a spouse as the beneficiary, a
survivor annuity will be paid to the beneficiary and will equal the benefit the
beneficiary would have received if the member had retired on the day before
death and had elected to receive an annuity certain and for life with a period
certain of one hundred eighty (180) months, commencing in the month following
the date of the member's death and paid until the end of the period certain. If
the beneficiary dies prior to the completion of the period certain, a one-time
lump sum payment equal to the present value of the remaining period certain
payments to the estate of the beneficiary. In determining the amount of the
survivor annuity, the retirement benefit payable on account of the member's
presumed retirement shall be calculated in accordance with the early retirement
reduction provisions of section
22-37(b), if applicable.
   (3)   Default for multiple beneficiaries, trusts and estates. The survivor
annuities described in paragraphs (1) and (2) above are payable only to a
spouse or single person designated as a beneficiary. If the member has
designated multiple beneficiaries, a death benefit will be paid to the multiple
beneficiaries in accordance with the member's designation, regardless of
whether the spouse is named as one of the multiple beneficiaries. If the member
has designated a trust or an estate as a beneficiary, or an estate is the
default beneficiary under the terms of section
22-33(f), the trust or estate shall be entitled to receive a death benefit
only, and shall not receive a survivor annuity, regardless of whether the
member's spouse is a beneficiary of the trust and regardless of whether the
trust or estate has only one beneficiary.
   (4)   Death benefit election. A spouse or single beneficiary entitled to
receive a survivor annuity under paragraph (1) and (2) above may elect, in his
or her discretion, to waive the survivor annuity and receive a death benefit.
To make the death benefit election, the spouse or beneficiary shall sign a
statement acknowledging that the survivor annuity and death benefit options
have been satisfactorily explained and shall make a written election to receive
the death benefit, all in accordance with the policies and procedures of the
system administrator.
   Sec. 22-40(f). Refund guarantee. A member who elects a single life annuity
pursuant to section
22-42(b) or a joint and survivor annuity pursuant to section
22-42(c) shall be guaranteed a refund if the named recipients on the selected
annuity die before the monthly retirement benefits paid equal or exceed two (2)
times the value of the member's accumulated contributions with interest at time
of retirement. The amount of the refund shall equal two (2) times the value of
the member's accumulated contributions account at the time of retirement,
reduced by the retirement benefits paid to date (the "refund amount"). If the
member elected a single life annuity and the member dies, or the member elected
a joint and survivor annuity and both the member and the named survivor die,
the member's beneficiary (or the member's estate, if the beneficiary is not
then living) will receive the refund amount.
   Sec. 22-40(g). Payment following death. Following the death of a member, the
system administrator will notify the beneficiary(ies) or the surviving spouse,
as applicable, regarding the right to receive a refund of member contributions,
a death benefit or a survivor annuity. Any lump sum benefit available to a
spouse or beneficiary(ies) under this article shall be paid in accordance with
sections
22-43(f) and (g).
(Ord. No. 10657, § 2, 4-28-09, eff. 7-1-09; Ord. No. 10696, § 4, 8-5-09, eff.
7-1-09; Ord. No. 10711, § 3, 9-9-09, eff. 7-1-09; Ord. No. 10712, § 3, 9-9-09,
eff. 7-1-09; Ord. No. 10915, § 6, 6-21-11, eff. 7-1-11; Ord. No. 11327, § 12,
12-8-15, eff. 1-1-16; Ord. No. 11595, § 5, 10-23-18)
   Editor's note – Section 8 of Ord. No. 10915, adopted June 21, 2011, provides
that the amendments made to Sec. 22-40(f) are effective retroactively to July
1, 2009.
Sec. 22-41. Refund of accumulated contributions accounts; transfers to other
systems.
   Sec. 22-41(a). Member's request for refund. A member may request a refund of
the member's accumulated contribution account following the member's
termination date by filing the appropriate refund application with the system
administrator. If the member was dismissed from city service, the member's
application for a refund shall not be approved and disbursed until the member's
separation from employment with the city becomes final and is no longer subject
to any administrative or judicial review.
   Sec. 22-41(b). Refund to Non-Vested Member. Any Member who terminates from
City service prior to becoming a Vested Member shall cease to be a Member and
shall be eligible to request a refund of his Accumulated Contributions Account
as set forth in Section
22-33(c). The System Administrator shall contact the former Member as soon as
reasonably possible following the Termination Date and shall provide
information regarding the available refund. In the event that the former
Member's termination is subject to administrative or judicial review, no refund
shall be processed until such termination is final and binding. In the event
the former Member does not consent to receipt of the refund of the Member's
Accumulated Contributions Account within a reasonable period following
notification by the System Administrator and the Member's Accumulated
Contributions Account balance is more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00),
but does not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), the System Administrator
may transfer the Accumulated Contributions Account balance to an individual
retirement account established for the benefit of the Member in accordance with
Code Section 401(a)(31)(B). If the Member's Accumulated Contributions Account
balance equals one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or less and the Member fails to
consent to receipt of the refund, the System Administrator may, in its
discretion, issue a refund check to the Member without the Member's consent. If
the Member's Accumulated Contributions Account balance equals five thousand
dollars ($5,000.00) or more and the former Member fails to consent to receipt
of the refund, the System Administrator shall hold the Accumulated
Contributions Account in the System for a period of three (3) years from the
Termination Date, at which time the System Administrator shall escheat the
Accumulated Contributions Account to the State of Arizona. The amount escheated
to the State of Arizona shall not include Interest credited to the Accumulated
Contributions Account after the Termination Date.
   Sec. 22-41(c). Beneficiary's request for refund. Upon the death of a member,
a beneficiary may request a refund of the member's accumulated contributions
account or a death benefit. The beneficiary's right to receive a refund or a
death benefit shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter and such determination shall take into account any retirement benefit
payments made to the member prior to death, if any.
   Sec. 22-41(d). Transfer to other Arizona Systems. Following a member's
termination date and prior to the member's retirement or request for a refund
of the member's accumulated contribution account, the member may request a
transfer of the member's vested accrued benefit and/or the member's accumulated
contributions account to a public retirement system maintained by the State of
Arizona or any municipality of the State of Arizona, to be processed in
accordance with Arizona Revised Statute Sections 38-730, 38-923 and 38-924, as
amended. A transfer from the system shall not cause the system to incur any
unfunded accrued liability, except in the case of a transfer to the Arizona
State Retirement System in accordance with the reciprocity rules in effect with
regard to transfers between the system and ASRS and which shall not cause any
significant detriment to the funded status of the system.
   Sec. 22-41(e). Forfeiture of credited service and tier I status. Any refund
or transfer of a member's accumulated contributions account or a transfer of
member's accrued benefit shall trigger an immediate forfeiture of all credited
service earned by the member. In the case of a vested member, a refund or
transfer under this section
22-41 and the related forfeiture of credited service will result in the loss of
the member's (or beneficiary's) retirement pension rights under the system. If
a former member requests a refund of the member's accumulated contributions
account or a transfer of the member's accrued benefit, the former member shall
forfeit any and all rights to tier I member status and, if the former member is
rehired by the city, may reenter the system only as a tier II member, subject
to all applicable participation requirements.
(Ord. No. 10657, § 2, 4-28-09, eff. 7-1-09; Ord. No. 10915, § 7, 6-21-11, eff.
7-1-11; Ord. No. 11020, § 3, 9-11-12, eff. 7-1-09)
Sec. 22-42. Retirement benefit payment options.
   Sec. 22-42(a). Explanation of benefit options. A member who is eligible to
receive a retirement benefit may request from the system administrator
information regarding the retirement benefit payment options available. No
pension is automatically payable hereunder, except as provided in section
22-40, death benefits, and all eligible members must make appropriate
retirement elections under the system. The member and spouse, if any, shall
sign a statement acknowledging that the retirement benefit payment options have
been satisfactorily explained and shall make a written election of one (1) of
the retirement benefit payment options. All elections shall be made in
accordance with the policies and procedures of the system administrator, and
any spousal consent shall be provided in accordance with section
22-33(f)(1). The benefit election can be revoked or changed by the member by
filing a written notice of revocation or change with the system administrator,
subject to any applicable spousal acknowledgement requirements, any time prior
to ratification of the retirement benefit by the board. The benefit election is
irrevocable upon board ratification of the member's application for retirement
benefits.
   Sec. 22-42(b). Single life annuity. A member eligible for retirement may
elect to receive his retirement benefit payable in a single life annuity,
ending with the monthly payment made in the month of the member’s death. The
single life annuity shall be the normal form of benefit for purposes of
calculating the retirement benefits under the system. Any election of an
alternative annuity option under the system shall result in the payment of an
annuity which is the actuarial equivalent of the single life annuity payable to
the member.
   Sec. 22-42(c). Joint and survivor annuity. A member eligible for retirement
may elect to receive his retirement benefit payable in a joint and survivor
annuity which provides payments to the member for the remainder of the member's
life and then provides payments to the surviving beneficiary for the remainder
of the beneficiary's life. In making this election, the monthly benefit to be
paid to the surviving beneficiary following the death of the member may be one
hundred percent (100%), seventy-five percent (75%) or fifty percent (50%) of
the monthly benefit the member had been receiving. All payments will cease upon
the death of the member or the beneficiary, whichever shall occur last. The
member's designation of a beneficiary to receive any survivor benefit payable
under a joint and survivor annuity shall be subject to the requirements of
section
22-43(f) and Code section 401(a)(9), including the limitations on non-spouse
beneficiaries, any joint and survivor annuity election shall be adjusted as
necessary for compliance with the Code.
   Sec. 22-42(d). Annuity certain and for life. A member eligible for
retirement may elect to receive his retirement benefit payable in an annuity
for a term certain and for life. This benefit allows a member to ensure payment
of a benefit over the member’s lifetime, and in the event of the member’s death
before the end of a “period certain,” continuing payment of the benefit until
the end of the “period certain” to a surviving beneficiary or contingent
beneficiary. A member may elect to receive a term certain annuity with a
guaranteed payment period of sixty (60) months, one hundred twenty (120) months
or one hundred eighty (180) months. For purposes of the annuity for a term
certain and for life, the guaranteed payment period shall begin with the
earlier of the first monthly benefit payment made to the member or the first
monthly end of service program accrual, if applicable. Should the member live
beyond the period certain elected, no survivor benefits shall be paid to the
member’s beneficiary(ies). Should the member, the beneficiary and any
contingent beneficiary die before the expiration of the term certain, the board
shall make a one-time lump sum payment equal to the present value of remaining
period certain payments to the estate of the person last receiving a benefit
under the annuity.
   Sec. 22-42(e). Failure to elect benefit option or commencement date. Failure
to elect a benefit option will result in the member receiving a single life
annuity, assuming the member survives until the pension commencement date.
Failure to elect a date on which payment begins will result in payments made in
accordance with the minimum required distribution provisions of section
22-43(e) and Code Section 401(a)(9). Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
provisions of section
22-40 apply when a vested member dies while eligible for retirement and prior
to the board’s ratification of the member’s application for retirement
benefits.
(Ord. No. 10657, § 2, 4-28-09, eff. 7-1-09; Ord. No. 10711, § 4, 9-9-09, eff.
7-1-09; Ord. No. 10712, § 4, 9-9-09, eff. 7-1-09; Ord. No. 11327, §§ 13, 14,
12-8-15, eff. 1-1-16; Ord. No. 11595, § 6, 10-23-18)
Sec. 22-43. Administration of benefit payments; benefit calculations.
   Sec. 22-43(a). Payment of small accounts. If the accrued benefit of a
member, including any refund of an accumulated contributions account, has a
present value of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or less at the time the
benefit becomes payable, a lump sum distribution shall be paid to the member
within thirty (30) days following their benefit election and the satisfaction
of any applicable spousal consent requirements.
   Sec. 22-43(b). Special rules for members with part-time employment. When a
member has earned accrued service during part-time employment or both full-time
and part-time employment, the monthly retirement benefit, in the form of
benefit elected, will be computed using the following special rules.
   (1)   Special rules for computing average final monthly compensation for a
member who had part-time or both full-time and part-time employment. Average
final monthly compensation shall be determined by:
   (A)   For periods of full-time hours worked, the average of the highest
thirty-six (36) consecutive months of compensation of the last one hundred
twenty (120) consecutive months of compensation divided by thirty-six (36), or
if the member has less than thirty-six (36) consecutive months of compensation
divided by the actual number of months of compensation.
   (B)   For periods of part-time hours worked, the average of the highest
annualized thirty-six (36) consecutive months of compensation of the last one
hundred twenty (120) consecutive months of compensation divided by thirty-six
(36), or if the member has less than thirty-six (36) consecutive months of
compensation divided by the actual number of months of compensation.
   (2)   Special rules for computing annualized months of compensation for a
member who had a part-time or both full-time and part-time employment.
   (A)   Determine the actual compensation paid to an employee during a two
thousand eighty-hour (2,080) period in any consecutive twelve-month calendar
period.
   (B)   Divide the actual number of hours for which an employee was
compensated by two thousand eighty (2,080).
   (C)   Divide the result obtained in "A" by the result obtained in "B."
Annualized monthly compensation shall be the result obtained under "C" divided
by twelve (12).
   Sec. 22-43(c). Special rule for members with authorized leave without pay.
When a member has taken authorized leave without pay, including periods of
qualified military service, the member's average final monthly compensation
shall be computed by imputing compensation for the authorized leave period, at
the compensation rate in effect for the member immediately preceding the
commencement of the leave period. For the period beginning on July 1, 2009, and
ending on June 30, 2010, furlough periods shall be considered periods of
authorized leave without pay for purposes of this section
22-43(c).
   Sec. 22-43(d). Limitation on compensation. In no event may the compensation
of a member considered under this system exceed the limit set forth in Section
401(a)(17) of the Code, as adjusted for cost-of-living increases in accordance
with Code Section 401(a)(17)(B). The cost-of-living adjustment in effect for a
calendar year applies to any fiscal year period, not exceeding twelve (12)
months, over which compensation is determined beginning in such calendar year.
   Sec. 22-43(e). Maximum benefit allowable. Notwithstanding anything hereunder
to the contrary, the annual benefit payable to a member in the form of a
straight life annuity shall not exceed the annual dollar limitation in effect
under Code Section 415(b), as adjusted in accordance with paragraph (1) below
(the "annual dollar limitation"). For the 2009 Limitation Year, the annual
dollar limitation is $195,000.00. If the benefit the member would otherwise
accrue in a limitation year would produce an accrued benefit in excess of the
annual dollar limitation, the benefit shall be limited (or the rate of accrual
reduced) to a benefit that does not exceed the annual dollar limitation. For
purposes of this section, the annual benefit shall not include the annual
benefit attributable to either mandatory member contributions or rollover
contributions.
   (1)   Cost of living adjustments. The annual dollar limitation shall be
adjusted for each calendar year to take into account any cost-of-living
increase adjustments for that calendar year allowable pursuant to applicable
regulations or rulings of the United States Treasury Department under Section
415(d) of the Code. Any such adjustment shall be effective only as of the first
day of the calendar year for which such adjustment is announced. Cost-of-living
adjustments to the annual dollar limitation made after a member retires shall
apply to that member, provided that in no event shall such cost-of-living
adjusted amounts exceed the Code Section 401(a)(17) limitation on compensation
for that member determined as of the member's termination of employment.
   (2)   Minimum benefits. Notwithstanding anything else in this section to the
contrary, the benefit otherwise accrued or payable to a member under the system
shall be deemed not to exceed the annual dollar limitation if:
   (A)   The benefits payable for a limitation year under any form of benefit
with respect to such member do not exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00)
multiplied by a fraction: (i) the numerator of which is the member's number of
years (or part thereof, but not less than one (1) year) of credited service
(not to exceed ten (10)), and (ii) the denominator of which is ten (10); and
   (B)   The city has not at any time maintained a defined contribution system
in which the member participated (for this purpose, mandatory employee
contributions under a defined benefit system are not considered a separate
defined contribution system).
   (3)   Service and participation reductions. If the member has less than ten
(10) years of participation in the system, the annual dollar limitation shall
be multiplied by a fraction: (1) the numerator of which is the number of years
(or part thereof, but not less than one (1) year) of participation in the
system, and (2) the denominator of which is ten (10).
   (4)   Early payment adjustments. The annual dollar limitation shall be
adjusted if the member's benefit commencement date is before age sixty-two
(62).
   (A)   Limitation Years Beginning on or after July 1, 2007. With regard to
annuities commencing in Limitation Years beginning on or after July 1, 2007 and
when the Member's benefit commencement date is before age 62, the Annual Dollar
Limitation for the Member's benefit commencement date shall be the annual
amount of a benefit payable in the form of a straight life annuity commencing
at the Member's benefit commencement date that is the actuarial equivalent of
the lesser of (i) the Annual Dollar Limitation (adjusted under Section
22-43(d)(3), if required) computed using a 5% interest rate and the applicable
mortality table under Code Section 417(e)(3) and expressing the Member's age
based on completed calendar months as of the benefit commencement date and (ii)
the Annual Dollar Limitation (adjusted under Section
22-43(d)(3), if required) multiplied by the ratio of the annual amount of the
immediately commencing straight life annuity under the System at the Member's
benefit commencement date to the annual amount of the immediately commencing
straight life annuity under the System at age 62.
   (B)   Limitation Years Beginning Before July 1, 2007. With regard to
annuities commencing in Limitation Years beginning before July 1, 2007 and when
the Member's benefit commencement date is before age 62, the annual amount of a
benefit payable in the form of a straight life annuity commencing at the
Member's benefit commencement date that is the actuarial equivalent of the
Annual Dollar Limitation (adjusted under Section
22-43(d)(3), if required) computed using a 5% interest rate and the mortality
table described in Rev. Rul. 2001-62.
   (C)   Notwithstanding the other requirements of this Section, no adjustment
shall be made to the Annual Dollar Limitation to reflect the probability of a
Member's death between the Member's benefit commencement date and age 62 if
benefits are not forfeited upon the death of the Member prior to the benefit
commencement date. To the extent benefits are forfeited upon death before the
benefit commencement date, such an adjustment shall be made.
   (5)   Alternative benefit payment options. Except as provided below, if a
benefit is payable in a form other than a straight life annuity, the benefit
shall be adjusted to an actuarially equivalent straight life annuity that
begins at the same time as such other form of benefit and is payable on the
first day of each month, before applying the limitations of this section.
   (A)   (i)   Limitation Years Beginning on or After July 1, 2007. With regard
to annuities commencing in Limitation Years beginning on or after July 1, 2007,
the actuarially equivalent straight life annuity is equal to the greater of:
   (a)   the annual amount of the straight life annuity (if any) payable to the
Member under the System commencing at the same benefit commencement date as the
Member's form of benefit; and
   (b)   the annual amount of the straight life annuity commencing at the same
benefit commencement date that has the same actuarial present value as the
Member's form of benefit, computed using a 5% interest rate assumption and the
applicable mortality table under Code Section 417(e)(3).
   (ii)   Limitation Years Beginning Prior to July 1, 2007. With regard to
annuities commencing in Limitation Years beginning prior to July 1, 2007, the
actuarial equivalent straight life annuity is equal to the greater of:
   (a)   the annual amount of a straight life annuity (if any) payable to the
Member under the System commencing at the same benefit commencement date as the
Member's form of benefit; and
   (b)   the annual amount of the straight life annuity commencing at the same
benefit commencement date that has the same actuarial present value as the
Member's form of benefit, computed using a 5% interest rate assumption and the
mortality table described in Rev. Rul. 2001-62.
   (6)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the term "limitation year"
shall mean the calendar year beginning on January 1 and ending on December 31.
The term "applicable mortality table" shall mean the mortality table prescribed
by the Internal Revenue Service based on the actual experience of pension plans
and projected trends in such experience.
   (7)   Incorporation by reference. The additional requirements of Code
Section 415(b) and the treasury regulations promulgated there under, as
applicable to governmental plans maintained in accordance with Code Section 414
(d), are hereby incorporated by reference.
   (8)   Late Payment Adjustments. The Annual Dollar Limitation shall be
adjusted if the Member's benefit commencement date is after age 65.
   (A)   Limitation Years Beginning on or after July 1, 2007. With regard to
annuities commencing in Limitation Years beginning on or after July 1, 2007 and
when the Member's benefit commencement date is after age 65, the Annual Dollar
Limitation for the Member's benefit commencement date shall be the annual
amount of a benefit payable in the form of a straight life annuity commencing
at the Member's benefit commencement date that is the actuarial equivalent of
the Annual Dollar Limitation (adjusted under Section
22-43(e)(3), if required), computed with a 5% interest rate and the applicable
mortality table under Code Section 417(e)(3) (and expressing the Member's age
based on completed calendar months as of the benefit commencement date).
   (B)   Limitation Years Beginning Before July 1, 2007. With regard to
annuities commencing in Limitation Years beginning before July 1, 2007 and when
the Member's benefit commencement date is after age 65, the Annual Dollar
Limitation shall be the amount calculated in accordance with (A) above, but
without adjusting the Member's age based on completed calendar months as of the
benefit commencement date.
   (C)   Notwithstanding the other requirements of this Section, no adjustment
shall be made to the Annual Dollar Limitation to reflect the probability of a
Member's death between age 65 and the Member's benefit commencement date if
benefits are not forfeited upon the death of the Member prior to the benefit
commencement date. To the extent benefits are forfeited upon death before the
benefit commencement date, such an adjustment shall be made.
   Sec. 22-43(f). Minimum required distributions. The board and the system
administrator shall make reasonable and good faith efforts to comply with the
requirements of the treasury regulations promulgated pursuant to Code Section
401(a)(9), notwithstanding any provision herein to the contrary. The
obligations of the board and the system administrator shall be interpreted and
construed in a manner consistent with the relief afforded to governmental plans
under Section 823 of the Pension Protection Act of 2006 and the Treasury
Department's proposed regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, at Treas. Reg.
Sec. 1.401(a)(9)-1, Q&A-2(d). When processing distributions required by Code
Section 401(a)(9), the system administrator shall make reasonable and good
faith efforts to begin the payment of such distributions no later than the
April 1 of the calendar year following the later of the calendar year in which
the member attains the age of 70½ or the calendar year containing the member's
termination date. Death benefit distributions also shall be processed in
accordance with a reasonable and good faith interpretation of the requirements
of Code Section 401(a)(9).
   Sec. 22-43(g). Eligible rollover distributions. Notwithstanding anything
herein to the contrary, the member or distributee may elect to have any portion
of an eligible rollover distribution received from the system paid directly to
an eligible retirement plan. An eligible rollover distribution shall be made
pursuant to the requirements of Code Section 401(a)(31) and Code Section 402,
and the applicable regulations promulgated there under, and in the manner
prescribed by the board.
   (1)   Distributee. A "distributee" includes a member or former member. In
addition, the member's or former member's surviving spouse and any alternate
payee under a domestic relations order, are distributees with regard to the
interest of the spouse or former spouse. A distributee also includes the
member's non-spouse designated beneficiary. In the case of a non- spouse
beneficiary, the direct rollover may be made only to an individual retirement
account or annuity described in Section 409(a) or Section 408(b) of the Code
that is established on behalf of the designated beneficiary and that will be
treated as an inherited IRA pursuant to the provisions of Section 402(c)(11) of
the Code. Section 402(c)(11) of the Code provides that a direct rollover of a
distribution to a non-spouse beneficiary is a rollover of an eligible rollover
distribution only for purposes of Section 402(c) of the Code. Accordingly, the
distribution to a non-spouse beneficiary is not subject to the direct rollover
requirements of Section 401(a)(31) of the Code, the notice requirements of
Section 402(f) of the Code, or the mandatory withholding requirements of
Section 3405(c) of the Code.
   (2)   Eligible retirement plan. An "eligible retirement plan" is an eligible
plan under Section 457(b) of the Code which is maintained by a state, political
subdivision of a state, or an agency or instrumentality of a state or political
subdivision of a state and which agrees to separately account for amounts
transferred into such plan from the system, an individual retirement account
described in Section 408(a) of the Code, an individual retirement annuity
described in Section 408(b) of the Code, an annuity plan described in Section
403(a) of the Code, an annuity contract described in Section 403(b) of the
Code, or a qualified plan described in Section 401(a) of the Code, that accepts
the distributee's eligible rollover distribution. The definition of eligible
retirement plan shall also apply in the case of a distribution to a surviving
spouse, or to an alternate payee under a domestic relations order. An "eligible
retirement plan" also is a Roth IRA described in Section 408A(b) of the Code,
provided that any distribution to such Roth IRA is made in accordance with the
provisions of Section 408A of the Code.
   (3)   Eligible rollover distribution. An "eligible rollover distribution" is
any distribution of all or any portion of the balance to the credit of the
distributee, except that an eligible rollover distribution does not include:
(i) any distribution that is one of a series of substantially equal periodic
payments (not less frequently than annually) made for the life (or life
expectancy) of the distributee or the joint lives (or joint life expectancies)
of the distributee and the distributee's designated beneficiary, or for a
specified period of ten (10) years or more; (ii) any distribution to the extent
such distribution is required under Section 401(a)(9) of the Code; (iii) the
portion of any distribution that is not includible in gross income; and (iv)
any other distribution that is reasonably expected to total less than two
hundred dollars ($200.00) during a year. A portion of a distribution shall not
fail to be an eligible rollover distribution merely because the portion
consists of after-tax member contributions which are not includible in gross
income. However, such portion may be transferred only to (1) an individual
retirement account or annuity described in Section 408(a) or (b) of the Code,
(2) to a qualified defined contribution plan described in Section 401(a) of 403
(a) of the Code that agrees to separately account for amounts so transferred,
including separately accounting for the portion of such distribution which is
includible in gross income and the portion of such distribution which is not so
includible, or (3) for taxable years beginning after December 31, 2006, to a
qualified trust or to an annuity contract described in Section 403(b), if such
trust or contract provides for separate accounting for amounts so transferred
(including interest thereon), including separately accounting for the portion
of such distribution which is includible in gross income and the portion of
such distribution which is not so includible.
   Sec. 22-43(h). Assignments prohibited. Except as set forth in section
22-43.1, none of the money, pensions or other benefits payable by the system
shall be assignable either in law or in equity or be subject to execution,
levy, attachment, garnishment or other legal process.
(Ord. No. 10657, § 2, 4-28-09, eff. 7-1-09; Ord. No. 11020, § 4, 9-11-12, eff.
7-1-09)
Sec. 22-43.1. System approved domestic relations orders.
   Sec. 22-43.1.(a). Benefits subject to domestic relations orders. The right
of a member to a retirement benefit, to the refund of a member's accumulated
contributions account, or any other benefit under the provisions of the system
shall be subject to award pursuant to a system approved domestic relations
order.
   Sec. 22-43.1(b). System administrator review and approval. The system
administrator is responsible for the review and approval of any domestic
relations order impacting benefits or rights of a member under this system and
which is presented to the system administrator in a timely fashion. The system
administrator shall determine whether the domestic relations order can be
administered and benefits paid in accordance with the applicable requirements
of the order, the system and the Code. Any domestic relations order accepted by
the system administrator shall be referred to as a system approved domestic
relations order. To the extent permitted by law, the system administrator's
decision regarding a domestic relations order shall be final and binding. The
city, the board, and the system administrator shall not be responsible for the
payment of any system benefits in contravention of a domestic relations order
when the domestic relations order is not timely presented to the system
administrator for review. Additionally, upon ratification of a member's
retirement application by the board, all benefit payment elections (including
those filed by the member, ordered pursuant to a system approved domestic
relations order or filed by an alternate payee) shall become irrevocable and no
change in benefit options shall be permitted, regardless of any changes in the
marital status of the member or the alternate payee.
   Sec. 22-43.1(c). System approved domestic relations order. No domestic
relations order shall be accepted by the system administrator if the order
requires the system to provide any type, form or time of payment that is not
provided under this Code, as determined by the system administrator in its
discretion. Additionally, any system approved domestic relations order must
reasonably identify the Tucson Supplemental Retirement System and specify all
of the following: (1) the name and last known mailing address of the member;
(2) the name and last known mailing address of each alternate payee covered by
the order; (3) the method of determining the amount of the member's system
benefits to be paid to each alternate payee covered by the order; (4) the
number of payments or period to which the order applies; and (5) whether
survivor benefits are payable to the alternate payee upon the death of the
member.
(Ord. No. 10657, § 3, 4-28-09, eff. 7-1-09; Ord. No. 11327, § 15, 12-8-15, eff.
1-1-16)
DIVISION 2.
ADMINISTRATION OF THE SYSTEM
Sec. 22-44. Board of trustees.
   Sec. 22-44(a). Administration. The board of trustees shall be responsible
for, and shall have the power and authority necessary to effectuate the
administration, management and operation of the system. The board shall
construe, interpret and implement the provisions of this article, in its
discretion and pursuant to uniform and non-discriminatory rules, policies and
procedures.
   Sec. 22-44(b). Membership. The membership of the board shall be exempt from
all provisions of section
10A-134 of the Tucson Code. The board shall consist of the following seven (7)
members:
   (1)   A chairman, to be appointed by the mayor, subject to the approval of
the city council;
   (2)   The city's human resources director or his/her designee;
   (3)   The city's finance director or his/her designee;
   (4)   Two (2) contributing members nominated and elected by the contributing
members of the system in a manner that the board shall prescribe by regulation;
   (5)   One (1) retired member nominated and elected by the retired members of
the system in a manner that the board shall prescribe by regulation;
   (6)   One (1) member appointed by the city manager.
   Sec. 22-44(c). Qualifications. The individuals appointed to the board by the
mayor, as chairman of the board, and by the city manager shall be appointed
based on the individual's business experience with emphasis on a discipline
such as law, retirement administration, accounting or investments.
   Sec. 22-44(d). Compensation. The members of the board shall serve without
compensation but shall be reimbursed for expenses incurred by them in the
performance of their board duties.
   Sec. 22-44(e). Term of office. The term of office of board members nominated
and elected by members in accordance with section
22-44(b)(4) and (5) above shall be four (4) years. The chairman of the board
shall serve a term of four (4) years. The city manager's appointee shall serve
at the discretion of the city manager or until the appointee resigns by
providing advance notice to the board and the city manager. The directors of
human resources and finance shall be standing members of the board and not
subject to annual terms. Any employee or retiree representative board member
who is elected to two (2) consecutive terms shall not be eligible to succeed
themselves.
   Sec. 22-44(f). System budget. The board shall annually prepare and maintain
a budget setting forth the administrative costs of the system. The system
budget shall include separate line items for the primary administrative
expenses of the system, including, but not limited to, recordkeeping,
accounting fees, actuarial expenses, investment fees and expenses, audit
expenses, staffing costs, other independent professional expenses, and
professional development fees and expenses for board members and the system
administrator. The system budget shall be presented to mayor and council in
connection with the board's annual report on the system.
   Sec. 22-44(g). Employment of professionals. The board may employ managers,
consultants, actuaries, technical advisors and professionals, including legal
counsel and medical practitioners, and staff personnel as may be necessary for
the proper administration of the system. Professionals employed by the board
shall discharge their duties in accordance with and be subject to the highest
prevailing industry standard of care for their respective disciplines.
   Sec. 22-44(h). Establishing interest rates and actuarial assumptions;
actuarial studies. The board shall establish, from time to time, the interest
rate(s) applicable to member accumulated contributions accounts and the assumed
earnings rate applicable to end of service program benefits, as well as the
applicable crediting methodologies. The board also shall adopt from time to
time such mortality, service and other tables, as well as the assumed interest
rate, as are necessary and proper for the administration and funding of the
system. Additionally, the board shall cause an actuarial study to be completed
with regard to all of the experience of the system no less frequently than
every five (5) years. Upon receipt and review of the results of the actuarial
study(ies), the board shall if necessary revise the actuarial assumptions used
in the calculation of contributions and/or the preparation of the annual
valuations.
   Sec. 22-44(i). Retirement incentives. The board may, pursuant to duly
adopted board policies, recommend retirement incentive programs and/or an
extension of the scheduled termination date of incentive programs such as the
end of service program; provided that the recommended action shall have no
significant detrimental effect on the annual required contribution or the
funded status of the system and is consistent with the employment and retention
goals and objectives of the city, as determined by the board in consultation
with the system's actuary and the city manager's office.
   Sec. 22-44(j). Prohibited interest and fiduciary responsibility. No member
of the board shall have any interest, direct or indirect, in the gains or
profits of an investment made by the board, except as a member or beneficiary
of the system. No member of the board shall, directly or indirectly, for
himself or as an agent, in any manner use the moneys or other assets of the
system, except to make such payments from the system as are authorized by the
board; nor shall any member of the board become an endorser or surety or in any
manner an obligor for moneys loaned by or borrowed from the board. The board
shall discharge its duties with respect to the system solely in the interest
of, and for the exclusive purpose of providing benefits to, members and
beneficiaries.
   Sec. 22-44(k). Additional powers and duties. In addition to all other powers
and duties, the board shall:
   (1)   Keep a record of all of its proceedings, and such record shall be open
to inspection by members and the public;
   (2)   Determine the credited service, the compensation, the average final
monthly compensation, and the age of all members; and when the same cannot be
determined from the records, it may make the best available estimates thereof;
   (3)   Make annually a report to the mayor and city council covering the
operations of the system for the preceding fiscal year, including its financial
conditions as of fiscal closing;
   (4)   Review and provide written recommendations to the mayor and city
council on all proposed ordinances and resolutions not originating from the
board that amend, modify or delete provisions of the system. The board shall be
given forty-five (45) days advance notice prior to any such mayor and council
action regarding the system;
   (5)   Invest the assets of the system;
   (6)   Adopt necessary rules and regulations governing the administration of
the system;
   (7)   Hear and resolve employee, member and beneficiary claims relating to
the system; and
   (8)   Do all other things necessary for the proper administration of the
provisions of the system.
   Sec. 22-44(l). Advisory committees and subcommittees. The board may
establish advisory committees and subcommittees consistent with the needs of
administering the system. Advisory committees and subcommittees shall report
directly to the board and have no authority to make decisions on behalf of the
board.
(Ord. No. 10657, § 4, 4-28-09, eff. 7-1-09; Ord. No. 11327, § 16, 12-8-15, eff.
1-1-16; Ord. No. 11743, § 1, 4-14-20, eff. 7-1-20)
Sec. 22-45. Investments.
   Sec. 22-45(a). Investments. The board shall have full power to invest and
reinvest all moneys belonging to the system's trust fund and to hold, purchase,
sell, assign, transfer or dispose of the securities or investment in which such
moneys have been invested. The board or any agents employed by the board may:
   (1)   Invest and reinvest the principal and income of the trust fund without
distinction between principal and income;
   (2)   Sell, exchange, convey, transfer or otherwise dispose of any
investments of the trust fund held in the name of the system by private
contract or at public auction;
   (3)   And with regard to trust fund investments:
   (A)   Vote upon any stocks, bonds or other securities;
   (B)   Give general or special proxies or powers of attorney with or without
power of substitution;
   (C)   Exercise any conversion privileges, subscription rights or other
options and make any payments incidental thereto;
   (D)   Consent to, or otherwise participate in, corporate reorganizations or
other changes affecting corporate securities and delegate discretionary powers
and pay any assessments or charges in connection therewith;
   (E)   Generally exercise any of the powers of any owner with respect to
securities or other investments held in the trust fund;
   (4)   Make, execute, acknowledge and deliver any and all other instructions
that may be necessary or appropriate to carry out the powers herein granted;
   (5)   Register any investment held in the trust fund in the name of the
system or in the name of the nominee;
   (6)   At the expense of the system, enter into agreement with a trustee or
manager for the acquisition and safekeeping and handling of securities and
other investments coming into the possession of the board; the agreement shall
be entered into under such terms and conditions as shall secure the proper
safeguarding, inventory, withdrawal and handling of the securities and other
investments; no access to, and no deposit or withdrawal of, the securities from
any place of deposit selected by the board shall be permitted or made except as
the terms of the agreement may provide; and
   (7)   Do all other acts and engage in other transactions whether or not
expressly authorized which may be deemed necessary or proper for the growth and
protection of the investment held in the trust fund.
   Sec. 22-45(b). Due diligence. In making each and all such investments, the
board shall exercise the judgment and care under the circumstances then
prevailing which persons of ordinary prudence, discretion and intelligence
exercise in management of their own affairs, not in regard to speculation, but
in regard to the permanent disposition of their funds, considering the probable
income therefrom as well as the probable safety of the capital. The board shall
not be held liable for the exercise of more than ordinary care and prudence in
the selection of investments and shall not be limited to so-called "legal
investments for trustees"; but all assets of the system shall be invested
subject to all conditions, limitations and restrictions imposed by law.
(Ord. No. 10657, § 4, 4-28-09, eff. 7-1-09)
Sec. 22-46. Finance director duties.
The finance director or his/her designee shall deposit the system’s assets in
the trust fund held by the custodial financial institution selected by the
board to maintain the assets in trust for the benefit of the members. The
finance director shall be responsible for maintaining a system of accounts for
the assets in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles for
pension funds. The finance director also shall be responsible for oversight of
the payroll procedures connected to the system administration, such as the
collection of contributions pursuant to section
22-35(d). The finance director shall serve as the secretary of the board.
(Ord. No. 10657, § 4, 4-28-09, eff. 7-1-09; Ord. No. 11327, § 17, 12-8-15, eff.
1-1-16)
Sec. 22-47. Human resources director duties.
The human resources director or his/her designee shall provide the board with
all relevant information available in the city’s human resources department
concerning the employment status of members.
(Ord. No. 10657, § 4, 4-28-09, eff. 7-1-09; Ord. No. 11327, § 18, 12-8-15, eff.
1-1-16)
Sec. 22-48. System administrator.
The system administrator is charged with the day to day administration of the
system and oversight of the city's retirement office and personnel. The system
administrator shall be an individual having a demonstrated familiarity with one
or more disciplines such as finance, accounting, actuarial evaluations,
investments or tax law. The system administrator shall attend board meetings,
consult with other professionals employed by the board and shall report to the
board on such matters as may affect the administration of the system. The
system administrator shall make all such decisions as are necessary for the
daily operation of the system, exercise the discretion necessary to carry out
its functions hereunder and supervise such employees who may be assigned to
assist in the operation of the system.
(Ord. No. 10657, § 5, 4-28-09, eff. 7-1-09)
Sec. 22-49. Indemnification.
To the extent permitted by law, the board, the individual members of the board
and the system administrator shall be indemnified and held harmless against any
and all liabilities (including defense costs and expenses) arising by reason of
an act or failure to act in their fiduciary and administrative capacities to
the system, and for liability and costs resulting from the acts and omissions
of their duly appointed agents, except for those acts, omissions, or conduct
resulting from their own willful misconduct, willful failure to act, or gross
negligence. The system shall maintain fiduciary liability insurance designed to
fund the indemnification provided by this section. The city shall be liable for
indemnification under this section only to the extent that the liability
exceeds the amount available through the system's fiduciary liability
insurance.
(Ord. No. 10657, § 5, 4-28-09, eff. 7-1-09)
Sec. 22-50. Miscellaneous administrative provisions.
   Sec. 22-50(a). Fraudulent acts prohibited. Any person who knowingly makes
any false statement with respect to or falsifies or permits to be falsified any
record, application or form of the system in an attempt to defraud the system
or defeat the right of a member to receive a retirement benefit to which they
may be entitled is guilty of a crime and shall be subject to prosecution in
accordance with the applicable criminal statutes.
   Sec. 22-50(b). Correction of errors. The board shall correct errors in the
records and actions of the system administration. The board shall seek to
recover overpayments and shall make up underpayments. Recovery of overpayments
may be accomplished by reducing the amount of future payments so that the
actuarial present value of actual payments is equal to the actuarial present
value of correct payments.
   Sec. 22-50(c). Employment rights. The system shall not be construed as
giving an employee any right to be retained in the service of the city without
its consent nor shall the system interfere with the right of the city to
discharge an employee, nor shall an employee be given any right, claim or
interest in any benefits of the system except upon fulfillment of the
conditions and requirements of the system.
   Sec. 22-50(d). Applicable laws. The system shall be construed and enforced
under the laws of the State of Arizona and any federal law, rule or regulation
applicable to a tax-qualified governmental retirement plan structured in
accordance with Section 414(d) of the Code and Section 3(32) of the Employee
Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, and all of the provisions hereof shall
be administered in accordance therewith.
(Ord. No. 10657, § 5, 4-28-09, eff. 7-1-09)
Sec. 22-51. Alteration, amendment, repeal of the system.
   Sec. 22-51(a). Amendment or repeal of system; non-forfeiture of benefits.
The mayor and city council may alter, amend or repeal any provision of the
system or its application to any person. All accrued benefits that have vested
or accrued at the time of such alteration, amendment or repeal shall not be
affected thereby for any member or beneficiary.
   Sec. 22-51(b). Continuing administration of the system. In the event the
mayor and city council repeal the provisions of this article, the board shall
continue to administer the system in accordance with the provisions of this
article for the sole benefit of the then members, any beneficiaries receiving
retirement benefit payments, and any future persons entitled to receive
retirement benefit payments as beneficiaries of any such beneficiaries or
members. The remaining assets of the system shall be allocated by the board in
an equitable manner to provide a distribution for all designated persons in
accordance with the provisions of the system, but based on years of credited
service and average final monthly compensation as of the date of repeal and in
the following order:
   (1)   First, for the benefit of the then members to the extent of their
individual accumulated contributions account. Members are hereby declared to
have a property right in such accumulated contributions and shall have an
unrestricted right to withdraw such accumulated contributions in the event of
repeal of this article. If any assets remain, then
   (2)   Second, for the benefit of the then beneficiaries and persons already
designated by former members under one (1) of the retirement benefit payment
options provided for in this article to the extent of the member's accrued
benefit. If any assets remain, then
   (3)   Third, for the benefit of those members who may elect not to withdraw
their accumulated contributions and retain a right to a deferred retirement
benefit and the individuals, if any, designated by such members under one (1)
of the retirement benefit payment options, to the extent of the member's
accrued benefit. The allocation under this paragraph shall be on the basis of
greatest length of credited service first.
   Sec. 22-51(c). Allocation of additional funds by the city. In the event the
assets at the date of repeal of the system are insufficient to provide all
required distributions, the city shall contribute to the assets of the system,
as and when required, any amount necessary to make up such deficiency.
   Sec. 22-51(d). Payment of distributions. The allocation of assets of the
system provided for in this section shall be carried out through the payment of
distributions provided for in this section as they become due, or by the
transfer of such assets to a successor retirement system replacing this system;
provided, that all vested benefits provided in this section shall be fully
maintained under any successor retirement system.
   Sec. 22-51(e). Reversion of assets to the general fund of the city. Any
assets remaining in the system after all liabilities prescribed by this section
have been paid shall revert to the general fund of the city.
(Ord. No. 10657, § 5, 4-28-09, eff. 7-1-09)
Sec. 22-52. Effective date.
This article first became effective on December 17, 1953. This revision shall
be effective as of July 1, 2009, except as otherwise set forth herein.
(Ord. No. 10657, § 5, 4-28-09, eff. 7-1-09)
Sec. 22-53. Reserved.
   Editors Note: Ord. No. 10657, § 6, adopted April 28, 2009, effective July 1,
2009, repealed §
22-53, which pertained to end of service incentive and derived from Ord. No.
10320, § 1, adopted Sept. 19, 2006; Ord. No. 10483, § 1, adopted Nov. 27, 2007;
Ord. No. 10489, § 1, adopted Jan. 8, 2008.
Sec. 22-54. Reserved.
   Editors Note: Ord. No. 10657, § 6, adopted April 28, 2009, effective July 1,
2009, repealed §
22-54, which pertained to City of Tucson 401(a) Supplemental Retirement Plan
and derived from Ord. No. 10322, § 1, adopted Sept. 26, 2006.
Sec. 22-55. Reserved.
   Editors Note: Ord. No. 10657, § 6, adopted April 28, 2009, effective July 1,
2009, repealed §
22-55, which pertained to purchase of permissive service credits and derived
from Ord. No. 10483, § 4, adopted Nov. 27, 2007.
Article IIIA.
Deferred Compensation Retirement Plans
Sec. 22-56 Purpose.
   It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this Article to confirm the
authority of the City to develop and maintain various tax-deferred defined
contribution retirement programs for City employees, to be administered by the
Deferred Compensation Plan Management Board in accordance with this Article and
the applicable Plan Documents.
(Ord. 11937, § 1, 7-12-22)
Sec. 22-57. Definitions.
   Sec. 22-57(a). "Board" means the City of Tucson Deferred Compensation Plan
Management Board.
   Sec. 22-57(b). "IRC" means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.
   Sec. 22-57(c). "DC Plans" means the deferred compensation plans adopted by
the City of Tucson for the benefit of its employees, including any IRC Section
457(b) arrangement and any IRC Section 401(a) retirement plan. As of the date
of enactment of this Article, the City maintains the City of Tucson Deferred
Compensation Plan, the City of Tucson 401(a) Plan, and the City of Tucson
Contract Executives 401(a) Plan. The foregoing DC Plans may be amended,
modified or terminated in accordance with their underlying plan documents and
Section
22-65 below. The City also may adopt new DC Plans, in its discretion, after the
enactment of this Article without amendment of this Article.
   Sec. 22-57(d). "Participant" means an employee who is eligible to
participate in a DC Plan or, as the context may indicate, a former employee who
holds an account balance under a DC Plan.
   Sec. 22-57(e). "Plan Document(s)" means the plan documents, adoption
agreements, amendments and other governing documents approved and executed by
the City with regard to a DC Plan.
   Sec. 22-57(f). "Trust Fund" means the custodial or trust account(s)
maintained under a DC Plan and exempt from taxation pursuant to Sections 401
(a), 457(g) and 501(a) of the IRC, as further defined and administered in
accordance with the applicable Plan Documents.
(Ord. 11937, § 1, 7-12-22)
Sec. 22-58. Exclusive benefit.
   The DC Plans shall be maintained and operated for the exclusive purpose of
providing benefits to the Participants and their beneficiaries. With the
exception of the payment of reasonable expenses necessary to maintain the DC
Plans, no part of the corpus or income of the Trust Funds shall be used for, or
diverted to, purposes other than providing benefits to the Participants and
their beneficiaries.
(Ord. 11937, § 1, 7-12-22)
Sec. 22-59. Eligibility and participation.
   The eligibility and participation provisions of all DC Plans shall be
designed and administered in accordance with the employment and employee
benefit provisions of the Tucson City Code. The eligibility of active and
former City employees to participate in a DC Plan, and the procedures or rules
regarding the enrollment of such individuals in a DC Plan, shall be determined
in accordance with the applicable Plan Document.
(Ord. 11937, § 1, 7-12-22)
Sec. 22-60. DC plan contributions.
   As soon as administratively practical following the end of each payroll
period, the Finance Director shall cause the City to remit to the applicable
Trust Funds the Participant deferrals owed to each DC Plan for the particular
payroll period. Any employer contributions owed to a DC Plan shall be remitted
by the City in accordance with applicable deadlines.
(Ord. 11937, § 1, 7-12-22)
Sec. 22-61. Management Board.
   Sec. 22-61(a). Membership. The Deferred Compensation Plan Management Board
shall consist of the following seven (7) members, subject to the qualification
requirements set forth in Section 22-61(b) below:
   (1)   A member appointed by the City Manager;
   (2)   The City's Finance Director;
   (3)   The City's Human Resources Director;
   (4)   Two (2) active City employees who are contributing to or holding an
account in a DC Plan, nominated and elected by the active DC Plan Participants,
in a manner determined by the Board; and
   (5)   Two (2) former City employees who hold an account in a DC Plan,
nominated and elected by the inactive DC Plan Participants who hold accounts,
in a manner determined by the Board.
   Both the City's Finance Director and the City's Human Resources Director
shall have the authority to delegate their Board position to a senior level
management employee of the City with experience in the applicable area of
finance or human resources and who is expected to serve as a long-term voting
member of the Board.
   Sec. 22-61(b). Qualifications. The Board member appointed by the City
Manager shall be a resident of Pima County and may be a local citizen or an
employee of the City, including the City's Pension and Benefits Administrator,
as determined by the City Manager in their discretion. The candidates for the
City Manager's appointee and the elected employee and former employee positions
shall have relevant secondary education or employment experience in the areas
of business administration, finance, accounting, human resources, investments,
law, procurement, management or retirement administration.
   Sec. 22-61(c). City Requirements for Boards. The Board shall be exempt from
all provisions of section
10A-134 of the Tucson Code.
   Sec. 22-61(d). Term of Office. The City Manager's appointee to the Board
shall serve at the pleasure of the City Manager and without a specified term,
subject to the Board member's ability to resign from the position with ninety
(90) days' notice to the Board and the City Manager. Effective with regard to
elections held after the enactment of this provision, the term of office of
individual Board members who are nominated and elected by DC Plan Participants
shall be four (4) years and such members shall serve no more than two (2)
consecutive terms on the Board (non-consecutive terms are permitted). The
Directors of Finance and Human Resources, or their delegates, shall be standing
members of the Board and not subject to specified terms.
   Sec. 22-61(e). Chairperson of the Board. The Board shall elect a chairperson
from among the Board membership, who shall serve as chairperson for a term of
three (3) years, subject to Section 22-61(d) above. The Board shall elect a
successor chairperson from time to time as necessary, and it is expected that
the chairperson position shall rotate among Board members.
   Sec. 22-61(f). Compensation. The City Manager's appointee to the Board shall
serve without compensation. Employees of the City who serve on the Board shall
receive no additional compensation for their Board service. All Board members
shall be reimbursed for expenses incurred by them in the performance of their
Board duties.
(Ord. 11937, § 1, 7-12-22)
Sec. 22-62. Administration of DC plans.
   Sec. 22-62(a). Plan Administrator and Named Fiduciary. The Board shall serve
as the Plan Administrator and named fiduciary of the DC Plans. The Board shall
be responsible for, and shall have the power and authority necessary to
effectuate the administration, management and operation of the DC Plans. The
Board shall construe, interpret and implement the provisions of this Article
and the Plan Documents, in its discretion and pursuant to uniform and non-
discriminatory rules, policies and procedures. In the event of a conflict
between this Article and a Plan Document, the provisions of this Article shall
control unless application of this Article would negatively impact the tax
advantages associated with a DC Plan.
   Sec. 22-62(b). Employment of Professionals. The Board may employ record-
keepers, investment consultants, investment managers, retirement plan
consultants, and other service providers as may be necessary for the proper
administration of the DC Plans. Professionals employed by the Board shall
discharge their duties in accordance with and be subject to the highest
prevailing industry standard of care for their respective disciplines.
   Sec. 22-62(c). Payment of Expenses. The Board shall facilitate and approve
the payment of expenses that are reasonably necessary for the proper
administration of the DC Plans. Expense payments authorized by the Board shall
be funded from the appropriate Trust Fund, unless the City has agreed to pay a
particular expenses and has budgeted for such expense.
   Sec. 22-62(d). Correction of errors. The Board shall correct errors that
occur in the administration of the DC Plans in accordance with the rules
governing the correction of errors in tax-qualified and tax-deferred retirement
programs.
   Sec. 22-62(e). Additional Powers and Duties. In addition to all other powers
and duties, the Board shall:
   (1)   Keep a record of all of its proceedings, and such record shall be open
to inspection by Participants and the public;
   (2)   Review and resolve ambiguities arising in the administration of the DC
Plans, including questions of eligibility, benefits, account distributions and
interpretation of Plan Documents;
   (3)   Manage the investment of DC Plan assets with the advice and counsel of
the Board's investment consultants and pursuant to the Plan Documents governing
the Trust Funds;
   (4)   Adopt necessary rules and regulations governing the administration of
the DC Plans;
   (5)   Hear and resolve employee, Participant and beneficiary claims relating
to the DC Plans;
   (6)   Delegate fiduciary decision-making, administrative functions and
ministerial duties to the City's Pension and Benefits Administrator, in its
discretion;
   (7)   Contract with service providers to perform administration, investment,
recordkeeping and custodial services with regard to the DC Plans; and
   (8)   Do all other things necessary for the proper administration of the
provisions of the DC Plans.
   Sec. 22-62(f). Prohibited Acts. No member of the Board shall have any
interest, direct or indirect, in the gains or profits of an investment made by
the Board or an investment option approved by the Board, except as a
Participant or beneficiary of a DC Plan. No member of the Board shall, directly
or indirectly, for himself or as an agent, in any manner use the moneys or
other assets of any DC Plan, except to make such payments from the DC Plan
Trust Funds as are authorized by the Board.
   Sec. 22-62(g). Due Diligence. When managing the DC Plan investments, the
Board shall exercise the judgment and care of a prudent retirement plan
fiduciary. The Board shall structure an investment array for Participants that
allows for appropriate diversification, minimizes the risk of large losses and
avoids conflicts of interest.
(Ord. 11937, § 1, 7-12-22)
Sec. 22-63. Indemnification.
   To the extent permitted by law, the Board, the individual members of the
Board and the City's personnel who engage in the administration of the DC Plans
shall be indemnified and held harmless against any and all liabilities
(including defense costs and expenses) arising by reason of an act or failure
to act in their fiduciary and administrative capacities to the DC Plans, and
for liability and costs resulting from the acts and omissions of their duly
appointed agents, except for those acts, omissions, or conduct resulting from
their own willful misconduct, willful failure to act, or gross negligence. The
City may procure fiduciary liability insurance designed to fund the
indemnification provided by this section, and may charge the cost of such
insurance to the DC Plans as a reasonable expense of administration. The City
shall be liable for indemnification under this section only to the extent that
the liability exceeds the amount available through the DC Plans' fiduciary
liability insurance.
(Ord. 11937, § 1, 7-12-22)
Sec. 22-64. Applicable laws.
   The DC Plans shall be construed and enforced under the laws of the State of
Arizona and any federal law, rule or regulation applicable to a tax-qualified
governmental retirement plan or a tax-deferred IRC Section 457 deferred
compensation plan. The DC Plans are intended to be structured and operated as
IRC Section 414(d) governmental plans or eligible IRC Section 457 deferred
compensation plans, and both the DC Plans and this Article shall be
administered in accordance therewith.
(Ord. 11937, § 1, 7-12-22)
Sec. 22-65. Amendment and termination of DC plans.
   Sec. 22-65(a). Amendment of DC Plans. The Board may alter, amend or modify
any provision of the DC Plans to comply with applicable federal laws and to
provide additional benefits, rights or features to Participants and
beneficiaries; provided, however, that no amendment approved by the Board shall
impact employer contributions to a DC Plan or have a material impact on the
City's cost of maintaining a DC Plan. No amendment to a DC Plan shall diminish
or infringe upon the vested rights of any Participant or beneficiary under a DC
Plan. Any amendment submitted to the Board for approval must be reviewed and
approved by legal counsel prior to adoption.
   Sec. 22-65(b). Termination of DC Plans and Amendments Impacting City Costs.
The Mayor and City Council may alter, amend or terminate a DC Plan at any time
in their discretion. Any amendment to a DC Plan that will impact employer
contributions to a DC Plan or have a material impact on the City's cost of
maintaining a DC Plan must be approved by the Mayor and City Council to be
effective. No amendment or termination of a DC Plan shall diminish or infringe
upon the vested rights of any Participant or beneficiary under a DC Plan.
(Ord. 11937, § 1, 7-12-22)
Secs. 22-66 – 22-77. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV.
GROUP INSURANCE AND MEDICAL HEALTH PLANS*
__________
*   Editors Note: Section I of Ord. No. 4138, enacted Feb. 19, 1974, amended
art. IV, §§
22-78--22-85, to include medical health benefits in the provisions of the
article. Formerly art. IV was entitled "Group Insurance."
__________
Sec. 22-78. Short title.
This article may be cited as the Tucson Group Insurance and Medical Health Plan
Ordinance.
(1953 Code, ch. 20, § 60; Ord. No. 2208, § 1, 9-5-61; Ord. No. 4138, § 1, 2-19-
74)
Sec. 22-79. Purpose.
   It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this article to authorize and
provide group insurance and health plan coverage for officers, employees and
retirees of the city and for their dependents, which may be provided on a self-
insured basis or through the purchase of fully insured products, as determined
by the city and as set forth in the city's applicable health plan documents.
(1953 Code, ch. 20, § 61; Ord. No. 2208, § 1, 9-5-61; Ord. No. 4138, § 1, 2-19-
74; Ord. No. 11628, § 1, 3-5-19)
Sec. 22-80. Coverage authorized; coverage optional.
   The Mayor and Council may negotiate and execute any necessary agreement with
a group insurance carrier or a self-insured health plan containing such terms
and conditions as may be required to provide group insurance and health plan
coverage for officers, employees and retirees of the city and their dependents.
All determinations regarding eligibility and coverage under all city health
plan shall be made in accordance with the provisions of the applicable plan
documents and agreements. The group insurance or health benefits offered by the
city shall be made available to eligible individuals, as determined in
accordance with the applicable plan documents, but coverage shall not be
mandatory for any eligible individual (absent a change in applicable federal or
state law). With regard to any health plan coverage made available to city
retirees pursuant to this article, the continued availability of such services
after a retiree becomes eligible for Federal Medicare will be determined in
accordance with the applicable health plan documents.
(1953 Code, ch. 20, § 62; Ord. No. 2208, § 1, 9-5-61; Ord. No. 4138, § 1, 2-19-
74; Ord. No. 11628, § 2, 3-5-19)
Sec. 22-81. Establishment of Self-Insured Health Benefits Trust.
   Sec. 22-81.1. There is established the City of Tucson Self-Insured Health
Benefits Trust. The mayor and council shall adopt a Trust Agreement that sets
forth the specific terms of the Health Benefits Trust, with a stop-loss
provision shall be incorporated into the Trust Agreement.
   Sec. 22-81.2. Initially, the Trust shall provide funding for medical and
pharmacy benefits made available to officers, employees and retirees of the
city and their dependents. In the uniform discretion of the city, tax-preferred
health care funding vehicles such as health savings accounts and health
reimbursement accounts may be funded through the Trust in connection with the
self-insured health plan coverage. The Trust may be expanded at future dates to
include the self-funding of other employee welfare benefits as directed by the
mayor and council and as may be authorized by the annual appropriation of funds
by the mayor and council.
   Sec. 22-81.3. The Trust shall be held separate from the general assets of
the city and the Self-Insured Trust Fund established pursuant to Tucson Code
Chapter 18. The Trust Agreement may be amended by the mayor and council at any
time in their discretion. The board shall have the power and discretion to
recommend amendments to the Trust Agreement to the mayor and council, and shall
be afforded a reasonable opportunity to review and comment on any proposed
amendments before action is taken by the mayor and council.
   Sec. 22-81.4. An annual audit of the Trust Fund shall be conducted by an
external auditor designated by the board. A copy of the audit report shall be
kept on file in the city's retirement and benefits office for a period of not
less than five (5) years.
   Sec. 22-81.5. The city manager shall designate a risk management consultant
or an insurance administrator licensed pursuant to Title 20, Chapter 2, Article
3 of the Arizona Revised Statutes. Any insurance administrator or risk
management consultant shall present evidence of licensure in accordance with
state law to the board periodically and upon request.
   Sec. 22-81.6. Any health benefits plan adopted by the city shall include
terms and conditions of coverage and exclusions of coverage. Neither the
implementation of the Self-Insured Health Benefits Trust, nor anything in a
benefit plan document, the Trust Agreement or this Chapter 22, Article IV of
the Tucson Code shall be interpreted to expand or increase the liability of the
city for any health benefit claim.
(Ord. No. 11628, § 3, 3-5-19)
Sec. 22-82. Board of trustees for Self-Insured Health Benefits Trust.
   Sec. 22-82.1. The board of trustees shall include five (5) joint trustees,
all of whom shall be at least twenty-one (21) years old, citizens of the United
States of America and reside or work in the City of Tucson, Arizona. One
trustee shall be an officer of the city designated by the city manager and no
other trustee shall be an officer or employee of the City of Tucson. Except for
the city officer appointed to the board of trustees by the city manager, the
trustees shall be appointed by the mayor and council and shall have expertise
in the field of finance, health or medical insurance, employment benefits,
health care or actuarial science.
   Sec. 22-82.2. Trustees shall serve four (4) year staggered terms. The city
may, in the Trust Agreement, set forth special initial terms for the individual
trustees, to ensure continuity of experience on the board. Any trustee may be
reappointed by his or her appointing authority upon expiration of his or her
term, provided that no trustee other than the city officer trustee serves more
than two (2) consecutive terms. The city officer who is appointed as a trustee
shall not be subject to term limits.
   Sec. 22-82.3. No person shall qualify as trustee until he or she has been
bonded. The bond requirement may be satisfied by the blanket performance bond
or other coverage provided by the city.
   Sec. 22-82.4. Trustees are subject to removal and substitution by their
appointing authority, with or without cause. Any trustee may, upon expiration
of his or her term, continue to serve until a replacement is appointed by the
appointing authority. Additional rules regarding the resignation, removal and
replacement of trustees, and regarding board officers and procedures, shall be
set forth in the Trust Agreement.
   Sec. 22-82.5. Trustees shall not be entitled to receive compensation for
their services as trustees, except that trustees shall be entitled to
reimbursement for any reasonable out-of-pocket cost and expenditures made by
the trustees in the performance of their duties as trustees. The employment
compensation paid by the city to the city officer who is appointed to serve as
a trustee shall not be considered compensation for trustee services.
   Sec. 22-82.6. The board of trustees shall be responsible for, and shall have
the power and authority necessary to, manage the investment of all trust assets
in its discretion, and to provide advice and recom mendations regarding
management, funding and sufficiency of the trust.
   Sec. 22-82.7. The Board of Trustees shall meet at least four (4) times per
year or more frequently if determined necessary by the chairperson of the
board, or as requested by the city manager.
   Sec. 22-82.8. The board of trustees shall serve in an advisory capacity to
the city, providing advice, recommendations and feedback to the city with
regard to the design and cost of the health benefits program offered by the
city on a self-insured basis, all in advance of final approval of such program
by the mayor and council. The board shall not be responsible for the design of
the health benefits program offered by the city to officers and employees of
the city and their dependents, nor shall the board be authorized to determine
the premiums, rates, cost sharing and other financial aspects of the health
benefits program.
   Sec. 22-82.10. The board shall act in conformance with this Chapter 22,
Article IV and the terms of the Trust Agreement.
   Sec. 22-82.9. The board of trustees shall be exempt from all provisions of
Chapter 10A, title XIII of the Tucson Code, with the exception of Section 10A-
136 of the Tucson Code.
(Ord. No. 11628, § 4, 3-5-19)
Sec. 22-83. Manner of financing Self-Insured Health Benefits Trust.
   The city manager shall annually recommend to the mayor and council the level
of funding necessary to achieve and maintain adequate trust funding. The
determination of the appropriate amount of funding for the trust shall be made
annually and shall be solely within the discretion of the mayor and council.
The trust shall be funded by allocation of funds from general fund and non-
general fund departments. Once funds are deposited to the trust, said funds
shall not be subject to the local government budgeting provisions of A.R.S. §
42-17101 et seq. All monies received by the city for the purpose of funding the
self-insured health benefits plan shall be deposited into the trust fund,
including all health care premiums, contributions, credits, rebates and
refunds. Incentive payments and allowances that are made available by service
providers and spent by the service providers on plan or trust related matters
are not received by the city and are not required to be deposited to the trust.
(Ord. No. 11628, § 5, 3-5-19)
Sec. 22-84. City's premium costs; finance director to pay premiums.
   The city's predetermined proportionate share of the premium or payment cost
of the group insurance, self-insured health plan coverage provided for
officers, employees, retirees and dependents and any tax-preferred health
coverage funding vehicles included in the trust shall be paid from funds
budgeted and authorized to be paid during each fiscal year that such group
insurance policy or health plan shall be in effect. The finance director is
hereby authorized and directed to pay, upon receipt of duly executed demands,
to the group insurance carrier or the self-insured health benefits such sums as
may, from time to time, be due and payable as premiums or payments in
accordance with the agreement and master policy. Such payments shall be made
from the appropriate fund of the city.
(Ord. No. 11628, § 6, 3-5-19)
Sec. 22-85. Duties of human resources director; employees' premium costs.
   The human resources director is hereby charged with the duty of causing all
officers, employees and retirees of the city who are eligible to participate in
an employee health or welfare plan to be informed as to their benefits, rights
and obligations under such health or welfare plan. The human resources director
also is directed to deduct and withhold for each and every payroll period from
the compensation of each such officer, employee and retiree (or from pension
payments, in the case of a retiree) a sum equal to that individual's
predetermined proportionate share of the premium or cost of the group
insurance, self-insured health benefits plan provided to and elected by such
officer, employee or retiree and any tax-preferred health coverage funding
vehicles included in the trust. In appropriate cases, as determined by the
human resources director, officers, employees and retirees may submit payment
of his or her predetermined proportionate share of the premium or cost of any
elected group insurance or self-insured health benefits plan via alternative
means acceptable to the human resources director. The amount so withheld or
collected shall be paid to the appropriate insurance company or to the Self-
Insured Health Benefits Trust as provided by section
22-81; however, failure of the human resources director to withhold such sums
shall not relieve such officer or employee from whose compensation such sums
are not withheld from liability therefor. If more or less than the correct
amount is deducted in any payroll period or collected from the officer,
employee or retiree, proper adjustment or refund shall be made, without
interest, in such manner and for such time as the human resources director
shall prescribe.
(Ord. No. 11628, § 7, 3-5-19)
Sec. 22-86. Expenditure of funds held in Self-Insured Health Benefits Trust.
   Funds of the Self-Insured Health Benefits Trust shall be expended solely for
payment of claims incurred in accordance with any self-insured medical benefits
plan, administration of any such plan and the Self-Insured Health Benefits
Trust, overhead and indirect costs allocated by the city to the self-insured
medical benefits plan and the trust, wellness programs benefitting city
employees participating in the self-insured medical benefits plan and their
dependents, and other purposes of the trust as approved by the trustees. The
trustees shall adopt an annual budget for the trust, including the
administrative costs of administering the trust and the plans, as well as
benefit and reinsurance costs.
(Ord. No. 11628, § 8, 3-5-19)
Sec. 22-87. Effective date of Self-Insured Health Benefits Trust.
   The trust shall be established effective as of July 1, 2019.
(Ord. No. 11628, § 9, 3-5-19)
Sec. 22-88. Medical insurance incentive allowance.
   Notwithstanding other provisions of this article, any city officer or
employee eligible for medical coverage under the city's medical plan may waive
coverage under the city's medical plan and elect to receive a medical insurance
incentive allowance of thirty-six dollars and ninety-two cents ($36.92) per pay
period provided that the city officer or employee is not currently covered by
the city's retiree medical plan or as a dependent under another city employee
or retiree's plan, and provided that the employee provides acceptable proof of
non-city medical insurance to the Benefits division of Human Resources. This
waiver does not extend to dental coverage or to other plans provided under
section 125 of the Internal Revenue Code.
   Any city officer or employee may request the incentive for waiver of medical
coverage during the initial thirty-one (31) days of city employment, during the
annual open enrollment period, or whenever there is a qualifying life event
such as gaining coverage through a non-city medical plan, and provided that the
city officer or employee is not currently covered by the city's medical plan.
   The actual effective date for the incentive payment will depend upon the
reason for the change. For newly hired employees, the effective date for start
of the incentive will be the date a new hire employee normally becomes eligible
for other city-paid benefits. For an open enrollment change, the effective date
for start of the incentive will be the date that the new fiscal year's medical
insurance premiums otherwise would take effect. For qualifying life events, the
effective date for starting the incentive payment will be the first day the
waiver of city medical coverage takes effect. Regardless of the reason, in
order for the incentive to take effect on the dates prescribed above, proper
documentation supporting the incentive for waiver must be received by the
Benefits division of Human Resources before the incentive payment will begin.
If documentation is received after the date incentive otherwise would have
taken effect, the incentive will begin the pay period that the acceptable
documentation is received, and retroactive payments of the incentive will not
be made.
   When an eligible employee resumes medical coverage on a city plan, the
effective date for stopping the incentive will be the last date prior to the
date the city medical coverage begins.
   Any city officer or employee waiving medical coverage under the city's plan
must provide written proof of medical coverage from another non-City of Tucson
source. Failure to provide periodic proof of medical coverage from another non-
city source, satisfactory to, and at such frequency as determined by the city,
will be grounds for the city to discontinue the incentive and recoup any
incentive payments made for the time the employee did not maintain medical
coverage. Proof of medical coverage from another non-city source must be
provided within thirty (30) days of any request.
(Ord. No. 9857, §§ 1, 2, 6-2-03; Ord. No. 10059, § 1, 10-11-04; Ord. No. 10678,
§ 2, 6-9-09, eff. 7-1-09; Ord. No. 10991, § 1, 6-12-12, eff. 7-1-12; Ord. No.
11364, § 3, 6-7-16, eff. 6-26-16; Ord. No. 11628, § 10, 3-5-19)
   Editor’s note – It should be noted that § 22-88 is effective retroactive to
April 30, 2003.
Sec. 22-89. Reserved.
ARTICLE V.
LEAVE BENEFIT PLAN*
__________
*   Editors Note: Ord. No. 9348, § 1, adopted Feb. 7, 2000, amended the title
of art. V to read as herein set out.
__________
Sec. 22-90. Providing for leave benefit plan.
   Sec. 22-90(1). Vacation leave accrual. The city's leave benefit plan shall
include vacation, sick, military leave and other paid and unpaid leave and time
off work as hereafter set forth. The number of days and accrual rates for
vacation, sick leave, and military leave, and conditions governing compensation
for unused accrued leave paid to employees separating from city service are as
follows, further provided that any provision for compensation of unused accrued
sick leave is subject to retroactive and/or prospective change at any time.
   a.   Permanent, full-time employees, including Public Safety, shall accrue
paid vacation leave as follows:
Continuous Years of Service Per Pay Period Per Year
Continuous Years of Service           Per Pay Period Per Year
0 - 1 years of continuous service*:   4 hrs. 0 min.  13 days (104 hrs.)
Over 1 to 2 years of continuous       4 hrs. 30 min. 14 days, 5 hrs. (117 hrs.)
service*:
Over 2 to 6 years of continuous       5 hrs. 0 min.  16 days, 2 hrs. (130 hrs.)
service*:
Over 6 to 9 years of continuous       6 hrs. 0 min.  19 days, 4 hrs. (156 hrs.)
service*:
O v e r 9 t o 1 4 y e a r s o f c o n 6 hrs. 30 min. 21 days, 1 hrs. (169 hrs.)
t i n u o u s s e r v i c e * :
O v e r 1 4 t o 1 7 y e ars of        7 hrs. 0 min.  22 days, 6 hrs. (182 hrs.)
continuous service*:
Over 17 to 20 years of continuous     7 hrs. 24 min. 24 days, 0 hrs. (192 hrs.)
service*:
Over 20 years plus*:                  8 hrs. 0 min.  26 days, 0 hrs. (208 hrs.)
 
   *Continuous service excludes AWOL/LWOP
   b.   Permanent, part-time employees who work twenty (20) or more hours per
week accrue a prorated amount of paid vacation leave according to the actual
hours worked and hours of paid leave used per pay period.
   c.   Permanent employees who work less than twenty (20) hours per week and
non- permanent employees do not accrue paid vacation leave.
   d.   Employees who have accrued thirty- six (36) days (two hundred eighty-
eight (288) hours) of vacation leave in any pay period will not accrue
additional vacation leave for that pay period. The number of hours of vacation
leave that would otherwise have accrued for that pay period will be credited to
the employee as additional sick leave accrual. Commissioned fire personnel at
or below the rank of captain may receive a maximum of two hundred eight (208)
hours of such additional sick leave accrual each year, starting with the pay
period in which April 1 falls. All other employees may receive a maximum of
fifty-six (56) hours (seven (7) days) of such additional sick leave accrual
each year, starting with the pay period in which April 1 falls. Notwithstanding
the forgoing provisions that impose caps on the vacation and additional sick
leave that can be accrued by employees, special vacation leave accrual and cash
payment rules shall apply for a limited portion of the 2020 calendar year, as
set forth in section
22-90(1)(g) below.
   e.   An employee who is on leave without pay or any unpaid leave status for
up to one-half(1/2) of the pay period shall accrue vacation leave on a pro-
rated basis for that pay period based on the actual hours worked and hours of
paid leave used. An employee who is on leave without pay or any unpaid leave
status for more than one-half(1/2) of a pay period does not accrue vacation
leave for that pay period.
   f.   Employees on paid leave shall be paid their regular salaries and shall
continue to accrue their normal vacation and sick leave.
   g.   Permanent, full-time employees, including public safety, shall accrue
additional vacation leave pursuant to the city's vacation leave carryover
program ("VLCP") from March 15, 2020 until December 19, 2020 (the "COVID
vacation period"). Employees who have accrued the maximum amount of vacation
leave and additional sick leave under section
22-90(1)(d) above, at any time during the COVID vacation period, shall accrue
additional vacation leave that is classified as VLCP hours. The accrual of VLCP
hours shall occur at the applicable accrual rate set forth in section
22-90(1)(a) above, and shall be tracked separately from any vacation leave or
additional sick leave previously accrued. Employees who accrue VLCP hours in
accordance with this section
22-90(1)(g) shall be compensated for any unused accrued VLCP hours at the
employee's base rate of pay on the earlier of (i) the employee's separation
from employment with the city or (ii) December 31, 2020. The VLCP shall expire
and have no further effect on vacation leave accruals as of December 20, 2020.
The provisions of this section
22-90(1)(g) shall supersede any provision of section
22-90 to the contrary, with regard to VLCP hours accrued during the COVID
vacation period.
   Sec. 22-90(2). Sick leave accrual.
   a.   Probationary and permanent, full-time employees, except permanent, full
time commissioned fire and commissioned police personnel, shall accrue sick
leave as follows:
 
Per Pay Period Per Year
4 hrs. 0 min.  13 days (104 hrs.)
 
   b.   Permanent full time commissioned fire and commissioned police employees
shall accrue sick leave as follows:
 
                                  Per Pay Period Per Year
0--10 years of continuous service: 4 hrs. 0 min.  13 days (104 hrs.)
Over 10 to 15 years of continuous  4 hrs. 38 min. 15 days, 28 min. (120 hrs. 28
service:                                          min.)
Over 15 years of continuous        6 hrs. 10 min. 20 days, 20 min. (160 hrs. 20
service:                                          min.)
 
   c.   Probationary and permanent, part time employees who work twenty (20) or
more hours per week (forty (40) or more hours per pay period) shall accrue the
greater of either a pro-rated amount of sick leave according to the actual
hours worked and hours of paid leave used per pay period or shall accrue one
hour of sick leave for every thirty (30) hours worked.
   d.   Non-permanent employees and permanent part-time employees who work less
than twenty (20) hours per week, shall accrue sick leave at the rate of one (1)
hour for every thirty (30) hours worked.
   e.   Employees on leave without pay or any unpaid leave status for up to
one-half (1/2) of a pay period shall accrue sick leave on a pro-rated basis for
that pay period based on the actual hours worked and hours of paid leave used.
An employee who is on leave without pay for more than one- half (1/2) of a pay
period does not accrue sick leave for that pay period.
   f.   Earned paid sick time (as defined in A.R.S. § 23-371) is not additional
sick leave, but is the first 40 hours accrued annually. Earned paid sick time
accrues as stated above in subsections (a), (b), (c), and (d) and is capped at
a maximum of forty (40) hours accrual and usage per year. A maximum of forty
(40) hours of unused earned paid sick time may be carried over to the following
calendar year. Any carryover of earned paid sick time is available for an
employee's immediate use at the beginning of the subsequent calendar year,
subject to the annual forty (40) hour maximum usage.
   g.   Accruals in excess of the forty (40) hours maximum of earned paid sick
time is designated sick leave, and accrues at the rates stated above in
subsections (a), (b), (c), and (d). Any earned paid sick time in excess of the
maximum carryover of forty (40) hours on January 1 of any subsequent calendar
year shall be converted to sick leave.
   h.   Sick leave credit is cumulative with no maximum accrual.
   Sec. 22-90(3). Compensation for unused accrued leave to employees separating
from city service.
   a.   Permanent employees shall be fully compensated for unused accumulated
vacation day/hours at the employee's base rate of pay at the time of
separation.
   b.   Employees, excepting commissioned police officers and commissioned fire
personnel, who retire from the city, under a normal, early, disability or a
retirement incentive program and are eligible for benefits from the Tucson
Supplemental Retirement System shall be compensated for accumulated sick leave
in accordance with the following schedule and using the employee's base rate of
pay at the time of separation for the calculation.
Accrued sick leave hours payment:
 
0--240        0% of total
Over 240--480 25% of total balance
Over 480--720 35% of total balance
Over 720      50% of total balance
 
   c.   Commissioned police officers and commissioned fire personnel who retire
from the city and are eligible for normal or permanent disability retirement
benefits from the Public Safety Personnel Retirement System shall be
compensated for accumulated sick leave as hereafter provided using the
employee's base rate of pay at the time of separation for the calculation.
   1.   Those who retire with sick leave balances of two hundred eighty-seven
(287) hours or less will be compensated for those hours at fifty (50) percent
of the employee's base rate of pay.
   2.   Those who retire with sick leave balances of at least two hundred
eighty- eight (288) hours will be compensated for two hundred eighty-eight
(288) of those hours at one hundred (100) percent of the employee's base rate
of pay, however, any sick leave hours remaining, in excess of two hundred
eighty-eight (288) hours, will be compensated at the lessor rate of fifty (50)
percent of the employee's base rate of pay.
   d.   Upon the death of a city employee, the city shall pay the employee's
entire accumulated sick leave to the employee's survivor. A survivor for the
purpose of this section shall be the person(s) determined in accordance with
applicable state law.
   Sec. 22-90(4). Military leave.
   a.   Employees of the City of Tucson who are members of any branch, reserve,
or auxiliary of the armed forces, and are under orders for active duty, short
tour training, attending camps, maneuvers, formation, or drill, shall be
granted military leave in accordance with this section and state and/or federal
law.
   b.   The military leave period is based on the average total of regularly
scheduled hours in a weekly work period. An employee of the City of Tucson is
entitled to up to three (3) times the average of regularly scheduled work hours
in a weekly work period each year and up to six (6) times the average of
regularly scheduled work hours in a weekly work period in any two (2)
consecutive years.
   -   240 hours for an employee assigned to work a 5/8-hour schedule
   -   300 hours for an employee assigned to work a 4/10-hour schedule
   -   360 hours for an employee assigned to work a 3/12-hour schedule
   -   720 hours for an employee scheduled to work a 56-hour schedule
      This paid military leave is not to exceed thirty days (30) per federal
fiscal year (Oct.1- Sept. 30), as described above. Such employees will receive
full city salary for normally scheduled working hours that fall within the
military leave periods of training duty unless otherwise provided by the Tucson
Code. Employees will not be charged military leave for days on which the
employee was not otherwise scheduled for work.
      Military leave shall not be carried forward or accrued. In addition to
the usage provided in this subparagraph b, this additional leave may be used to
perform inactive duty drills provided that the member establishes that the
military leave was required to perform those drills.
   c.   For the purposes of this section:
      1.   "Day" means a shift of work.
      2.   "Year" means the fiscal year of the United States government.
   Sec. 22-90(5). Paid Parental Leave.
   a.   Permanent and probationary employees with one (1) year of continuous
service are entitled to twelve (12) weeks of consecutive paid parental leave
for the birth of the employee's child, commencing the day of birth, or for the
adoption of a child, commencing the day of adoption. If applicable, this leave
shall run concurrent with Family Medical Leave.
   b.   Paid Parental Leave will be approved by the Human Resources Director or
designee and is available only once during a continuous twelve (12) month
period. Paid Parental leave is calculated as follows:
   -   480 hours for an employee assigned to work an 8-, 10-, or 12- hour
schedule /shift
   -   672 hours for an employee assigned to work a 56-hour shift
   Note – Ord. No. 10004, § 2, adopted June 28, 2004, reenacted section 22-90
(5) for Fiscal Year 2005.
(Ord. No. 8881, § 1, 6-9-97; Ord. No. 9570, § 1, 6-18-01; Ord. No. 95-90, § 1,
8-6-01; Ord. No. 9719, §§ 1, 2, 6-10-02; Ord. No. 9831, § 1, 4-14-03; Ord. No.
9864, § 1, 6-16-03; Ord. No. 10004, §§ 1, 2, 6-28-04; Ord. No. 10057, § 8, 10-
11-04; Ord. No. 10163, § 1, 6-14-05; Ord. No. 10425, § 1, 6-19-07; Ord. No.
10557, § 1, 6-25-08, eff. 7-1-08; Ord. No. 10678, § 3, 6-9-09, eff. 7-1-09;
Ord. No. 11364, §§ 4, 5, 6-7-16, eff. 6-26-16; Ord. No. 11469, § 1, 6-20-17,
eff. 7-1-17; Ord. No. 11483, § 1, 8-8-17, eff. 9-1-17; Ord. No. 11595, § 7, 10-
23-18; Ord. No. 11795, §§ 3, 4, 10-20-20; Ord. No. 11911, § 1, 2-23-22; Ord.
No. 11967, § 1, 11-14-22; Ord. No. 11968, § 1, 11-14-22; Ord. No. 12080, § 1,
4-25-24)
   Editors Note: Due to a scrivener's error, §
22-90(1) should read effective FY 03.
   Note: Section
22-90(1)e. is effective July 1, 2007.
Sec. 22-91. Duties of the human resources director and city manager.
   The human resources director, subject to the supervision and approval of the
city manager, is charged with the responsibility for establishing rules and
procedures regulating employee leaves, both with and without pay, for other
paid and unpaid time off work and for the administration, establishment, and
amendment, of those rules and procedures as from time to time may be required
in accordance with the preceding provisions and as hereafter set forth. Rules
and regulations for paid and unpaid leave shall not exceed the authorizations
provided by ordinance.
   a.   The human resources director, with the approval of the city manager
shall also establish administrative policies and procedures to provide for:
      1.   Paid time off not to exceed forty (40) hours annually to exempt
employees in recognition of exceptional performance requiring expenditure of
numerous hours beyond the hours normally worked. Such time off must be used
when granted and will not be accumulated or otherwise compensated.
      2.   Paid time off not to exceed forty (40) hours annually for a non-
exempt employee when the employee has performed duties above those normally
required of the position or other circumstances determined by the department
director and director of human resources to warrant the temporary leave. Such
time off must be used when granted and will not be accumulated or otherwise
compensated.
      3.   Paid time off not to exceed two (2) hours to vote in primary and
general elections.
      4.   Paid time off not to exceed two (2) hours for the purposes of blood
donations.
      5.   Paid time off to employees on jury duty.
      6.   Paid time off to permanent employees on witness duty unassociated
with their employment. (Employee attendance as a witness on behalf of the city
is an employment duty).
      7.   Paid time for holidays, which are as follows: New Year's day, Martin
Luther King, Jr. Day, Presidents Day, César E. Chávez and Dolores Huerta Day
(to be observed on either the final Monday or the final Friday in March,
whichever is closest in time to March 31), Memorial Day, Juneteenth Day (June
19), Independence Day, Labor Day, Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day
and excepting commissioned public safety employees who shall have a birthday
day holiday, one (1) employee floating holiday per year.
      8.   Unpaid or paid time off for a period of bereavement for loss of
immediate family not to exceed one workweek annually.
      9.   Unpaid leave, consistent with the needs of the city, not to exceed
one year, but always in conformance with applicable state and federal law.
   b.   The city manager, when recruiting department directors, deputy or
assistant city managers, may as an employment incentive:
      1.   Grant on commencement of employment up to an additional thirty (30)
days of paid vacation leave which shall be in addition to any leave entitlement
provided in section
22-90 preceding.
      2.   Waive any of the time in service requirements for accrual of
vacation leave to permit up to the maximum rate of vacation accrual for such
employees immediately on commencement of employment.
(Ord. No. 8881, § 1, 6-9-97; Ord. No. 9570, § 2, 6-18-01; Ord. No. 9864, § 2,
6-16-03; Ord. No. 9878, § 1, 8-4-03; Ord. No. 10557, § 2, 6-25-08, eff. 7-1-08;
Ord. No. 11146, § 1, 3-4-14; Ord. No. 11415, § 1, 12-6-16; Ord. No. 11878, § 1,
10-5-21; Ord. No. 11966, § 1, 11-14-22; Ord. No. 12145, § 1, 2-19-25)
   Note: Section
22-91(a)7. is effective July 1, 2008.
Sec. 22-92. Peace officer recruitment incentive.
The human resources director, with the approval of the city manager, when
recruiting lateral entry commissioned peace officers may, as an employment
incentive:
   (1)   On a one-time basis, grant, on commencement of employment, up to an
additional seven (7) days of vacation leave.
   (2)   On a one-time basis, grant, on commencement of employment, up to an
additional seven (7) days of sick leave.
(Ord. No. 9348, § 2, 2-7-00)
Sec. 22-93. Conditions for annual sick leave payment to fire department
commissioned personnel.
   Sec. 22-93(a). Payment shall be at the employee's base rate of pay in effect
at the time of the payment, exclusive of overtime, shift differential, standby
pay, temporary promotion pay, longevity pay, and any other type of pay not
included in the employee's base rate.
   Sec. 22-93(b). Payment shall require a request by the employee prior to June
1 preceding the fiscal year of payment. Any of the annual sick leave hours for
which payment is not requested remains subject to the sick leave transfer
provisions of city administrative directive 2.01-7.
   Sec. 22-93(c). Conditions for annual sick leave payment to fire department
commissioned personnel are subject to retroactive and/or prospective
alteration, amendment, or repeal at any time.
   Sec. 22-93(d). Employees with five (5) or more years of service as of July 1
of the year of their request for sick leave payment who have three hundred
sixty (360) hours of sick leave on the first day of the pay period in which
April 1 falls, shall, on request, be paid for the unused portion of the first
fifty-six (56) hours of their annual sick leave, or any part of those hours as
set forth in the employee's request, in approximately two (2) equal
installments during the pay period in which July 1 falls and the next
subsequent pay period.
   Sec. 22-93(e). Employees with ten (10) or more years of service as of July 1
of the year of their request for sick leave payment who have four hundred
eighty (480) hours of sick leave on the first day of the pay period in which
April 1 falls, shall, on request, be paid for the unused portion of the first
fifty-six (56) hours of their annual sick leave, plus an additional forty-eight
(48) hours of their accrued sick leave, or any part of those combined hours as
set forth in the employee's request, not to exceed a maximum total of one
hundred four (104) hours per year, in approximately equal installments
commencing in the pay period in which July 1 falls through the end of that
fiscal year.
   Sec. 22-93(f). Employees with seventeen (17) or more years of service as of
July 1 of the year of their request for sick leave payment who have five
hundred twenty (520) hours of sick leave on the first day of the pay period in
which April 1 falls, shall, on request, be paid for the unused portion of the
first fifty-six (56) hours of their annual sick leave, plus an additional one
hundred four (104) hours of their accrued sick leave, or any part of those
combined hours as set forth in the employee's request, not to exceed a maximum
total of one hundred sixty (160) hours per year, in approximately equal
installments commencing in the pay period in which July 1 falls through the end
of that fiscal year.
   Sec. 22-93(g). Employees with twenty-two (22) or more years of service as of
July 1 of the year of their request for sick leave payment who have six hundred
(600) hours of sick leave on the first day of the pay period in which April 1
falls shall, on request, be paid for the unused portion of the first seven (7)
days (fifty-six (56) hours) of their annual sick leave plus an additional one
hundred fifty-two (152) hours of their accrued sick leave, or any part of those
combined hours, as set forth in the employee's request, not to exceed a maximum
total of two hundred eight (208) hours per year, in approximately equal
installments, commencing in the pay period in which July 1 falls through the
end of that fiscal year.
(Ord. No. 9382, § 1, 5-15-00; Ord. No. 9523, § 1, 3-5-01; Ord. No. 9561, § 1,
6-11-01; Ord. No. 9720, § 1, 6-10-02; Ord. No. 10425, § 2, 6-19-07, eff. 7-1-
07)
   Editors Note: Ord. No. 9382, § 1, adopted May 15, 2000, amended the Code by
adding provisions designated as §
22-92. Inasmuch as there already exist provisions so designated, the provisions
of Ord. No. 9382 have been included herein as §
22-93 at the discretion of the editor.
Sec. 22-94. Conditions for annual sick leave payment to police department
commissioned personnel.
   Sec. 22-94(a). Payment shall be at the employee's base rate of pay in effect
at the time of the payment, exclusive of overtime, shift differential, standby
pay, temporary promotion pay, longevity pay, and any other type of pay not
included in the employee's base rate.
   Sec. 22-94(b). Payment shall require a request by the employee prior to June
1 preceding the fiscal year of payment. Any of the remaining annual sick leave
hours for which payment is not requested remain subject to the sick leave
transfer provisions of city administrative directive 2.01-7.
   Sec. 22-94(c). Conditions for annual sick leave payment to police department
commissioned personnel are subject to retroactive and/or prospective
alteration, amendment, or repeal at any time.
   Sec. 22-94(d). Employees with five (5) or more years of service in the pay
period in which July 1 of the year of their request for sick leave payment
falls, who have accrued hours of sick leave as listed in the table below, on
the first day of the pay period in which April 1 falls, shall, on request be
paid for the unused portion of the first fifty-six (56) hours of their annual
sick leave, plus an additional number of hours of their accrued sick leave, or
any part of those combined hours as set forth in the employee's request, not to
exceed a maximum total of hours per year as listed in the table below, in
approximately equal installments commencing in the pay period in which July 1
falls through the end of the fiscal year.
 
         Years of      Minimum SL    SLVL 56 or Additional SL
         Service as of Hours Balance portion    Hours to Sell Maximum Hours
         July 1        as of End of  therein    Back          to Sell Back
                       Leave Year
26 Equal <5            Not Eligible
Payments
        5             240           56         0             40
        10            480           56         24            80
        15            480           56         104           160
        20+           480           56         184           240
 
   Payment shall be at the employee's base rate of pay in effect at the time of
the payment, exclusive of overtime, shift differential, temporary promotion
pay, longevity pay, and any other type of pay not included in the employee's
base rate of pay.
   Sec. 22-94(e). Year(s) of prior active duty military service or prior
commissioned police service from other jurisdictions shall be included in
calculating the years of qualifying service applicable to any payments made
under the preceding subparagraph (d) of §
22-94.
(Ord. No. 9560, § 1, 6-11-01; Ord. No. 95-90, § 2, 8-6-01; Ord. No. 9864, § 3,
6-16-03; Ord. No. 9878, § 2, 8-4-03; Ord. No. 10425, § 3, 6-19-07, eff. 7-1-07,
eff. 7-1-07; Ord. No. 11911, § 1, 2-23-22)
Sec. 22-95. Reserved.
   Editor’s note – Ord. No. 11782, § 2, adopted September 22, 2020, repealed §
22-95, which pertained to wellness attendance incentive and derived from Ord.
No. 9719, § 3, adopted June 10, 2002; Ord. No. 10004, § 3, adopted June 28,
2004; Ord. No. 10019, § 1, adopted August 2, 2004; Ord. No. 10163, § 2, adopted
June 14, 2005; Ord. No. 10294, § 2, adopted June 27, 2006; Ord. No. 10425, § 4,
adopted June 19, 2007; Ord. No. 10557, § 3, adopted June 25, 2008; Ord. No.
10678, § 4, adopted June 9, 2009; Ord. No. 10812, § 1, adopted June 22, 2010;
Ord. No. 10899, § 1, adopted June 7, 2011; Ord. No. 10991, § 2, adopted June
12, 2012; Ord. No. 11071, § 1, adopted May 21, 2013; Ord. No. 11176, § 1,
adopted June 3, 2014; Ord. No. 11292, § 1, adopted August 5, 2015.
Sec. 22-96. Transfer and accrual of sick leave and vacation for City of Tucson/
Pima County Household Hazardous Waste Program employees entering city service.
   (a)   Each City of Tucson/Pima County Household Hazardous Waste Program
employee who is leaving Pima County employment and beginning employment with
the City of Tucson under section 13 of the intergovernmental agreement with
Pima County approved by mayor and council resolution on March 1, 2005 shall
have his or her accrued sick and vacation leave balances transferred with the
employee.
   (b)   These employees shall thereafter accrue city sick and vacation leave
at a rate commensurate with the employees combined length of service with the
county and city. This special length of service provision shall not otherwise
affect the status of these employees, who will begin employment with the city
as new civil service employees.
   (c)   The administration of accumulated and earned sick and vacation leave,
as provided in this section for these employees, shall be in accordance with
applicable city code and administrative provisions, as they may be amended from
time to time.
(Ord. No. 10125, § 1, 3-1-05)
Sec. 22-97.   Living Donor Leave.
   (a)   An employee is entitled to a paid leave of absence for the time
specified for the following purposes:
   (1)   Up to five (5) work days to serve as a bone marrow donor for a bone
marrow transplant if the employee provides the employee's appointing authority
with written verification that the employee is to serve as a bone marrow donor.
This leave may include time spent on a screening process to determine whether
the employee is a compatible donor, not to exceed one (1) day in any calendar
year, if the employee provides written verification that the employee is
participating in that process.
   (2)   Up to thirty (30) work days to serve as an organ donor for a human
organ transplant if the employee provides the employee's appointing authority
with written verification that the employee is to serve as an organ donor. This
leave may include time spent on a screening process to determine whether the
employee is a compatible donor, not to exceed five (5) days in any calendar
year, if the employee provides written verification that the employee is
participating in that process.
   (b)   An employee who is granted a leave of absence pursuant to this section
is entitled to receive base pay without interruption during the leave of
absence. For the purposes of determining seniority, pay or pay advancement,
credited service and/or for the calculation and receipt of any benefit that may
otherwise be affected by a leave of absence, the service of the employee is
considered uninterrupted by the leave of absence.
   (c)   The employer shall not penalize an employee for requesting or
obtaining a leave of absence pursuant to this section.
   (d)   For the purposes of this section:
   (1)   "Bone marrow" means the soft material that fills human bone cavities.
   (2)   "Bone marrow transplant" means the medical procedure by which transfer
of bone marrow is made from the body of a person to the body of another person.
   (3)   "Employee" means a probationary or permanent full-time or part-time
employee.
   (4)   "Human organ transplant" means the medical procedure by which transfer
of an organ or part of an organ is made from the body of a person to the body
of another person.
   (5)   "Organ" means human organs or parts of an organ that are capable of
being transferred from the body of a person to the body of another person.
   (e)   The director of human resources may prescribe rules and regulations
for the administration of this section.
(Ord. No. 11534, § 1, 3-20-18)
Secs. 22-98. Public Safety Bridge Leave.
   (a)   Short-term paid Public Safety Bridge Leave may be authorized by the
Chief of Police/Fire Chief or their designee to permanent commissioned
employees of the police and fire departments for up to 30 consecutive calendar
days with a maximum of three 30-calendar day extensions under the following
circumstances:
   (1)   The permanent commissioned public safety employee is deemed unfit for
duty by a licensed mental health provider due to exposure to traumatic event(s)
as defined in A.R.S. § 38-673 during their employment as a permanent
commissioned employee with the Tucson Police Department or the Tucson Fire
Department; and
   (2)   The permanent commissioned public safety employee has applied for
Worker's Compensation benefits for the specific event(s) the employee was
deemed Not Fit for Duty under the Worker's Compensation Act, A.R.S. § 23-
1043.01 and is awaiting final disposition of that claim; and
   (3)   The permanent commissioned public safety employee has exhausted all
Sick Leave, Earned Paid Sick Time, Vacation Leave, Compensatory Time, Donated
Leave, or any other leave provided as part of the permanent commissioned public
safety employee's benefits package.
   (b)   If the permanent commissioned public safety employee's Worker's
Compensation claim is accepted, the employee will be appropriately compensated
under the Worker's Compensation Act. Public Safety Bridge Leave will be
immediately terminated and the employee must repay all compensation received
while on Public Safety Bridge Leave. If the Worker's Compensation claim is
denied, the Public Safety Bridge Leave is immediately terminated and the
employee's status changed to the appropriate leave without pay designation.
(Ord. No. 11642, § 1, 4-23-19)
Sec. 22-99. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI.
OTHER INSURANCE BENEFITS
Sec. 22-100. Reserved.
   Editors Note: Ord. No. 10425, § 5, adopted June 19, 2007, effective July 1,
2007, repealed §
22-100, which pertained to providing for other insurance benefits and derived
from Ord. No. 9383, § 1, adopted May 15, 2000; Ord. No. 10005, § 1, adopted
June 28, 2004; Ord. No. 10163, § 4, June 14, 2005.
Sec. 22-101. Death benefit for employee group eligible for representation by
TPOA.
Effective June 1, 2008, the city shall provide a twenty-five thousand dollar
($25,000.00) death benefit to the survivor of a city employee who is a member
of the employee group eligible for representation by TPOA, who holds a
permanent position in the classified service at the time of death, and who is
killed while directly performing duties as a peace officer for the city. A
survivor for the purposes of this section shall be the person(s) indicated as
the beneficiary of the employee's pension or as otherwise provided by law.
(Ord. No. 10005, § 1, 6-28-04; Ord. No. 10163, § 5, 6-14-05; Ord. No. 10557, §
4, 6-25-08, eff. 7-1-08; Ord. No. 10569, § 1, 7-8-08)
Sec. 22-102. Death benefit for employee group eligible for representation by
IAFF.
The city shall provide a twenty-five thousand dollar ($25,000.00) death benefit
to the survivor of a city employee who is a member of the employee group
eligible for representation by IAFF who holds a permanent position in the
classified service at the time of death and who is killed while directly
performing duties as a commissioned fire employee for the city, or who dies as
a result of occupational illness or occupational exposure. A survivor for the
purposes of this section shall be the person(s) indicated as the beneficiary of
the employee's pension or as otherwise provided by law.
(Ord. No. 10005, § 1, 6-28-04; Ord. No. 10294, § 3, 6-27-06; Ord. No. 10557, §
5, 6-25-08, eff. 7-1-08)
Sec. 22-103. Death benefit for employee group eligible for representation by
AFSCME.
The city shall provide a two thousand five hundred dollar ($2,500.00) special
death benefit to the survivor of a city employee who is a member of the
employee group eligible for representation by AFSCME and dies while in the
employ of the City of Tucson. Although the benefit will be paid without
restriction, it is intended that it should be used for purposes of the
employees funeral expenses. A survivor for the purposes of this section shall
be the person(s) indicated as the beneficiary of the employee's pension or as
otherwise provided by law.
(Ord. No. 10020, § 1, 8-2-04; Ord. No. 10557, § 6, 6-25-08, eff. 7-1-08)
Sec. 22-104. Death benefit for employee group eligible for representation by
CWA/TACE.
The city shall provide twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) death benefit
to the survivor of a city employee who is a member of the employee group
eligible for representation by CWA/TACE who holds a permanent position in the
classified service at the time of death and who is killed while directly
performing duties as an employee for the city, or who dies as a result of
occupational illness or occupational exposure. A survivor for the purposes of
this section shall be the person(s) indicated as the beneficiary of the
employee's pension or as otherwise provided by law.
(Ord. No. 10557, § 7, 6-25-08, eff. 7-1-08)
Chapter 23
LAND USE CODE*
__________
   *Editor's note – Ordinance No. 8509 adopted the Land Use Code which
supercedes all prior provisions of Chapter 23, Tucson Zoning Code, as of July
1, 1995. Three copies of the Land Use Code shall be filed with the city clerk's
office and maintained as public records of the City of Tucson. The Land Use
Code shall be published separately from the Tucson Code.
   Pursuant to Section 2 of Ordinance No. 11025, adopted October 9, 2012, the
Land Use Code is repealed effective January 1, 2016. Section 2 of Ordinance No.
11025 provides: "The Land Use Code, Chapter 23 of the Tucson Code as adopted
and amended prior to October 9, 2012 is repealed effective January 1, 2016
except that the same is continued in full force and effect as necessary for the
interpretation or application of other ordinances, resolutions, agreements or
other legal documents or as necessary to the final determination and
disposition of, or the prosecution or litigation of any claim or complaint that
has been made or may be made in the future alleging a violation of any prior
provision of the Land Use Code, Chapter 23 based upon acts occurring prior to
the repeal of any such provision."
   Section 6 of Ordinance No. 11025 provides: "Any owner of record, as of
October 9, 2012 wishing to develop real property which would be governed by the
provisions of this ordinance, where such development occurs between the
effective date of the UDC, and the date of repeal of the LUC, January 1, 2016
shall have the option of electing which code to apply to the full development.
Once an election is made, the code chosen shall be the only code applicable to
the subject development for all development and applications therefore from
January 2, 2013 until January 1, 2016 except as provided by Section 9 herein."
__________
Chapter 23A
DEVELOPMENT COMPLIANCE CODE*
__________
   *Editor's note – Ordinance No. 9967, § 7, adopted May 17, 2004, effective
July 1, 2004, amended the title of said chapter to read as set out. Formerly
said title pertained to Development Compliance Reviews.
   Section 3 of Ordinance No. 11025, adopted October 9, 2012, provides:
"Article 1, General Provisions, and Article II, Review Procedures, of Chapter
23A are hereby repealed effective January 1, 2016 except that the same is
continued in full force and effect as necessary for the interpretation or
application of other ordinances, resolutions, agreements or other legal
documents or as necessary to the final determination and disposition of, or the
prosecution or litigation of any claim or complaint that has been made or may
be made in the future alleging a violation of any prior provision of Article I
or Article II, Chapter 23A based upon acts occurring prior to the repeal of any
such provision."
__________
Art. I.   General Provisions, §§ 23A-1--23A-30
   Div. 1. Introduction, §§ 23A-1--23A-20
   Div. 2. Mapping, §§ 23A-21--23A-30
Art. II.   Review Procedures, §§ 23A-31--23A-70
   Div. 1. General Zoning Review Procedure, §§ 23A-31--23A-39
   Div. 2. Special Zoning Review--Limited Notice Procedure, §§ 23A-40--23A-49
   Div. 3. Special Zoning Review--Full Notice Procedure, §§ 23A-50--23A-59
   Div. 4. Appeal Procedures, §§ 23A-60--23A-70
Art. III.   Development Impact Fee Regulations, §§ 23A-71 – 23A-91
   Div. 1. Applicability and Intent, §§ 23A-71 – 23A-74
   Div. 2. Fee Calculation, §§ 23A-75 – 23A-86
   Div. 3. General Provisions, §§ 23A-87 – 23A-89
   Div. 4. Development Impact Fee Schedules and Effective Dates, §§ 23A-90 –
23A-91
Art. IV.   Definitions, §§ 23A-101--23A-136
   Div. 1. General Provisions, §§ 23A-101--23A-23A-110
   Div. 2. (Reserved)
Article I. General Provisions
Division 1. Introduction
Sec.
23A-1.   Title.
Sec.
23A-2.   Purpose.
Sec.
23A-3.   Scope.
Sec.
23A-4.   Certification of zoning compliance.
Sec.
23A-5.   Applicability.
Sec.
23A-6.   Interpretation.
Sec.
23A-7.   Appeals.
Sec.
23A-8.   Violation.
Sec.
23A-9.   Enumeration.
Sec.
23A-10.   Hierarchy.
Secs.
23A-11--23A-20. Reserved.
Division 2. Mapping
Sec.
23A-21.   Title.
Sec.
23A-22.   Purpose, applicability, and interpretation.
Secs.
23A-23--23A-30. Reserved.
Article II. Review Procedures
Division 1. General Zoning Review Procedure
Sec.
23A-31.   Zoning compliance review.
Sec.
23A-32.   Administrative design review procedure.
Sec.
23A-32.1.   NPZ design review procedure.
Sec.
23A-33
.   Subdivision of land.
Sec.
23A-33.1.   Subdivision plat process
Sec.
23A-33.2.   Minor subdivision platting process
Sec.
23A-33.3.   Land splits.
Sec.
23A-34.   Development plan review.
Sec.
23A-35.   Flexible lot development (FLD) review.
Secs.
23A-36--23A-39. Reserved.
Division 2. Special Zoning Review--Limited Notice Procedure
Sec.
23A-40.   Limited notice procedure.
Secs.
23A-41--23A-49. Reserved.
Division 3. Special Zoning Review--Full Notice Procedure
Sec.
23A-50.   Application, notice, public comment and review.
Sec.
23A-51.   PDSD full notice procedure.
Sec.
23A-52.   Board of adjustment full notice procedure.
Sec.
23A-53.   Zoning examiner special exception full notice procedure.
Sec.
23A-54.   Conditional use: Suspension or termination of designated permitted,
secondary and special exception uses.
Secs.
23A-55--23A-59. Reserved.
Division 4. Appeal Procedures
Sec.
23A-60.   Appeal procedures.
Sec.
23A-61.   Board of adjustment appeal procedure.
Sec.
23A-62.   Mayor and council appeal procedure.
Sec.
23A-63.   Takings appeal procedure, individual dedications and exactions and
excessive reduction of property value.
Sec.
23A-64.   Design review board appeal procedure.
Secs.
23A-65--23A-70. Reserved.
Article III. Development Impact Fee Regulations
Division 1. Applicability and Intent
Sec.
23A-71.   Title.
Sec.
23A-72.   Legislative intent and purpose.
Sec.
23A-73.   Definitions.
Sec.
23A-74.   Applicability.
Division 2. Fee Calculation
Sec.
23A-75.   Authority for development impact fees.
Sec.
23A-76.   Administration of development impact fees.
Sec.
23A-77.   Land use assumptions.
Sec.
23A-78.   Infrastructure improvements plan.
Sec.
23A-79.   Adoption and modification procedures.
Sec.
23A-80.   Timing for the renewal and updating of the infrastructure
improvements plan and the land use assumptions.
Sec.
23A-81.   Collection of development impact fees.
Sec.
23A-82.   Development impact fee credits and credit agreements.
Sec.
23A-83.    Development agreements.
Sec.
23A-84.    Appeals.
Sec.
23A-85.   Refunds of development impact fees.
Sec.
23A-86.   Oversight of development impact fee program.
Division 3. General Provisions
Sec.
23A-87.   Miscellaneous provisions.
Sec.
23A-88.   Severability.
Sec.
23A-89.   Violations.
Division 4. Development Impact Fee Schedules and Effective Dates
Sec.
23A-90.   Effective dates.
Sec.
23A-91.   Fee schedule tables.
Article IV. Definitions
Division 1. General Provisions
Sec.
23A-101.   Purpose.
Sec.
23A-102.   General rules of application.
Sec.
23A-103.   General rules for construction of language.
Secs.
23A-104--23A-110. Reserved.
Division 2. Reserved.
ARTICLE I.
GENERAL PROVISIONS*
__________
   *Editor's note – Section 3 of Ordinance No. 11025, adopted October 9, 2012,
provides: "Article 1, General Provisions, and Article II, Review Procedures, of
Chapter 23A are hereby repealed effective January 1, 2016 except that the same
is continued in full force and effect as necessary for the interpretation or
application of other ordinances, resolutions, agreements or other legal
documents or as necessary to the final determination and disposition of, or the
prosecution or litigation of any claim or complaint that has been made or may
be made in the future alleging a violation of any prior provision of Article I
or Article II, Chapter 23A based upon acts occurring prior to the repeal of any
such provision."
__________
DIVISION 1.
INTRODUCTION
Sec. 23A-1. Title.
This chapter is entitled "Development Compliance Code."
(Ord. No. 9392, § 2(1.1.1), 5-22-00; Ord. No. 9967, § 7, 5-17-04)
Sec. 23A-2. Purpose.
Chapter 23A is established to identify the processes for the review and
approval of proposed development for compliance with the technical and
objective requirements of the Land Use Code (LUC), Chapter
23 of the Tucson Code and to provide for the calculation, assessment and
collection of impact fees.
(Ord. No. 9392, § 2(1.1.2), 5-22-00; Ord. No. 10053, § 1, 9-27-04)
Sec. 23A-3. Scope.
The provisions of Chapter
23A apply to all proposed development within the corporate limits of the city
and shall establish the process for certification of zoning compliance.
(Ord. No. 9392, § 2(1.1.3), 5-22-00)
Sec. 23A-4. Certification of zoning compliance.
The certification of zoning compliance as provided in Chapter
23A shall consist of the certification that proposed development and
construction are in conformance with the nondiscretionary, technical, and
objective requirements of the Land Use Code (LUC), Chapter
23 of the Tucson Code, prior to final development approval.
(Ord. No. 9392, § 2(1.1.4), 5-22-00)
Sec. 23A-5. Applicability.
The planning and development services department (PDSD) is responsible for
assuring that no land is used or occupied; no site improvement, modification,
or construction is started; no existing use is implemented, expanded, or
changed; no structure is expanded, reconstructed, changed, or otherwise
altered; and no land is divided into multiple parcels until the certification
of zoning compliance has been provided in accordance with this chapter. No city
agency may issue a permit for excavation, grubbing, grading, paving,
demolition, or construction of any sort before PDSD has certified such
compliance with the Land Use Code (LUC).
(Ord. No. 9392, § 2(1.1.5), 5-22-00; Ord. No. 10655, § 4, 4-21-09, eff. 7-1-09)
Sec. 23A-6. Interpretation.
The planning and development services department (PDSD) director is responsible
for issuing all final decisions in the content and application of this chapter,
except as may be expressly provided in this chapter. Any decision or
interpretation on the application and content of the Land Use Code (LUC),
Chapter
23 of the Tucson Code, shall be by the zoning administrator as provided in
section 1.2.1 of the LUC.
(Ord. No. 9392, § 2(1.1.6), 5-22-00; Ord. No. 10655, § 4, 4-21-09, eff. 7-1-09)
   Editors Note: All graphics included in Chapter
23A are for illustrative purposes and do not have legal status.
Sec. 23A-7. Appeals.
The decision of the planning and development services department (PDSD)
director on the content and application of this chapter shall be final and
nonappealable unless specifically provided herein.
(Ord. No. 9392, § 2(1.1.7), 5-22-00; Ord. No. 10655, § 4, 4-21-09, eff. 7-1-09)
Sec. 23A-8. Violation.
Any improvements that are constructed without zoning compliance or any
improvements under construction that are not in compliance with plans approved
for zoning compliance shall be considered a violation of this chapter. The
planning and development services department (PDSD) shall enforce compliance
with this chapter by suspending construction or through other available means
until compliance is achieved.
(Ord. No. 9392, § 2(1.1.8), 5-22-00; Ord. No. 10655, § 4, 4-21-09, eff. 7-1-09)
Sec. 23A-9. Enumeration.
The Tucson Code establishes an outline of organization in descending order of
chapter, article, division, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause,
and words. Chapter
23A is arranged in the same organizational format with minor modification.
Chapter
23A, the assigned chapter within the Tucson Code, is implied but not used when
referencing articles, divisions, sections, or subsections within this chapter.
(Ord. No. 9392, § 2(1.1.9), 5-22-00)
Sec. 23A-10. Hierarchy.
The hierarchy used in Chapter
23A is a combination of numerical digits separated by a period to denote the
descending order of article, division, section, and so on. For example, Sec.
3.0.0 references Article III; Sec. 3.3.0 references Article III, Division 3;
Sec. 3.3.5 references Article III, Division 3, Section 5; and Sec. 3.3.5.5.A.
references Article III, Division 3, Section 5, subsection 5, paragraph A.
(Ord. No. 9392, § 2(1.1.9.1), 5-22-00)
   Editors Note: See the original section numbers retained in the history
notes.
Secs. 23A-11--23A-20. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
MAPPING
Sec. 23A-21. Title.
As provided by Chapter
23 of the Tucson Code, Land Use Code, section 1.3.1, the set of maps depicting
land use zoning boundaries within the City of Tucson is entitled "City of
Tucson Zoning Maps."
(Ord. No. 9392, § 2(1.2.1), 5-22-00)
Sec. 23A-22. Purpose, applicability, and interpretation.
The purpose, applicability, and interpretation of the City of Tucson Zoning
Maps are as provided by Chapter
23 of the Tucson Code, Land Use Code (LUC), Article I, Division 3.
(Ord. No. 9392, § 2(1.2.2), 5-22-00)
Secs. 23A-23--23A-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE II.
REVIEW PROCEDURES*
__________
   *Editor's note – Ordinance No. 9967, § 8, adopted May 17, 2004, repealed the
former Art. II, §§ 23A-31 – 23A-33, 23A-41 – 23A-49, 23A-61, 23A-62. Section 9
of Ordinance No. 9967 enacted a new Art. II, §§ 23A-31 – 23A-35, 23A-40, 23A-50
– 23A-54, 23A-60 – 23A-63, as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to
similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 9392, § 2 (2.1.1) – (2.1.3),
(2.2.1) – (2.2.9), (2.3.1), (2.3.2), adopted May 22, 2000.
   Section 3 of Ordinance No. 11025, adopted October 9, 2012, provides:
"Article 1, General Provisions, and Article II, Review Procedures, of Chapter
23A are hereby repealed effective January 1, 2016 except that the same is
continued in full force and effect as necessary for the interpretation or
application of other ordinances, resolutions, agreements or other legal
documents or as necessary to the final determination and disposition of, or the
prosecution or litigation of any claim or complaint that has been made or may
be made in the future alleging a violation of any prior provision of Article I
or Article II, Chapter 23A based upon acts occurring prior to the repeal of any
such provision."
__________
DIVISION 1.
GENERAL ZONING REVIEW PROCEDURE
Sec. 23A-31. Zoning compliance review.
Review to determine whether any application conforms to zoning regulations is
conducted in accordance with this section. Interpretations of zoning
regulations and certifications of approval of applications in compliance with
all zoning regulations may be appealed to the board of adjustment.
For certain applications as specified in the LUC, there are also special zoning
review requirements which may involve either a limited notice procedure in
accordance with Division 2 of this chapter or a full notice procedure in
accordance with Division 3 of this Chapter. Limited notice procedures may be
appealed to the board of adjustment. Full notice procedures may be subject to
an appeal to either the board of adjustment or the mayor and council in
accordance with Division 4 of this chapter.
For proposed development in conformance with the property's existing zoning
regulations, whether it is new construction, expansion of existing
construction, new use, change in use, or expansion of an existing use, review
for conformance with the provisions of the Land Use Code (LUC), Chapter 23 of
the Tucson Code, this chapter and applicable development standards will be by
planning and development services department (PDSD). The applications requiring
zoning compliance review include, but are not limited to, temporary uses,
business licenses, tenant improvement, home occupations, site plan review, new
construction, expansion of existing premises, and certain electrical
reconnections.
   (1)   Application. Applications shall conform to the requirements set forth
in the LUC, this chapter and appropriate development standards. The director
may require additional information and materials following acceptance of an
application where it is determined that such information is important to the
review of the application. The director may conditionally accept an application
subject to obtaining subsequent approvals. The director shall not be required
to make a decision on an application until at least five (5) days following the
acceptance of the additional submittal information or five (5) days following
the time for submission of a recommendation by an advisory body.
   (2)   Review process. Review is conducted by the planning and development
services department staff and other agencies, committees or advisory boards as
specified in this chapter, the LUC and as may be deemed appropriate by the
director. Applications are reviewed for compliance this chapter, the LUC and
applicable development standards. Where an application requires review under
more than one (1) special zoning review procedure, the development services
director shall determine whether reviews shall be conducted sequentially or
concurrently based upon the issues raised by each application. Where the
director determines that reviews shall be conducted sequentially, the date of
acceptance for each procedure shall commence upon the date of decision of the
prior procedure unless otherwise stated by the director.
   (3)   Decision. Except as otherwise provided, the director determines
whether to approve or deny an application. For all general and special zoning
review decisions, time periods specified for the director's decision may be
extended by the applicant.
   (4)   Written statement of reasons for denial. If an application is not
approved due to lack of compliance with zoning regulations, the applicant may
request a written statement of the basis for the rejection of the application,
which shall then be provided within three (3) days. Projects under this review
process may be approved by the PDSD director or designee if they are in
conformance with the LUC, this chapter and applicable development standards.
   (5)   Zoning interpretations and zoning certification. For any development
reviewed in accordance with this article which involves an interpretation of
the substantive provisions of the LUC or the application of substantive zoning
provisions in the zoning certification of a development plan, site plan,
tentative plat or final plat, a request for a written interpretation or
certification may be submitted to the zoning administrator in the following
manner:
   a.   A person affected by the proposed development, as defined in subsection
b below, may request in writing that any decision requiring a interpretation of
substantive zoning regulations be reviewed and decided by the zoning
administrator. The applicant or the zoning administrator may place other
parties on notice of the determination by providing a copy of the application
to such parties at the time it is submitted to the zoning administrator and
listing such persons as a party of record in the application.
   b.   A person affected by the proposed development shall include the
applicant, owners or residents of property within three hundred (300) feet of
the site, any neighborhood association within one (1) mile and any person who
may be personally affected by the proposed development in a manner that is
beyond the impact of the development on the general public.
   c.   The zoning administrator shall make the final zoning determination
within five (5) days of receipt of any such written request. Any party
interested in the decision may request a copy of the final zoning
determination. The final zoning determination or certification shall be mailed
to the applicant and all parties of record within three (3) days of the
determination.
   d.   The zoning administrator may designate certain decisions as precedent
for future decisions. Any decision so designated shall be binding upon future
cases unless reversed on appeal. One (1) copy of all precedent decisions shall
be maintained by the zoning administrator and one (1) copy shall be maintained
by the city clerk for public review and inspection.
   e.   The zoning administrator's determination shall be binding upon the
applicant and all parties of record unless appealed.
   (6)   Appeal of zoning interpretations. Within thirty (30) days of a final
zoning determination by the zoning administrator that involves the
interpretation of the substantive zoning provisions of the Land Use Code, the
applicant, and any party of record may appeal that determination to the board
of adjustment pursuant to section
23A-61.
   (7)   Stay of the issuance of plan approvals and permits during appeals.
Where an administrative appeal is submitted in a timely manner to a city
official or body such as the director, the board of adjustment, the zoning
examiner or the mayor and council in accordance with this chapter, no permits
shall be issued and no formal plan approvals or inspections shall be made on
any portion of an application that is subject to the appeal while that appeal,
review period or the time provided for reconsideration is pending. PDSD may, in
the discretion of the director, continue to process review of applications and
may issue permits or plan approvals on applications or portions thereof that
are not affected by the appeal. Where a final city decision has been made
following city administrative appeals, any further appeal shall be to Superior
Court in accordance with applicable law. An appeal to Superior Court shall not
stay the issuance of permits or plan approvals unless the Superior Court issues
such a stay.
(Ord. No. 9967, § 9, 5-17-04; Ord. No. 10655, § 4, 4-21-09, eff. 7-1-09)
Sec. 23A-32. Administrative design review procedure.
The following procedure is for administrative design review where such review
is required by the LUC. This procedure applies to review of minor development
applications in Historic Preservation Zone (HPZ) districts in accordance with
LUC section 2.8.8.5.c and design review in the Rio Nuevo and Downtown (RND)
Zone. The criteria for determining whether development in the RND Zone is
subject to minor, full or conceptual review are stated in LUC section 2.8.10.4.
   (1)   Pre-application conference. A pre-application conference with the
planning and development services department is required to determine whether
the application shall be reviewed through the minor, conceptual or full design
review procedure. The applicant may request informal review by the DRB as part
of the pre-application process.
   (2)   Minor design review. Development subject to the minor design review
procedure shall reviewed as follows.
   a.   Submittal. Upon submittal, PDSD staff shall review the application to
determine that it provides all required information. The application shall be
accepted or rejected within two (2) days.
   b.   Staff review. PDSD staff shall review the application to determine
compliance with the applicable requirements and shall recommend to the director
whether to approve or reject the application.
   c.   Advisory board review. Applications in the RND Zone shall be referred
to the design review board (DRB) to be scheduled for consideration at the first
available meeting for review in accordance with design criteria of Development
Standard 9-05.0. If the proposed development includes exterior changes for
buildings on or eligible for inclusion on the National Register of Historic
Places, the application and elevation drawings will be forwarded to the Tucson-
Pima County Historical Commission Plans Review Subcommittee for review and
recommendation to the director. Applications for development in HPZ districts
shall be referred to the district advisory board and the plans review
subcommittee for review and recommendation.
   d.   Decision. The director shall make a decision on whether to accept or
reject the application within seven (7) days of acceptance of the application.
The director may, alternatively, determine that the application be subject to
the full design review procedure.
   e.   Notice of decision. Notice of the decision shall be provided to the
applicant within three (3) days of the date of the decision and, in the case of
a Historic Preservation Zone minor design review, the appropriate advisory
board and the plans review subcommittee.
   f.   Appeal to the board of adjustment. If an application is denied, the
applicant may appeal the decision to the board of adjustment in accordance with
section
23A-61 by filing an appeal within five (5) days of the notice of decision with
the zoning administrator.
   (3)   Major project design review. Development subject to major project
design review shall be reviewed as follows:
   a.   Submittal. Upon submittal, PDSD staff shall review the application to
determine that it provides all required information. The application shall be
accepted or rejected within four (4) days. If the application is accepted, it
is forwarded to the design review board (DRB) to be scheduled for consideration
at the next available DRB meeting.
   b.   Review. PDSD staff shall review the application to determine conceptual
compliance with the applicable RND requirements and with other code
requirements including those in the LUC, building codes and this chapter. These
reviews shall be preliminary and shall not establish any right on the part of
the applicant. PDSD staff shall report preliminary findings and recommendations
the director. The application may be referred to the DRB or appropriate
historic advisory boards for preliminary review during this time period.
   c.   Request for advisory board action. At any time during this review, the
applicant may request final conceptual review by the DRB and any appropriate
historic board. When such a request is made, the application shall be scheduled
before the appropriate advisory board for final action on the conceptual plan
within thirty (30) days.
   d.   Advisory board review. Applications in the RND Zone shall be referred
to the design review board (DRB) to be scheduled for consideration at the first
available meeting for determination of preliminary findings and recommendations
within thirty (30) days of acceptance of the application. The DRB, in
formulating its preliminary findings and recommendations, shall evaluate the
application based on the design criteria in Development Standard 9-05.0. If the
proposed development includes exterior changes for buildings on or eligible for
inclusion on the National Register of Historic Places, the application and
elevation drawings will be forwarded to the Tucson-Pima County Historical
Commission Plans Review Subcommittee for review and recommendation to the
director within thirty (30) days of acceptance of the application.
   e.   Recommendation for final approval. Where the project is sufficiently
detailed and complete, the advisory boards may recommend to the PDSD director
that the application is ready for final approval without being referred to the
full review process.
   f.   Summary of preliminary findings and recommendations. The director shall
make a summary of the preliminary findings and recommendations by the staff,
DRB and TPHC plans review subcommittee. The summary shall be provided to the
applicant within three (3) days of receipt of the last recommendations.
   g.   Action by applicant. Upon receipt of the preliminary findings and
recommendations, the applicant incorporates the findings and recommendations
into the final drawings and plans and submits these final documents for full
design review in accordance with section
23A-32(4).
   h.   Final approval. Where there is a recommendation from the advisory
bodies for final approval, and where the PDSD director determines that the
application is sufficiently detailed and complete to establish full compliance
with the RND regulations, the application may be approved without being
referred for further review through the full design review procedure in
accordance with section
23A-32(4).
   (4)   Full design review. Development subject to the full design review
procedure shall reviewed as follows.
   a.   Submittal. Upon submittal, PDSD staff shall review the application to
determine that it provides all required information. The application shall be
accepted or rejected within four (4) days. If the application is accepted, it
is forwarded to the design review board (DRB) to be scheduled for consideration
at the next available DRB meeting.
   b.   Review. PDSD staff shall review the application to determine compliance
with the applicable requirements and shall recommend to the director whether to
approve or reject the application.
   c.   Advisory board review. Applications in the RND Zone shall be referred
to the design review board (DRB) to be scheduled for consideration at the first
available meeting for review and recommendation. The DRB, in formulating its
recommendation, shall evaluate the application based on the design criteria in
Development Standard 9-05.0. If the proposed development includes exterior
changes for buildings on or eligible for inclusion on the National Register of
Historic Places, the application and elevation drawings will be forwarded to
the Tucson-Pima County Historical Commission Plans Review Subcommittee for
review and recommendation to the director.
   d.   Decision. The director shall make a decision on whether to accept or
reject the application based upon required design criteria and the
recommendations of the DRB and the TPHC plans review subcommittee. The decision
shall not earlier than fourteen (14) days and shall not be later than thirty
(30) days of acceptance of the application.
   e.   Notice of decision. Notice of the decision shall be provided to the
applicant within three (3) days of the date of the decision.
   f.   Appeal of the director's decision. The applicant, or in cases involving
historic properties the advisory board or the plans review subcommittee, may
appeal the director's decision to the board of adjustment in accordance with
section
23A-61 by submitting an appeal to the director within fourteen (14) days of the
date of decision. The appeal shall address and be determined upon the purpose,
intent, specific regulations, specific goals and the objectives of the RND
zone.
(Ord. No. 9967, § 9, 5-17-04; Ord. No. 10655, § 4, 4-21-09, eff. 7-1-09)
Sec. 23A-32.1. NPZ design review procedure.
The following procedure is for administrative design review where such review
is required by the LUC. This procedure applies to review of development
applications in the Neighborhood Preservation Zone (NPZ) district in accordance
with Land Use Code section 2.8.11.
   1.   Pre-application conference. A pre-application conference with the
planning and development services department (PDSD) is required to determine
whether the application shall be reviewed through NPZ design review procedure.
   2.   NPZ design review. Development subject to the NPZ design review
procedure shall be reviewed as follows:
   a.   Submittal. Upon submittal, PDSD staff shall review the application to
determine that it provides all required information. The application shall be
accepted or rejected within two (2) days. If an application is rejected, the
applicant may supplement and resubmit the application supplying required
information.
   b.   Design professional. The design professional shall review accepted
applications to determine compliance with the neighborhood specific design
manual and compatibility review criteria in accordance with Land Use Code
section 2.8.11.8.A.1.
   c.   Design professional findings and recommendation. The design
professional shall submit a written report with findings and recommendation to
the director of the planning and development services department within fifteen
(15) working days of acceptance of the application.
   d.   Director decision. The director shall review the application and render
a decision finding compliance or noncompliance with the neighborhood specific
design manual and compatibility review criteria within five (5) days of
receiving the design professional's report.
   e.   Notice of decision. Notice of the decision shall be mailed to the
applicant, property owners within fifty (50) feet of the subject site, and to
the neighborhood association that includes the subject site within three (3)
days of the date of the decision.
   f.   Appeal to the design review board (DRB). For purposes of this section,
a party of record is any individual who receives a notice of the director's
decision. A party of record may submit an appeal of the director's decision
pursuant to [section]
23A-64.
Appeals to the director's decision shall be referred to the DRB. An appeal
under this section must be based upon an error in the director's decision
finding compliance or noncompliance with the neighborhood specific design
manual and compatibility review criteria. Appeals shall be scheduled within
thirty (30) days of acceptance of the application for appeal.
A notice of intent to appeal must be received by the planning and developmental
services department within fourteen (14) days after the mailing of the notice
of decision. The complete appeals materials must be filed within thirty (30)
days of the acceptance of the application for appeal.
The DRB, in formulating its preliminary findings and recommendations, shall
apply the same standards that the design professional applies. Written notice
of the DRB's decision shall be provided to the party of record within three (3)
days of the date of the decision.
   g.   Appeal to the board of adjustment. A party of record may submit an
appeal of the DRB's decision to the board of adjustment in accordance with
section
23A-61. A notice of intent to appeal must be received by the planning and
development services department within fourteen (14) days of the notice of the
DRB's decision. The complete appeals material must be filed within thirty (30)
days of the decision.
(Ord. No. 10548, § 4, 6-10-08; Ord. No. 10655, § 4, 4-21-09, eff. 7-1-09; Ord.
No. 10726, § 1, 11-24-09)
Sec. 23A-33. Subdivision of land.
The following procedure is for review of applications for the subdivision of
land by subdivision, minor subdivision or lot split for approval in compliance
with the requirements of the Tucson Code, Chapter
23, Land Use Code (LUC), Article IV.
(Ord. No. 9967, § 9, 5-17-04)
Sec. 23A-33.1. Subdivision plat process.
The subdivision of land through the platting process as provided in LUC section
4.1.6 shall be reviewed and approved as follows.
   (1)   Tentative plat review. All subdivision applications, except as
provided for minor subdivisions (see section
23A-33.2), require the review and approval of a tentative plat. The tentative
plat shall be prepared in accordance with requirements set forth in Development
Standard No. 2-03.0.
   a.   Pre-application conference. A pre-application conference with planning
and development services department (PDSD) staff is encouraged.
   b.   Neighborhood meeting for an FLD. The applicant shall offer to meet at a
specified time and place to discuss the proposed FLD project with property
owners and the neighborhood association. The meeting notice shall be sent to
property owners within three hundred (300) feet of the FLD site and at least
two (2) designated representatives of any neighborhood association registered
with the city and located within one (1) mile of the FLD site. The offer shall
be made at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the meeting. The meeting
shall occur at least fifteen (15) and not more than sixty (60) days prior to
the submittal of the application. The neighborhood meeting shall be held at a
location near the property that is the subject of the application. Notice of
the meeting shall also be provided by the applicant to the office of the
council ward in which the subject site is located. Documentation of the offer
to meet and a summary of the meeting shall be submitted with the application.
   c.   Application. Applications for tentative plats shall be in accordance
with Development Standard No. 2-03.0. Only complete applications will be
accepted for processing.
   d.   Notice of an FLD application. Public notice that a tentative plat
application for an FLD has been filed and accepted for review shall be sent
within five (5) days after acceptance of the application. The notice shall
comply with the following:
   1.   The notice shall include pertinent information about the proposed
project, such as name; location; case number; type of development; site size;
residential density; number of stories; maximum density bonus (if applicable);
amenities; where the plat can be viewed by the public; and the address and
telephone number of the planning and development services department (PDSD).
Such notice shall contain a sentence indicating that any person may request
further notification of actions concerning the FLD. A minimum period of twenty
(20) working days from the date the notice is sent will be provided for
response.
   2.   The notice shall be sent to the following:
   (a)   All owners of property located within three hundred (300) feet of the
Flexible Lot Development (FLD) site (any public rights-of-way abutting the
(FLD) site are excluded from the measurement).
   (b)   At least two (2) designated representatives of any neighborhood
association registered with the city and located within one (1) mile of the FLD
site.
   (c)   Any other person determined by the planning and development services
department (PDSD) director to be affected by the proposed (FLD).
   e.   Review. Tentative plats are reviewed by the community design review
committee (CDRC) for compliance with city regulations in accordance with
Development Standards No. 1-03.0 and 2-03.0.
   f.   Approval. As provided in the Land Use Code (LUC), section 4.1.6.1, and
excepting FLD tentative plats, the planning and development services department
(PDSD) director shall approve the tentative plat within five (5) days of
receiving notification of approval from all community design review committee
(CDRC) members, provided the zoning of the property permits the proposed use of
the property. If the use of the property as proposed on the plat is subject to
the adoption of a rezoning ordinance or includes property in a resource overlay
zone that is subject to the PDSD full review procedure in section
23A-51, the tentative plat cannot be approved until the effective date of the
rezoning ordinance as provided in the LUC, section 4.1.6.1 or approval pursuant
to 23A-51 or appeal thereof. If the tentative plat is for an FLD, the tentative
plat can not be approved until notice is mailed to those entitled to notice and
the time for appeal has expired in accordance with
23A-33.1(1)(g).
Upon notice that the tentative plat is approved, the applicant shall submit the
number of copies of the tentative plat required by the planning and development
services department (PDSD) for placement of the approval signature. A copy of
the signed version will be sent to the applicant for submittal with grading
plans and other development applications for this development site. The final
plat, the grading plan, and other building permit applications will be reviewed
by staff for conformance with the signed version of the tentative plat.
   g.   Notice of decision; appeal of FLD decision. Written notice of the
decision shall be issued to the applicant. The notice shall include the date of
approval and the expiration date of the tentative plat approval period as
provided in the Land Use Code (LUC), section 4.1.7.
If the tentative plat is for an FLD, notice of the decision shall be mailed to
all persons entitled to notice of this application. The decision of the
director may only be appealed to the mayor and council on the grounds that the
decision is not in conformance with the criteria established by the LUC. The
notice of intent to appeal shall be in accordance with section
23A-62 and shall be filed with the city clerk no later than fourteen (14) days
after the date of the decision. The complete appeal materials must be filed
within thirty (30) days of the decision.
   h.   Review after expiration of approval. Review of plats with expired
approval dates shall be in accordance with section 4.1.7.5 of the Land Use Code
(LUC).
   (2)   Final plat review. All proposed subdivisions, including minor
subdivisions, require the review and approval of a final plat. The final plat
shall substantially conform to the approved tentative plat and be prepared in
accordance with final plat requirements set forth in Development Standard No.
2-03.0.
   a.   Pre-application conference. A pre-application conference with planning
and development services department (PDSD) staff is encouraged but is not
required, unless the application is for a minor subdivision plat.
   b.   Application. Submittal of an application shall be in accordance with
Development Standard No. 2-03.0. The final plat may be submitted prior to, or
concurrent with, the tentative plat in accordance with criteria set forth in
the development standard.
   c.   Review. Final plats are reviewed by the community design review
committee (CDRC) in conformance with Development Standards 1-03.0 and 2-03.0.
   1.   As provided by the Land Use Code (LUC), section 4.1.7, the applicant
has one (1) year from the date of tentative plat approval to secure approval
and have the final plat recorded. This time period provides the applicant one
(1) year within which to complete the platting process under the regulations in
place at the time of tentative plat approval. Should the approval not be
secured within the required timetable, the tentative plat and final plat shall
be revised to comply with regulations at the time of re-submittal. The re-
submittal initiates a new one (1) year time period. Refer to the LUC, section
4.2.5, for expiration dates on minor subdivisions.
   2.   Extensions to the time period may be granted in accordance with section
4.1.7.4 of the Land Use Code (LUC).
   d.   Director's recommendation. Upon recommendation of approval from all the
community design review committee (CDRC) members, the PDSD director shall
forward the final plat to mayor and council for consideration. If the plat is
dependent on the adoption of a rezoning ordinance, mayor and council
consideration of the plat shall be scheduled for the same agenda as, or on an
agenda following, the mayor and council consideration of the rezoning
ordinance.
   e.   Mayor and council consideration. The mayor and council consider the
application for final approval in a public meeting. Mailed notice of the
meeting is provided to the applicant and to all parties who have requested
notice.
   f.   Notice of decision. A notice of the mayor and council's decision shall
be provided by the city clerk to the applicant and any party requesting such
notice.
   g.   Recordation of plat. The city clerk shall forward the final plat
documents to the Office of the Pima County Recorder for recordation within five
(5) days after approval of a final plat by mayor and council. If the use of the
property proposed through the plat is dependent on the adoption of a rezoning
ordinance, the recordation shall occur within five (5) days after the effective
date of any change in zoning.
The subdivider shall pay the recording fees as specified by the Office of the
Pima County Recorder. In addition to the recording fees, the subdivider shall
pay the cost of providing reproducible copies of the recorded final plat to the
city engineer, Tucson Water, county recorder, county assessor, and county
addressing coordinator.
(Ord. No. 9967, § 9, 5-17-04; Ord. No. 10636, § 19, 2-24-09, eff. 3-28-09; Ord.
No. 10655, § 4, 4-21-09, eff. 7-1-09)
Sec. 23A-33.2. Minor subdivision platting process.
Minor subdivision platting requirements are established by the Tucson Code,
Chapter
23, Land Use Code (LUC), Article IV, Division 2.
   (1)   Application and review. The application and review procedures for
minor subdivision applications shall be the same as for final plats, as
provided in section 23A-45(2) of this division.
   (2)   Land survey exception. A minor subdivision may be recorded as a land
survey instead of a tentative or final plat provided assurances acceptable to
the director are provided for any required infrastructure. A subdivider shall
have one (1) year to obtain approval and record the survey under the
regulations in place at the time of application. Should the one (1) year review
period expire prior to the plat being recorded, the review of the project shall
be as provided in Article IV of the LUC.
(Ord. No. 9967, § 9, 5-17-04)
Sec. 23A-33.3. Land splits.
The procedure for review of land splits for compliance with the requirements of
the Tucson Code, Chapter
23, Land Use Code (LUC), Article IV, Division 3, shall be as provided below.
Applications filed under this procedure require review and decision by the
planning and development services department (PDSD) director or designee for
conformance with LUC requirements.
   (1)   Application. Applications are submitted to the planning and
development services department (PDSD) and shall be accepted as complete or
rejected as incomplete within two (2) days. Application requirements shall be
established by the PDSD director and shall include the information required
under the Land Use Code (LUC), section 4.3.3.1, and as listed below.
   a.   A completed application form.
   b.   A drawing or sketch showing the proposed land split. The drawing or
sketch should be fully dimensioned and prepared at a scale that maintains
legibility. The drawing or sketch shall show the following information:
   1.   The boundaries of the original parcel or lot prior to the land split.
   2.   The proposed lots.
   3.   The rights-of-way adjacent to or within the property, including streets
and easements.
   4.   The locations and dimensions of any existing structures.
   5.   The setbacks of existing buildings from existing and proposed property
lines.
   6.   The land area of each proposed lot in square feet or acreage.
   7.   Access to all proposed lots in compliance with section 3.2.14.5 of the
Land Use Code (LUC).
   8.   Whether there is any shared use of facilities between properties.
   c.   Documentation of the land division history of the parcel. Documentation
may consist of assessor's maps and records, deeds, title history search, or any
other information that would credibly show the number of land divisions that
have occurred from the original parcel over the last twenty (20) years or from
the date of annexation if the annexation occurred within the last twenty (20)
years.
   d.   If applicable, a copy of any easement agreement or other legal document
that permits shared facilities. For specific information on the preparation of
the drawing or sketch and other submittal requirements, refer to Development
Standard 2-03.0 for land splits.
   (2)   Review. Review is conducted by planning and development services
department (PDSD) staff for implementation of provisions of the Land Use Code
(LUC) on land splits, including the determinations provided in section 4.3.3.2
of the LUC and applicable requirements from state law.
   (3)   Planning and development services department (PDSD) director's
decision. The planning and development services department (PDSD) director
shall base the approval or denial of an application on the findings listed in
the Land Use Code (LUC), section 4.3.3.3. Such decision shall be issued within
ten (10) days of acceptance. As provided in the LUC, section 4.3.3.3.D, if a
decision is not issued within the ten-day period, the land split shall be
deemed not to constitute a subdivision.
   (4)   Appeal. The applicant may appeal the planning and development services
department (PDSD) director's decision within fourteen (14) days of the date of
decision. The appeal shall be considered in accordance with the board of
adjustment appeal procedure, section
23A-61.
(Ord. No. 9967, § 9, 5-17-04; Ord. No. 10655, § 4, 4-21-09, eff. 7-1-09)
Sec. 23A-34. Development plan review.
A development plan is a drawing of a project site that provides detailed
information as to how a proposed project will be constructed in conformance
with city ordinances and regulations. When a development plan is required to be
processed in accordance with the Land Use Code (LUC), Chapter
23, Tucson Code, section 5.3.8, preparation, application, review, and approval
shall be as follows.
   (1)   Applicability. As provided by the Land Use Code (LUC), section 5.3.8,
the development plan process is applied only on those projects whose approval
is subject to the process in section 5.3.8. Typically, rezoning cases and
special exception land use applications are approved subject to approval of a
development plan in accordance with the procedures established in section 5.3.8
of the LUC. The purpose of the review is twofold:
   a.   The review provides the mayor and council with information on whether
public infrastructure is currently available to the project or if public
improvements have to be provided; and
   b.   The review assures the mayor and council that the completed project
will conform with all conditions of approval applied by the mayor and council
and is in substantial conformance with the concept plan presented during the
public process, in addition to all city regulations applicable to the project.
The plan is also reviewed to ensure the implementation of any additional
requirements to which the applicant agreed at the time of approval of the
rezoning or special exception land use request. Many of these requirements will
be over and above the adopted regulations that are applied to projects with
existing zoning.
   (2)   Pre-application.
   a.   Pre-application conference. A pre-application conference with planning
and development services department (PDSD) staff is encouraged.
   b.   Preparation of drawings. Development plans shall be prepared in
accordance with Development Standard 2-05.0.
   (3)   Review procedure. Review of development plans shall be as follows.
   a.   Application. Applications shall be in accordance with submittal
requirements as provided in Development Standard 2-05.0. Development plans,
which are submitted as the result of a rezoning, a special exception land use,
or another similar public process application, generally require the plan to be
in substantial conformance with the concept plan submitted during the public
portion of those processes. Any deviation from the concept plan requires review
and approval in accordance with the Land Use Code (LUC), section 5.3.8.3.B,
prior to review by the community design review committee (CDRC).
   b.   Review. Development plans are reviewed by the community design review
committee (CDRC) in accordance with procedures established in Development
Standards 1-03.0 and 2-05.0. If notification as to the status of the review is
not provided to the applicant within sixty (60) days of acceptance of the
application, the development plan shall be deemed approved.
In accordance with section 5.3.8.2.A of the Land Use Code (LUC), the applicant
has one (1) year from the date the application was accepted for review to
obtain approval under the zoning and development requirements in effect at the
time of application. Should the approval not be obtained within the allotted
time period, a revised development plan, which complies with regulations in
effect at that time, is to be provided if the project is to continue.
   c.   Approval. The planning and development services department (PDSD)
director shall approve the development plan within five (5) days of receiving
notification that all community design review committee (CDRC) members
recommend approval, and it is confirmed that all conditions of approval as
authorized by a rezoning, special exception land use, or other similar
application have been met. This includes architectural review, dedication of
right-of-way, building height, land use, or any other requirement pertinent to
the individual case.
As provided by the Land Use Code (LUC), section 5.3.8.2.B, the approval is
valid for one (1) year. The one (1) year time period provides the applicant the
opportunity to secure permits and commence construction based on the
regulations in effect during the review of the development plan. Expiration of
the one (1) year time period prior to obtaining permits or commencing
construction requires re-approval of the development plan based on regulations
in effect at the time the development plan is resubmitted for review.
   d.   Notice of decision. A notice of decision shall be issued to the
applicant. The notice shall provide the case number and title, the decision,
the date of the decision, the expiration date for that approval, and the
address and telephone number of the planning and development services
department (PDSD).
A written notice of approval is also provided to the planning department on
development plans associated with rezoning or special exception land use
applications. The notice shall provide information on how the conditions of
approval on those applications were met.
   (4)   Issuance of permits. As provided by the Land Use Code (LUC), section
5.3.8.3, any property which is subject to development in accordance with an
approved development plan shall include, with the building permit documents, a
copy of the approved plan bearing the appropriate approval signature. Any
change to an approved development plan requires approval in accordance with the
LUC, section 5.3.8.3.B.
Permits for the implementation of any development plan approved through this
process and which is subject to the adoption of a rezoning ordinance cannot be
issued until the rezoning ordinance is in effect. By state law, the effective
date of the rezoning is thirty (30) days after the adoption of the rezoning
ordinance.
(Ord. No. 9967, § 9, 5-17-04; Ord. No. 10655, § 4, 4-21-09, eff. 7-1-09)
Sec. 23A-35. Flexible lot development (FLD) review.
The flexible lot development (FLD) is a development alternative permitted by
the Land Use Code (LUC), Chapter
23 of the Tucson Code, in various zoning districts. While the development
designator requirements, such as density, building height, setbacks, and lot
coverage, are provided in each zone, specific provisions for the design and
development of an (FLD) are found Section 3.6.1 of the LUC, and in Development
Standard 2-10.0.
   (1)   Subdivision plat.
   a.   Except as provided in section
23A-35(2) (development plan), an FLD must be prepared, processed, and have a
tentative and final plat approved prior to issuance of a building permit.
   b.   Plats must be prepared in compliance with section
23A-33.1 and Development Standard 2-10.0.
   (2)   Development plan.
   a.   When a plat is not required, an FLD must have a development plan
prepared, processed, and approved prior to issuance of a building permit.
   b.   Development plans must be prepared in compliance with Development
Standard 2-10.0 and processed in compliance with Chapter
23A-34.
   (3)   Architectural variation plan.
   a.   When required by Section 3.6.1.6.B (Architectural Variation) of the
LUC, an Architectural Variation Plan (AVP) must be prepared, processed, and
approved prior to issuance of a building permit.
   b.   AVPs must be prepared in compliance with Development Standard 2-10.0.
   c.   An AVP must be included with the subdivision plat, development plan, or
building permit submittal.
   d.   The design examiner will review AVPs for compliance with Section
3.6.1.6.B and forward his or her findings and recommendation in writing to the
director of the planning and development services department for consideration
of approval.
   e.   The director's decision may be appealed the design review board.
   f.   Conditions of the approved AVP must be included as notes on the
approved plat or development plan, whichever applies, and the building plan.
   (4)   Privacy mitigation plan.
   a.   When required by Section 3.6.1.5.A.2 (Privacy Mitigation) of the LUC, a
Privacy Mitigation Plan (PMP) must be prepared, processed, and approved prior
to issuance of a building permit.
   b.   PMPs must be prepared in compliance with Development Standard 2-10.0.
   c.   PMPs must be included with submittal of the Preliminary Development
Plan.
   d.   The Design Examiner will review the PMP for compliance with Section
3.6.1.5.A.2 and forward his or her findings and recommendation in writing to
the director of the planning and development services department for
consideration of approval.
   e.   The director's decision may be appealed to the design review board.
   f.   Conditions of the approved PMP, including a description of the required
mitigation and for which units the mitigation applies, must be included as
notes on the plat or development plan, whichever applies, and the building
plan.
(Ord. No. 9967, § 9, 5-17-04; Ord. No. 10636, §§ 18, 20, 2-24-09, eff. 3-28-09;
Ord. No. 10655, § 4, 4-21-09, eff. 7-1-09)
Secs. 23A-36--23A-39. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
SPECIAL ZONING REVIEW--LIMITED NOTICE PROCEDURE
Sec. 23A-40. Limited notice procedure.
Special zoning reviews which involve minor modifications to design criteria or
minor construction subject to design review shall be conducted in accordance
with the following general procedures. These procedures provide limited notice
to parties who may be affected by the development. It is the responsibility of
the applicant to provide full and complete information on the project in a
timely manner and the responsibility of the affected parties to provide
comments to the applicant and/or the city in a timely manner. Limited notice
procedures apply to certain design development options (DDO), approval of
resident artisan uses and requests for demolition of contributing, nonhistoric
structures in historic districts, special exception uses approved by the PDSD
director, "PDSD special exceptions," and modification to certain development
regulations in the RND Zone.
   (1)   Eligibility for limited notice procedure. The director shall determine
whether a proposed development qualifies for the limited notice procedure based
upon the following.
   a.   There is a minor change in the development criteria that is requested.
   b.   There are few, if any, changes in the physical attributes of the
property.
   c.   There is a potential for impact upon the neighborhood or the adjacent
properties.
   d.   Where there are commercial and office developments, a--c above shall
apply and there is a benefit to area properties from the proposed redevelopment
of the property.
   e.   There is a PDSD special exception land uses designated in the LUC.
   f.   There is a request for a modification of development requirements (MDR)
in the RND overlay zone in accordance with LUC section 2.8.10.8.
   (2)   Pre-application conference. A pre-application conference with city
staff to review requirements for the proposal under this chapter, the LUC,
development standards and other applicable policies and regulations is
encouraged on all limited notice procedure applications.
   (3)   Pre-application neighborhood contact. The applicant is encouraged to
meet with the property owners who are entitled to notice of the application,
the neighborhood association that includes the site and other interested
parties prior to submittal of the application to explain the proposed
development and potential impacts.
   (4)   Application. Applications shall conform to the requirements set forth
in the LUC, this chapter and appropriate development standards and shall show
the impact upon adjacent properties. Upon submittal of the application for
minor HPZ review, a copy shall be provided to the designated member of the
historic district advisory board and the designated member of the TPHC plans
review subcommittee for review and comment.
   (5)   Notice of submittal of the application. Notice of the application
shall be provided to property owners within fifty (50) feet of the subject site
and to the neighborhood association that includes the subject site.
   (6)   Public comment period. There shall be a period of ten (10) days
following the date on which notice is provided for submission of comments on
the proposal to the planning and development services department.
   (7)   Review process. Review is conducted by the planning and development
services department staff and other agencies, committees or advisory boards as
specified in this chapter, the LUC and as may be deemed appropriate by the
director.
   (8)   Decision by the director. The director shall decide whether to approve
or deny an application no earlier than one (1) day after the expiration of the
public comment period and no later than ten (10) days after the expiration of
the public comment period. The director may impose conditions for approval of
the application or may decide to require that the application proceed through
the procedure in accordance with Division 3 of this chapter.
   (9)   Notice of the decision. The director shall notify the applicant and
parties of record in writing of the decision within three (3) days of the
decision.
   (10)   Appeal to the board of adjustment. A party of record may submit an
appeal of the decision to the board of adjustment in accordance with section
23A-61. A notice of intent to appeal must be received by the planning and
development services department within five (5) days after the notice of
decision. The complete appeal materials must be filed within thirty (30) days
of the decision.
   (11)   Waiver of comment, notice of the decision and right to appeal. The
time period for public comment, for notice of the decision and for the filing
an appeal may be waived if the applicant provides written documentation that
all parties of record have waived one or more of these provisions.
   (12)   Failure to adequately describe the project. If, upon receiving a
complaint, the zoning administrator determines that the notice required by this
section, failed to accurately or adequately describe the proposed development
in a manner that substantially affects other property owners, the zoning
administrator may determine that the approval is invalid and that the
application must obtain a new approval through the limited notice procedure in
accordance with Division 3 of this chapter. The zoning administrator's decision
to invalidate an approval may be appealed by the applicant to the board of
adjustment in accordance with [section]
23A-61.
(Ord. No. 9967, § 9, 5-17-04; Ord. No. 10295, § 2, 6-27-06; Ord. No. 10655, §
4, 4-21-09, eff. 7-1-09)
Secs. 23A-41--23A-49. Reserved.
DIVISION 3.
SPECIAL ZONING REVIEW--FULL NOTICE PROCEDURE
Special zoning reviews which require the full notice procedure involve PDSD
director decisions on development applications in resource overlay zones,
applications for variances before the board of adjustment and certain special
exception uses that are decided by the zoning examiner, the "zoning examiner
special exceptions", and mitigation plans for certain restaurants serving
alcohol. This procedure provides broad notice to parties who may be affected by
the development. It is the responsibility of the applicant to provide full and
complete information on the project in a timely manner and the responsibility
of the affected parties to provide comments to the applicant and/or the city in
a timely manner. This procedure applies to applications as specified in the LUC
and include the following.
(Ord. No. 10387, § 4, 4-10-07; Ord. No. 10655, § 4, 4-21-09, eff. 7-1-09)
Sec. 23A-50. Application, notice, public comment and review.
An application for and review of a special zoning request that requires full
notice procedure shall comply with the following.
   (1)   Pre-application conference. A pre-application conference with city
staff to review requirements for the proposal under this chapter, the LUC,
development standards and other applicable policies and regulations is required
on all full notice procedure applications.
   (2)   Neighborhood meeting. The applicant shall offer to meet at a specified
time and place to discuss the proposed project with the persons and entities
entitled to notice of the application. The offer shall be made at least ten
(10) days prior to the date of the meeting. The meeting shall occur at least
fifteen (15) and not more than sixty (60) days prior to the submittal of the
application. The neighborhood meeting shall be held at a location near the
property that is the subject of the application. Notice of the meeting shall
also be provided by the applicant to the office of the council ward in which
the subject site is located. Documentation of the offer to meet and a summary
of the meeting shall be submitted with the application.
   (3)   Application. Applications shall conform to the requirements set forth
in the LUC, this chapter and appropriate development standards. An application
is accepted or rejected within seven (7) days of the date of receipt unless the
applicant consents to additional time. An application may, in the discretion of
the director, be conditionally accepted.
   (4)   Public notice of the application. Applications for full notice
procedure shall be provide public notice as follows.
   a.   Mailed notice.
   1.   Shall be sent to the applicant, public service agencies affected by the
application, all property owners within the subject site and within three
hundred (300) feet of the subject site, the neighborhood association(s) which
includes or are within one (1) mile of the subject site, any person or
organization that has filed a request and paid a fee to receive notification of
public meetings and hearings on a particular process and any other person the
director determines has an interest in the matter.
   2.   Property owners shall be determined from the records of the Pima County
Assessor that are available to the public no more than forty-five (45) days
prior to the application or public hearing.
   3.   Shall be provided to all parties of record on a previous hearing on the
same application and to other affected property owners as required by each
process.
   4.   Shall be sent whether or not the properties are within the corporate
limits of the city.
   5.   Adjoining land under the same ownership as the subject site and public
right-of-way abutting the site shall be included as part of the subject site in
determining the boundaries from which the notice area is measured.
   6.   For sites within the Airport Environs Zone (AEZ), notice shall be
provided to the Tucson International Airport or to the Davis Monthan Airforce
Base, whichever is applicable.
   b.   Posted notice. Notice shall be posted in such locations on the subject
property as to be visible to the public. The posted notice shall identify the
request, the date, time and location of any public comment period or public
hearings and a telephone number for the city and the applicant where further
information may be obtained.
   (5)   Public comment period. There shall be a period of twenty (20) days
following the date on which notice is mailed for submission of comments on the
proposal to the planning and development services department.
   (6)   Review process. Review is conducted by the planning and development
services department staff and other agencies, committees or advisory boards as
specified in this chapter, the LUC and as may be deemed appropriate by the
director.
   (7)   Denial of plan compliance appeal. if an application is rejected
because it is not consistent with the general plan or any applicable specific
plan, the rejection of the application may be appealed by the applicant to the
mayor and council in accordance with [section]
23A-62.
(Ord. No. 9967, § 9, 5-17-04; Ord. No. 10655, § 4, 4-21-09, eff. 7-1-09)
Sec. 23A-51. PDSD full notice procedure.
This procedure applies to approvals within overlay zones, such as, but not
limited to, the Hillside Development Zone (HDZ), Scenic Corridor Zone (SCZ),
Environment Resource Zone (ERZ) and Historic Preservation Zone (HPZ). This
section does not apply to applications for development subject to the Major
Streets and Routes Setback Zone or the Gateway Corridor Zone, to the Rio Nuevo
and Downtown Development (RND) Zone or the Drachman School Overlay (DSO) Zone.
This procedure also applies to development applications subject to the
watercourse, amenities, safety and habitat (WASH) regulations in section
29-12 et seq. and approvals of mitigation plans for certain restaurants serving
alcohol.
   (1)   Application, notice, public comment and review. The pre-application
conference, neighborhood meeting, application, notice, public comment, review
and denial of plan appeal shall be in conformance with section
23A-50.
   (2)   Maintenance and protection. Prior to approval of a subdivision plat or
issuance of building permits, such measures as covenants, assurances, or
homeowners' associations, as may be necessary to ensure the long-term
maintenance and control measures, may be required.
   (3)   Alteration of the property prohibited. No grubbing, grading,
excavation or construction shall occur nor shall the city issue any approval or
permit for grubbing, grading, excavation or construction on any lot or parcel
subject to the overlay zone unless and until the city approves a plat or plan
in conformance with this chapter, the LUC and the development standards.
   (4)   WASH development. Development subject to the watercourse, amenities,
safety and habitat (WASH) regulations in section
29-12 et seq. shall be subject to review and approval in accordance with the
PDSD full notice procedure, section
23A-51, and to the standards for review set forth in section
29-17.
   (5)   Time for issuance of decision. The director shall not make any
decision prior to the expiration of the twenty-day period for public comment.
The director shall make a decision on applications no later than twenty (20)
days after the expiration of the comment period or five (5) days after the
latest recommendation from a city advisory board, whichever is later.
   (6)   Notice of decision. Notice of the decision on an application shall be
mailed within three (3) days of the decision to all persons entitled to notice
of the application.
   (7)   Appeal. The decision of the director may be appealed to the mayor and
council on the grounds that the decision is not in conformance with the
criteria established by the LUC. The notice of intent to appeal shall be in
accordance with section
23A-62 and shall be filed with the city clerk no later than fourteen (14) days
after the date of the decision. The complete appeal materials must be filed
within thirty (30) days of the decision. A copy of the appeal shall be provided
to the director at the time it is filed.
   (8)   Site inspection. Prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit, the
site will be inspected by the planning and development services department
(PDSD) for compliance with the plans approved for the issuance of building
permits and any changes authorized by the PDSD director to those approved plans
during construction.
(Ord. No. 9967, § 9, 5-17-04; Ord. No. 10387, § 4, 4-10-07; Ord. No. 10655, §
4, 4-21-09, eff. 7-1-09)
Sec. 23A-52. Board of adjustment full notice procedure.
Applications for certain design development options, modifications of
development regulations in the RND and for variances before the board of
adjustment shall be in conformance with section
23A-50 and the following.
   (1)   Director's recommendation. The director shall prepare a recommendation
in accordance and forward it, together with the DRB and STAC recommendations
when required, to the applicant and the board of adjustment not less than five
(5) days prior to the scheduled public hearing. The recommendation shall be a
written report that includes the request and present plans, policies,
regulations, and other information relating to the request. The recommendation
shall include a recommended action by the board of adjustment or a statement
that the planning and development services department has no objection to the
request.
   (2)   Advisory board review. Variance requests from the Environmental
Resource Zone regulations require review by the design review board (DRB) and
the stormwater technical advisory committee (STAC) as provided in LUC section
2.8.8.6. Variance requests from Scenic Corridor Zone (SCZ), the Gateway
Corridor Zone, the landscaping and screening regulations, and the native plant
protection regulations require DRB review as provided in LUC sections 2.8.2.14,
2.8.4.5, 3.7.7.5, and 3.8.8.3, respectively.
   (3)   Board of adjustment public hearing. The board of adjustment shall hold
a public hearing in accordance with the following and the board of adjustment's
rules and regulations.
   a.   Notice of the public hearing shall be provided at least fifteen (15)
and no more than thirty (30) days before the date of the public hearing to all
parties who received notice of the application. Notice shall be provided in the
same manner as the application. The notice of the public hearing may be
consolidated with the notice of the application.
   b.   Except as permitted in the public hearing and the procedures for
submission of written materials, no person shall communicate with a member of
the board of adjustment regarding a matter to be decided by the board any time
prior to the expiration of the time for reconsideration of a decision.
   c.   The chair of the hearing body or person presiding may administer oaths
and may compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant
information, including witnesses requested by any party.
   d.   The chair or person presiding may impose any reasonable limitations on
the number of speakers heard and may establish the nature and length of
testimony by speakers.
   e.   Comments may be given by any person, either verbally or in writing.
   f.   Following the close of the hearing and prior to making a decision or
recommendation, the hearing body may discuss the matter and further question
staff or any party submitting comment.
   g.   A record of the hearing is made and retained as a public record.
   (4)   Board of adjustment decision. The board of adjustment may close the
public hearing or continue it to a specific date, time, and place provided the
continuance is not for more than one hundred twenty (120) days. The board of
adjustment shall issue a decision in accordance with the findings required for
approval of the application at the conclusion of the public hearing.
   (5)   Notice of decision. Notice of the decision shall be mailed within
three (3) days of the decision to the applicant and any persons requesting the
notice.
   (6)   Reconsideration. The board of adjustment may consider one request for
reconsideration by the applicant or a party of record, provided:
   a.   A written request is filed with the zoning administrator within
fourteen (14) calendar days after the board has rendered its decision, and
   b.   The request is based upon new evidence or materials which were not
presented and could not reasonably have been presented at the public hearing on
the case.
   (7)   Change of condition. After a DDO or a variance has been granted by the
board, the property owner/applicant may request a change to a condition for
approval as imposed by the board based upon changed circumstances which affect
the condition. The request shall be heard by the board and the board shall
initially determine whether the request if for a minor change of condition that
does not materially alter the variance and does not materially affect any other
properties. If the board determines that the request is for a minor change of
condition, it may decide whether to approve or deny the change. If the board
determines that the request is not a minor change of condition and there are
reasonable grounds for the request, the case shall be scheduled for a public
hearing and notice provided in conformance with this section.
(Ord. No. 9967, § 9, 5-17-04; Ord. No. 10295, § 3, 6-27-06; Ord. No. 10655, §
4, 4-21-09, eff. 7-1-09)
Sec. 23A-53. Zoning examiner special exception full notice procedure.
Applications for special exception land uses that are decided by the zoning
examiner, "zoning examiner special exceptions", and for expansions of
nonconforming uses and substitutions of nonconforming uses (uses not within the
same land use class) shall be decided by the zoning examiner in accordance with
the pre-application conference, neighborhood meeting, application, notice,
public comment, review and denial of plan appeal shall be in conformance with
section
23A-50 and the following.
   (1)   Director's recommendation. The director shall prepare a recommendation
and forward it to the applicant and the zoning examiner not less than fifteen
(15) days prior to the scheduled public hearing.
   (2)   Zoning examiner's public hearing. The public hearing shall be held
before the zoning examiner within seventy (70) days of acceptance of the
application. Public hearings are held in accordance with the following and the
zoning examiner's rules and procedures.
   a.   Notice of the public hearing shall be provided at least fifteen (15)
and no more than thirty (30) days before the date of the public hearing to all
parties who received notice of the application. The notice of the public
hearing may be consolidated with the notice of the application.
   b.   The zoning examiner may administer oaths and may compel the attendance
of witnesses and the production of relevant information, including witnesses
requested by any party.
   c.   The zoning examiner may impose any reasonable limitations on the number
of speakers heard and may establish the nature and length of testimony by
speakers.
   d.   Comments may be given by any person, either verbally or in writing.
   e.   A record of the hearing is made and retained as a public record.
   (3)   Conduct of the zoning examiner. The zoning examiner shall have the
ability to obtain information from all parties, including public agencies,
prior to the public hearing, provided all requests for information are in
writing and the request and information are included as part of the public
record. The zoning examiner shall also have the ability, after the close of the
public hearing, to obtain additional information or clarify information
presented and of record at the hearing provided the request for additional
information or clarification is requested in writing and such request and
information are included as part of the record or in the report to the mayor
and council.
Beyond these limitations, the zoning examiner shall not communicate, directly
or indirectly, with any party or party's representative in connection with any
issue involved with a particular request, except upon notice and opportunity
for all parties to participate; use or rely upon any communication, report,
staff memorandum, or other material prepared in connection with the particular
case, unless it is made a part of the record; or inspect the site with any
party or party's representative, unless all parties are given an opportunity to
be present.
   (4)   Zoning examiner's decision. The zoning examiner may close the public
hearing or continue the public hearing to a specified time, date and place
provided the continuance is not for more than thirty (30) days. Within five (5)
days of the close of a hearing, the zoning examiner shall make a decision to
approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application.
   (5)   Notice of decision. Notice of the decision on an application shall be
mailed within three (3) days of the decision to the applicant and all persons
who request the notice.
   (6)   Appeal. The zoning examiner's decision may be appealed by a party of
record to the mayor and council in accordance with section
23A-62 by submitting a notice of intent to appeal to the city clerk within
fourteen (14) days from the date of the decision with a copy delivered to PDSD.
The complete appeal materials must be filed within thirty (30) days of the
decision.
   (7)   Change of condition. An applicant may request a change in a condition
of approval of a zoning examiner special exception land use. The request shall
be reviewed by staff for recommendation to the zoning examiner. The request
shall then be considered at a public hearing in accordance with subsections 3,
4, 5, 6, 7 and 8 above.
(Ord. No. 9967, § 9, 5-17-04; Ord. No. 10655, § 4, 4-21-09, eff. 7-1-09)
Sec. 23A-54. Conditional use: Suspension or termination of designated
permitted, secondary and special exception uses.
Where a permitted, secondary or special exception land use is designated in the
LUC as subject to suspension or revocation for failure to conform to adopted
conditions and there is reason to believe that it is being operated in a manner
that violates the conditions imposed for the use, the use may be suspended or
revoked as follows:
   (1)   Determination by the zoning administrator. Upon receipt of information
establishing a reasonable grounds for determining that a conditional use is
operating in violation of established conditions, the zoning administrator
shall initiate such further investigation as may be necessary and, based upon
that investigation, shall determine if a violation of the conditions exists.
   (2)   Notice of violation. Upon determination that a violation of conditions
exists, the zoning administrator shall notify the property owner and all other
parties who may be identified with the operation of the use of the
determination that a violation exists. The notice shall state the facts that
support the determination. The notice shall further state that the use may be
suspended, subject to additional conditions or revoked if the property is not
brought into compliance with all use conditions. The determination shall not be
final until a period of fourteen (14) days from the date it is issued or until
an appeal to the board of adjustment has been completed.
   (3)   Appeal to the board of adjustment. A party who has received a
determination that a conditional use will be suspended, subject to additional
conditions or revoked, may appeal that decision by filing a notice of appeal
with the zoning administrator within fourteen (14) days of the date of the
decision. The appeal shall state the reasons for the appeal. Upon receipt of
such a notice, the zoning administrator shall schedule a public hearing before
the board of adjustment to consider the appeal.
   (4)   Public notice. Public notice shall be provided in accordance with
section
23A-50.
   (5)   Public hearing. The board of adjustment shall conduct a public hearing
to determine whether the use has complied with required conditions. The board
of adjustment shall determine whether the zoning administrator's decision is
supported by evidence in the record at the hearing. The board of adjustment may
affirm, reverse or modify the decision of the zoning administrator and may
place additional or different conditions upon the use.
   (6)   Final decision. Where no appeal is filed or the board of adjustment
affirms or modifies the decision of the zoning administrator, a determination
shall become final. Failure to comply with a final order shall be a continuing
violation of the Land Use Code for each day of operation that is not in full
compliance.
   (7)   Notice of decision. Notice of the decision on an application shall be
mailed within three (3) days of the decision to the applicant and all persons
who request the notice.
(Ord. No. 9967, § 9, 5-17-04; Ord. No. 10387, § 4, 4-10-07)
Secs. 23A-55--23A-59. Reserved.
DIVISION 4.
APPEAL PROCEDURES
Sec. 23A-60. Appeal procedures.
   (1)   Administrative appeals. Appeals from zoning and development decisions
shall be to the board of adjustment or to the mayor and council as specified in
each procedure. Appeals are limited to review of substantive zoning regulations
such as design and performance criteria and required findings for approval.
Where there is no further appeal to a city body is specified, the decision is
the final city decision and any further appeal or special action may be filed
with the Superior Court as provided by law.
   (2)   Takings appeals for individual dedications and exactions or excessive
reduction of property values. Appeals to final discretionary decisions that
require a dedication or an exaction as a condition for granting a development
approval and appeals to the adoption or amendment of a zoning regulation on the
grounds that the regulation creates an unconstitutional taking of private
property shall be processed in accordance with section
23A-63.
(Ord. No. 9967, § 9, 5-17-04)
Sec. 23A-61. Board of adjustment appeal procedure.
Appeals to the board of adjustment may be made from decisions by the zoning
administrator, including interpretations of the Land Use Code, notices of
violations of the Land Use Code, determinations of violations of conditional
uses, review decisions where the PDSD director has challenged the historic
designation of a structure proposed for demolition and other determinations in
accordance with the LUC, and decisions of the design review board pertaining to
Neighborhood Preservation Zone applications. Appeals shall be reviewed and
decided by the board of adjustment following a public hearing. The board of
adjustment may affirm, reverse or modify the decision subject to appeal and may
impose conditions necessary and appropriate to implement the LUC and other
pertinent regulations.
   (1)   Filing of an appeal. Appeals shall be filed with the zoning
administrator within the time provided by the procedure from which the decision
is appealed. An appeal shall be scheduled for consideration by the board of
adjustment at the next regular meeting which is at least thirty-five (35) days
following the filing of the appeal. The zoning administrator may, for good
cause, grant one (1) extension to the second regular meeting after the filing
of the appeal. The filing of an appeal stays the issuance of permits and
approvals and all formal land use action on the development proposal subject to
the appeal.
   (2)   Limitation on contact with the board of adjustment. Except for duly
noticed site inspection, study and public hearing, no person shall contact or
discuss the merits of any appeal with the members of the board of adjustment
between the filing of the appeal and the final determination by the board of
adjustment.
   (3)   PDSD director's report. The PDSD director shall forward the appeal,
any additional materials provided by the appellant, the recommendations, or in
the case of an appeal of NPZ design review, the decision of the DRB or other
applicable advisory body, any materials provided by any other party and the
director's report and recommendation to the board of adjustment no later than
five (5) days prior to the scheduled meeting.
   (4)   Public notice. Public notice of the board of adjustment public hearing
shall be provided not less than fifteen (15) days and not more than thirty (30)
days prior to the hearing. Public notice shall be to the applicant, the same
parties notified of the initial application and those who provided oral or
written comments in the course of the prior procedure. Notice shall be provided
in the same manner as for the procedure from which the appeal is filed.
   (5)   Board of adjustment public hearing. The board of adjustment may hold a
study session and shall hold a public hearing on the appeal in accordance with
section
23A-52(2) and the rules and regulations of the board of adjustment. The board
of adjustment shall reach a decision following the close of the public hearing.
The board of adjustment may continue the public hearing for up to forty-five
(45) days. The public hearing shall not be continued for more than forty-five
(45) days without the consent of the applicant, regardless of who is the
appellant.
   (6)   Notice of the decision. The decision by the board of adjustment shall
be announced and shall be final at the time the decision is made following the
public hearing. Written confirmation of the decision shall be provided within
three (3) days of the date of decision to all parties of record.
   (7)   Reconsideration. The appellant, the applicant, the zoning
administrator, or in the case of a decision relating to NPZ design review, the
PDSD director, may request reconsideration of a decision on an appeal provided
the request is filed with the zoning administrator within fourteen (14) days of
the date the decision is announced. A request for reconsideration may be made
only where there is an error in fact or law in the decision or where a party
has new evidence that was not available at the time of the public hearing. The
request shall be scheduled for the next regular meeting of the board of
adjustment.
   (8)   Issuance of permits and approvals. No permits or development approvals
based on the decision shall be issued, no inspections performed or other formal
action taken, while the appeal is pending before the board of adjustment or
before the expiration of the period for reconsideration where no request is
filed. If a request for reconsideration is filed, no permits or development
approvals based on the decision shall be issued, or other formal action taken
until completion of action on the request for reconsideration is announced by
the board of adjustment.
(Ord. No. 9967, § 9, 5-17-04; Ord. No. 10655, § 4, 4-21-09, eff. 7-1-09; Ord.
No. 10726, § 2, 11-24-09)
Sec. 23A-62. Mayor and council appeal procedure.
Appeals to the mayor and council may be made from decisions by the development
services director on Hillside Development Zone, Scenic Corridor Zone,
Environmental Resource Zone and Historic Preservation Zone applications, on
certain special exception land uses and such other matters as are designated in
this chapter and in the LUC. The mayor and council shall consider the appeal
following a public hearing in accordance with this section. The mayor and
council may affirm, reverse or modify the decision that is appealed and may
establish such conditions as are appropriate to implement the LUC and other
pertinent regulations.
   (1)   Filing of an appeal. Appeals shall be filed with the city clerk with a
copy to PDSD within the time provided by the procedure from which the decision
is appealed. The filing of an appeal stays the issuance of any permits or
development approvals based on the decision and all formal land use action on
the development proposal subject to the appeal.
   (2)   Limitation on contact with the mayor and council. No person shall
contact or discuss the merits of any appeal with the members of the mayor and
council between the filing of the appeal and the final determination by the
mayor and council.
   (3)   DRB Review. Appeals from decisions on SCZ, ERZ and HPZ applications
shall be forwarded to the DRB for review and recommendation if such review and
recommendation has not occurred.
   (4)   STAC Review. Appeals from decisions on ERZ and WASH applications shall
be forwarded to the stormwater technical advisory committee (STAC) for review
and recommendation if such review and recommendation has not occurred.
   (5)   City manager's communication. The PDSD director shall forward the
appeal, any additional materials provided by the appellant, the recommendations
of the applicable advisory body(ies), any materials provided by any other party
and the city manager's report and recommendation to the mayor and council no
later than five (5) days prior to the scheduled meeting.
   (6)   Public notice. Public notice of the mayor and council public hearing
shall be provided not less than fifteen (15) days and not more than thirty (30)
days prior to the hearing. Public notice shall be in accordance with section
23A-50.
   (7)   Mayor and council public hearing. The mayor and council may hold a
study session and shall hold a public hearing on the appeal in accordance with
the rules and regulations of the mayor and council. The mayor and council shall
reach a decision following the close of the public hearing. The mayor and
council may continue the public hearing for up to forty-five (45) days. The
public hearing shall not be continued for more than forty-five (45) days
without the consent of the property owner of the subject site.
   (8)   Mayor and council decision. Mayor and council shall decide the appeal
based upon the application, testimony, evidence and other materials considered
in the prior proceeding, the city managers communication and the testimony and
evidence presented in the public hearing. Mayor and council shall consider the
provisions, purpose and intent of the plans and regulations that apply to the
appeal.
   (9)   Notice of the decision. The decision by the mayor and council shall be
announced and shall be final at the time the decision is made following the
public hearing. Written notice of the decision shall be provided within three
(3) days of the date of decision to all parties of record.
   (10)   Issuance of permits and approvals. No permits or development
approvals based on the decision shall be issued, or other formal action taken,
while the appeal is pending before the mayor and council or before the
expiration of the period for reconsideration where no request is filed. If a
request for reconsideration is filed, no permits or development approvals based
on the decision shall be issued, or other formal action taken until completion
of action on the request for reconsideration is announced by the mayor and
council.
(Ord. No. 9967, § 9, 5-17-04; Ord. No. 10655, § 4, 4-21-09, eff. 7-1-09)
Sec. 23A-63. Takings appeal procedure, individual dedications and exactions and
excessive reduction of property value.
Appeals asserting that a final discretionary decision or a zoning regulation
constitute a "taking" of property in violation of the Fifth Amendment to the
United States Constitution (a "takings appeal") shall be processed in
accordance with this section.
   (1)   Decisions subject to appeal.
   a.   A takings appeal may be filed by a property owner are as follows.
   1.   Where the property owner has a legally recognized property interest in
the property that is subject to the city decision; and
   2.   Where a final discretionary administrative decision has been made by
the development services director, zoning examiner or the mayor and council to
require the dedication of property or the payment of a monetary exaction as a
condition for the approval of the development application in a manner that is
alleged to constitute a taking of property; or
   3.   A zoning regulation has been adopted or amended and is alleged to
constitute a taking of property.
   b.   A takings appeal may not be filed by a property owner regarding the
application of fees, assessments, taxes or any other dedication or exaction
required by a legislative act that does not give discretion to the
administrative agency or official to determine the nature or extent of the
requirement.
   (2)   Filing of appeal. An appeal shall be in writing and filed with or
mailed to the zoning examiner within thirty (30) days after the final action is
taken. Final action on a zoning regulation shall be the effective date of the
regulation. No fee shall be charged for an appeal under this section
23A-63.
   (3)   Public hearing and notice of public hearing. The zoning examiner shall
schedule a public hearing on the appeal to be held no later than thirty (30)
days after receipt of the appeal. Notice of the public hearing shall be mailed
to the appellant and to all parties entitled to notice of the administrative
decision at least ten (10) days before the appeal is heard.
   (4)   Statement of city authority. In all proceedings under this section
23A-63, the city shall provide the zoning examiner with a statement of the
city's authority to require the dedication or exaction or to adopt or amend the
zoning regulation. The city has the burden to establish in its statement of
authority the nexus between the dedication or exaction and a legitimate
governmental interest and that the proposed dedication, exaction or zoning
regulation is roughly proportional to the impact of the proposed use,
improvement or development or, in the case of a zoning regulation, that the
zoning regulation does not create a taking of property in violation of the
Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution.
   (5)   Zoning examiner's decision. The zoning examiner shall decide the
appeal within five (5) days after the appeal is heard. If the city has met it's
burden set forth in subsection (4) above, the appeal shall be denied. If the
city has failed to meet it's burden as set forth in subsection (4) above, the
zoning examiner shall:
   a.   In the case of a dedication or exaction, modify or delete the
requirement appealed under this section.
   b.   In the case of a zoning regulation, transmit a recommendation for
further action to the mayor and council.
(Ord. No. 9967, § 9, 5-17-04)
Sec. 23A-64. Design review board appeal procedure.
Appeals to the design review board may be made from decisions by the PDSD
director regarding Neighborhood Preservation Zone applications. Appeals shall
be reviewed and decided by the design review board following a public hearing.
The design review board may affirm, reverse or modify the decision subject to
appeal and may impose conditions necessary and appropriate to implement the LUC
and other pertinent regulations.
   (1)   Filing of an appeal. Appeals shall be filed with the planning and
development services department within the time provided by the procedure from
which the decision is appealed. An appeal shall be scheduled for consideration
by the design review board at the next regular meeting which is at least
thirty-five (35) days following the filing of the appeal. The planning and
development services department may, for good cause, grant one (1) extension to
the second regular meeting after the filing of the appeal. The filing of an
appeal stays the issuance of permits and approvals and all formal land use
action on the development proposal subject to the appeal.
   (2)   Limitation on contact with the design review board. Except for duly
noticed site inspection, study and public hearing, no person shall contact or
discuss the merits of any appeal with the members of the design review board
between the filing of the appeal and the final determination by the design
review board.
   (3)   PDSD director's report. The PDSD director shall forward the appeal,
any additional materials provided by the appellant, any materials provided by
any other party, and the director's report and recommendation to the design
review board no later than five (5) days prior to the scheduled meeting.
   (4)   Public notice. Public notice of the design review board public hearing
shall be provided not less than fifteen (15) days and not more than thirty (30)
days prior to the hearing. Public notice shall be to the applicant and the same
parties notified of the director's decision. Notice shall be provided in the
same manner as for the procedure from which the appeal is filed.
   (5)   Design review board public hearing. The design review board may hold a
study session and shall hold a public hearing on the appeal in accordance with
section
23A-52(3) and the rules and regulations of the design review board. The design
review board shall reach a decision following the close of the public hearing.
The design review board may continue the public hearing for up to forty-five
(45) days. The public hearing shall not be continued for more than forty-five
(45) days without the consent of the applicant, regardless of who is the
appellant.
   (6)   Notice of the decision. The decision by the design review board shall
be announced and shall be final at the time the decision is made following the
public hearing. Written confirmation of the decision shall be provided within
three (3) days of the date of decision to all parties of record.
   (7)   Reconsideration. The appellant, the applicant or the PDSD director may
request reconsideration of a decision on an appeal provided the request is
filed with the PDSD director within fourteen (14) days of the date the decision
is announced. A request for reconsideration may be made only where there is an
error in fact or law in the decision or where a party has new evidence that was
not available at the time of the public hearing. The request shall be scheduled
for the next regular meeting of the design review board.
   (8)   Issuance of permits and approvals. No permits or development approvals
based on the decision shall be issued, no inspections performed or other formal
action taken, while the appeal is pending before the design review board or
before the expiration of the period for reconsideration where no request is
filed. If a request for reconsideration is filed, no permits or development
approvals based on the decision shall be issued, or other formal action taken
until completion of action on the request for reconsideration is announced by
the design review board.
(Ord. No. 10726, § 3, 11-24-09)
Secs. 23A-65--23A-70. Reserved.
ARTICLE III.
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE REGULATIONS*
__________
*   Editors Note: Ord. No. 10053, § 5, added a new Art. III, which was repealed
and replaced by Ord. No. 11203, eff. 12-23-14.
__________
DIVISION 1.
APPLICABILITY AND INTENT
Sec. 23A-71. Title.
   This article shall be known and may be cited as Tucson's "Development Impact
Fee Regulations," and is referred to herein as "this article."
(Ord. No. 11203, § 1, 10-9-14, eff. 12-23-14)
Sec. 23A-72. Legislative intent and purpose.
   A.   This article is adopted for the purpose of promoting the health,
safety, and general welfare of the residents of the city by:
   1.   Requiring new development to pay its proportionate share of the costs
incurred by the city that are associated with providing necessary public
services to new development.
   2.   Setting forth standards and procedures for creating and assessing
development impact fees consistent with the requirements of A.R.S. § 9-463.05.
   3.   Setting forth procedures for administering the development impact fee
program, including mandatory offsets, credits, and refunds of development
impact fees. All development impact fee assessments, offsets, credits, or
refunds shall be administered in accordance with the provisions of this
article.
   B.   This article shall not affect the city's zoning authority or its
authority to adopt or amend its General Plan, provided that planning and zoning
activities by the city may require amendments to development impact fees as
provided in section
23A-77.
(Ord. No. 11203, § 1, 10-9-14, eff. 12-23-14)
Sec. 23A-73.   Definitions.
   When used in this article, the terms listed below shall have the following
meanings unless the context requires otherwise. Singular terms shall include
their plural. The definitions used in this article shall supersede any
definition for the same or similar term defined in
Chapter 23A, Article IV.
   1.   Applicant: A person who applies to the city for a building permit.
   2.   Appurtenance: Any fixed machinery or equipment, structure or other
fixture, including integrated hardware, software or other components,
associated with a capital facility that are necessary or convenient to the
operation, use, or maintenance of a capital facility, but excluding replacement
of the same after initial installation.
   3.   Aquatic center: A facility primarily designed to host non-recreational
competitive functions generally occurring within water, including, but not
limited to, water polo games, swimming meets, and diving events. The facility
may be indoors, outdoors, or any combination thereof, and includes all
necessary supporting amenities, including but not limited to, locker rooms,
offices, snack bars, bleacher seating, and shade structures.
   4.   Building permit: Any permit issued by the city that authorizes vertical
construction, increases square footage, or authorizes changes to land use.
   5.   Capital facility: An asset having a useful life of three or more years
that is a component of one or more categories of necessary public service
provided by the city. A capital facility may include any associated purchase of
real property, architectural and engineering services leading to the design and
construction of buildings and facilities, improvements to existing facilities,
improvements to or expansions of existing facilities, and associated financing
and professional services. "Infrastructure" shall have the same meaning as
"capital facilities."
   6.   Category of necessary public service: A category of necessary public
services for which the city is authorized to assess development impact fees, as
identified in the infrastructure improvements plans.
    7.   Category of development: A specific land use category against which a
development impact fee is calculated and assessed. The city assesses
development impact fees against residential, commercial, retail, high traffic
retail, industrial, general office, medical facilities, institutional, and
recreational land use categories, each of which is defined in this list of
definitions.
   8.   City: The City of Tucson, Arizona.
   9.   Commercial/Retail: General land use category: Commercial/Retail:
General includes general retail as well as shopping center type establishments,
which are an integrated group of commercial establishments that is planned,
developed, owned, and managed as a unit. General retail/shopping center
composition is related to its market area in terms of size, location, and type
of store. General retail/ shopping center also provides onsite parking
facilities sufficient to serve its own parking demands. This category includes
outparcels (peripheral buildings or pads located on the perimeter of the center
adjacent to the streets and major access points). These buildings are typically
drive-in banks, retail stores, or restaurants. See ITE code 820. Other uses may
be assessed as Commercial/Retail: General as determined by the development
impact fee administrator.
   10.   Commercial/Retail: Free Standing Discount Store land use category: A
discount store is similar to a free-standing discount superstore. It is also
similar to a department store with the exception that it generally offers
centralized cashiering and sells products that are advertised at discount
prices. Discount stores offer a variety of customer services and typically
maintain long store hours seven (7) days a week. The stores included in this
land use are often the only ones on the site, but they can also be found in
mutual operation with a related or unrelated garden center and/or service
station. Free-standing discount stores are also sometimes found as separate
parcels within a retail complex, with or without their own dedicated parking
(e.g., Costco, Walmart). See ITE Code 815. Other uses may be assessed as
Commercial/Retail: Free Standing Discount Store as determined by the
development impact fee administrator.
   11.   Credit: A reduction in an assessed development impact fee resulting
from developer contributions to, payments for, construction of, or dedications
for capital facilities included in an infrastructure improvements plan pursuant
to section
23A-82 (or as otherwise permitted by this article).
   12.   Credit agreement: A written agreement between the city and a developer
or landowner that allocates credits to the development pursuant to section
23A-82. A credit agreement may be included as part of a development agreement
pursuant to section
23A-83.
   13.   Credit allocation: A term used to describe when credits are
distributed to a particular development or parcel of land after execution of a
credit agreement, but are not yet issued.
   14.   Credit issuance: A term used to describe when the amount of an
assessed development impact fee attributable to a particular development or
parcel of land is reduced by applying a credit allocation.
   15.   Developer: An individual, group of individuals, partnership,
corporation, limited liability company, association, municipal corporation,
state agency, or other person or entity undertaking land development activity
and their respective successors and assigns.
   16.   Development agreement: An agreement prepared in accordance with the
requirements of section
23A-83, A.R.S. § 9-500.05, and any applicable requirements of the City Code.
   17.    Development impact fee administrator: The person designated by the
city manager and authorized to make determinations regarding the application,
administration, and enforcement of the responsibilities and duties under this
article.
   18.   Direct benefit: A benefit to a SU resulting from a capital facility
that:
      (a)   addresses the need for a necessary public service created in whole
or in part by the SU; and that,
      (b)   meets either of the following criteria:
         (i)    the capital facility is located in the immediate area of the SU
and is needed in the immediate area of the SU to maintain the level of service;
or,
         (ii)   the capital facility substitutes for, or eliminates the need
for a capital facility that would otherwise have been needed in the immediate
area of the SU to maintain the city's level of service.
   19.   Dwelling unit: A house, apartment, mobile home or trailer, group of
rooms, or single room occupied as separate living quarters or, if vacant,
intended for occupancy as separate living quarters.
   20.   Equipment: Machinery, tools, materials, and other supplies, not
including vehicles, that a capital facility needs to provide the level of
service specified by the infrastructure improvements plan, but excluding
replacement of the same after initial development of the capital facility.
   21.   Excluded park facility: Park and recreational facilities for which
development impact fees may not be charged pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-463.05,
including amusement parks, aquariums, aquatic centers, auditoriums, arenas,
arts and cultural facilities, bandstand and orchestra facilities, bathhouses,
boathouses, clubhouses, community centers greater than three thousand (3,000)
square feet in floor area, environmental education centers, equestrian
facilities, golf course facilities, greenhouses, lakes, museums, theme parks,
water reclamation or riparian areas, wetlands, or zoo facilities.
   22.   Fee report: A written report developed pursuant to section
23A-79 that identifies the methodology for calculating the amount of each
development impact fee, explains the relationship between the development
impact fee to be assessed and the plan-based cost per SU calculated in the
infrastructure improvements plan, and which meets other requirements set forth
in A.R.S. § 9-463.05.
   23.   Final approval: For a nonresidential or multifamily development, the
date of the approval of a site plan or, if no site plan is submitted for the
development, the date of the approval of a final subdivision plat; for a single
family residential development, the date that the first building permit is
issued pursuant to an approved site plan or subdivision plat.
   24.   Financing or debt: Any debt, bond, note, loan, interfund loan, fund
transfer, or other debt service obligation used to finance the development or
expansion of a capital facility.
   25.   Fire facility: A category of necessary public services that includes
fire stations, fire equipment, fire vehicles and all appurtenances for fire
stations. Fire facilities do not include vehicles or equipment used to provide
administrative services, or helicopters or airplanes. Fire facilities do not
include any facility that is used for training firefighters from more than one
station or substation.
   26.   General office land use category: A general office building houses
multiple tenants; it is a location where affairs of businesses, commercial or
industrial organizations, or professional persons or firms are conducted. An
office building or buildings may contain a mixture of tenants including
professional services, insurance companies, investment brokers, and tenant
services, such as a bank or savings and loan institution, a restaurant, or
cafeteria and service retail facilities. See ITE code 710. Other uses may be
assessed as general office as determined by the development impact fee
administrator.
   27.   General plan: The most recently adopted Tucson General Plan.
   28.   Gross impact fee: The total development impact fee to be assessed
against a subject development on a per unit basis, prior to subtraction of any
credits.
   29.   Hotel land use category: A hotel is a place of lodging that provides
sleeping accommodations and supporting facilities such as restaurants, cocktail
lounges, meeting and banquet rooms or convention facilities, limited
recreational facilities (pool, fitness room), and/or other retail and service
shops. All suites hotel, business hotel, motel, and resort hotel are related
uses. See ITE code 310. Other uses may be assessed as hotel as determined by
the development impact fee administrator.
   30.   Industrial: light industrial land use category: A light industrial
facility is a free-standing facility devoted to a single use. The facility has
an emphasis on activities other than manufacturing and typically has minimal
office space. Typical light industrial activities include printing, material
testing, and assembly of data processing equipment. See ITE code 110. Other
uses may be assessed as industrial: light industrial as determined by the
development impact fee administrator.
   31.   Industrial: manufacturing land use category: A manufacturing facility
is an area where the primary activity is the conversion of raw materials or
parts into finished products. Size and type of activity may vary substantially
from one facility to another. In addition to the actual production of goods,
manufacturing facilities generally also have office, warehouse, research, and
associated functions (e.g., Raytheon Company). See ITE code 150. Other uses may
be assessed as industrial: manufacturing as determined by the development
impact fee administrator.
   32.   Industrial: warehousing land use category: A warehouse is primarily
devoted to the storage of materials, but it may also include office and
maintenance areas (ex. Amazon Fulfillment Center). See ITE code 140. Other uses
may be assessed as industrial: warehousing as determined by the development
impact fee administrator.
   33.   Infrastructure improvements plan: A document or series of documents
that meet the requirements set forth in A.R.S. § 9-463.05, including those
adopted pursuant to section
23A-79 to cover any category or combination of categories of necessary public
services.
   34.   Institutional: schools land use category: This land use consists of
schools where bus service may be provided to students living beyond a specified
distance from the school. Public, charter and private schools are included in
this land use. See ITE code 520. Other uses may be assessed as institutional:
schools as determined by the development impact fee administrator.
   35.   Institutional: religious facilities land use category: Proxy land use
is a church. A church is a building in which public worship services are held.
A church typically houses an assembly hall or sanctuary; it may also house
meeting rooms, classrooms, and, occasionally, dining, catering, or party
facilities. Synagogue and mosque are related uses. See ITE code 560. Other uses
may be assessed as institutional: religious as determined by the development
impact fee administrator.
   36.   Institutional medical (nursing home/ assisted living) land use
category: Nursing home is the proxy land use. A nursing home is any facility
whose primary function is to provide care for persons who are unable to care
for themselves. Skilled nurses and nursing aides are present twenty-four (24)
hours a day at these sites. Nursing homes are occupied by residents who do
little or no driving; traffic is primarily generated by employees, visitors,
and deliveries. Assisted living and continuing care retirement community are
related uses. See ITE code 620. Other uses may be assessed as institutional:
medical (nursing home/assisted living) as determined by the development impact
fee administrator.
   37.   Institutional: medical (clinic, hospital): A clinic is any facility
that provides limited diagnostic and outpatient care but is unable to provide
prolonged in-house medical and surgical care. Clinics commonly have lab
facilities, supporting pharmacies, and a wide range of services (compared to
the medical office, which may only have specialized or individual physicians).
Hospital, free-standing emergency room, and medical-dental office building are
related uses. See ITE code 630. Other uses may be assessed as institutional:
medical (clinic, hospital) as determined by the development impact fee
administrator.
   37.   Interim fee schedule: The Tucson development impact fee schedule as
established prior to January 1, 2012, in accordance with then-applicable law
and which shall expire not later than August 1, 2014.
   38.   ITE land use categories: Land use categories found in the Institute of
Transportation Engineers' Trip Generation Manual (9th Edition, 2012).
   39.   Land use assumptions: Projections of changes in land uses, densities,
intensities and population for a service area over a period of at least ten
(10) years as specified in section
23A-77.
   40.   Level of service: A quantitative and/or qualitative measure of a
necessary public service that is to be provided by the city to development in a
particular service area, defined in terms of the relationship between service
capacity and service demand, accessibility, response times, comfort or
convenience of use, or other similar measures or combinations of measures.
Level of service may be measured differently for different categories of
necessary public services, as identified in the applicable infrastructure
improvements plan.
   41.   Necessary public services: Has the meaning prescribed in A.R.S. § 9-
463.05(T)(7).
   42.   Offset: An amount which is subtracted from the overall costs of
providing necessary public services to account for those capital components of
infrastructure or associated debt that have been or will be paid for by a
development through taxes, fees (except for development impact fees), and other
revenue sources, as determined by the city pursuant to section
23A-78.
   43.   Parks and recreational facilities: A category of necessary public
services including but not limited to parks, swimming pools, and related
facilities and equipment located on real property not larger than thirty (30)
acres in area and park facilities larger than thirty (30) acres where such
facilities provide a direct benefit. Parks and recreational facilities do not
include excluded park facilities although parks and recreational facilities may
contain, provide access to, or otherwise support an excluded park facility.
   44.   Plan-based cost per SU: The total future capital costs listed in the
infrastructure improvements plan for a category of necessary public services
divided by the total new equivalent demand units projected in a particular
service area for that category of necessary public services over the same time
period.
   45.   Pledged: Where used with reference to a development impact fee, a
development impact fee shall be considered "pledged" where it was identified by
the city as a source of payment or repayment for financing or debt that was
identified as the source of financing for a necessary public service for which
a development impact fee was assessed pursuant to the then applicable
provisions of A.R.S. § 9-463.05.
   46.   Police facilities: A category of necessary public services, including
vehicles and equipment, that are used by law enforcement agencies to preserve
the public peace, prevent crime, detect and arrest criminal offenders, protect
the rights of persons and property, regulate and control motorized and
pedestrian traffic, train sworn personnel, and/or provide and maintain police
records, vehicles, equipment, and communications systems. Police facilities do
not include vehicles and equipment used to provide administrative services, or
helicopters or airplanes. Police facilities do not include any facility that is
used for training officers from more than one (1) station or substation.
   47.   Qualified professional: A professional engineer, surveyor, financial
analyst, or planner providing services within the scope of that person's
license, education, or experience.
   48.   Residential land use category: Includes all uses which are described
as single unit, single-family, mobile home, 2+ unit, duplex, multi-family, as
well as other types (boats, RVs, vans, etc., occupied as a housing unit or
units that do not fit into the other categories). (Recreational vehicles,
boats, vans, railroad cars, and the like are included only if they are occupied
as a current place of residence.) Other uses may be assessed as residential as
determined by the development impact fee administrator.
   49.   Service area: Any specified area within the boundaries of the city
within which:
   (a)   the city will provide a category of necessary public services to
development at a planned level of service; and
   (b)   within which:
   (i)    a substantial nexus exists between the capital facilities to be
provided and the development to be served, or
   (ii)   in the case of a park facility larger than thirty (30) acres, a
direct benefit exists between the park facilities and the development to be
served, each as prescribed in the infrastructure improvements plan.
   Some or all of the capital facilities providing service to a service area
may be physically located outside of that service area provided that the
required substantial nexus or direct benefit is demonstrated to exist.
   50.   Service unit (SU): A unit of development within a particular category
of development, defined in terms of a standardized measure of the demand that a
unit of development in that category of development generates for necessary
public services in relation to the demand generated by a detached single-family
dwelling unit. For all categories of necessary public services, the SU factor
for a detached single-family dwelling unit is one (1), while the SU factor for
a unit of development within another category of development is represented as
a ratio of the demand for each category of necessary public services typically
generated by that unit as compared to the demand for such services typically
generated by a detached single-family dwelling unit.
   51.   Street facilities: A category of necessary public services including
arterial or collector streets or roads that have been designated on an
officially adopted plan of the city, traffic signals, and rights-of-way and
improvements thereon, including but not limited to, sidewalks, bus pullouts,
grade separations, intersection reconstruction, lane additions, roadway
extensions, bridges, culverts, irrigation, tiling, storm drains, and regional
transportation facilities.
   52.   Subject development: A land area linked by a unified plan of
development, which must be contiguous unless the land area is part of a
development agreement executed in accordance with section
23A-83.
   53.   Substantial nexus: A substantial nexus exists where the demand for
necessary public services that will be generated by an SU can be reasonably
quantified in terms of the burden it will impose on the available capacity of
existing capital facilities, the need it will create for new or expanded
capital facilities, and/or the benefit to the development from those capital
facilities.
   54.   Swimming pool: A public facility primarily designed and/or utilized
for recreational non-competitive functions generally occurring within water,
including, but not limited to, swimming classes, open public swimming sessions,
and recreational league swimming/diving events. The facility may be indoors,
outdoors, or any combination thereof and includes all necessary supporting
amenities.
   55.   Useful life: The period of time in which an asset can reasonably be
expected to be used under normal conditions, whether or not the asset will
continue to be owned and operated by the city over the entirety of such period.
   56.   Vehicle: Any device, structure, or conveyance utilized for
transportation in the course of providing a particular category of necessary
public services at a specified level of service, excluding helicopters and
other aircraft.
(Ord. No. 11203, § 1, 10-9-14, eff. 12-23-14; Ord. No. 11759, § 1, 6-9-20, eff.
8-23-20)
Sec. 23A-74.   Applicability.
   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this article, this article shall apply
to all new development within any service area, except for the development of
any public school or city facility.
   B.   The provisions of this article shall apply to all of the territory
within the corporate limits of the city.
   C.   The development impact fee administrator is authorized to make
determinations regarding the application, administration, and enforcement of
the provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 11203, § 1, 10-9-14, eff. 12-23-14)
DIVISION 2.
FEE CALCULATION
Sec. 23A-75.   Authority for development impact fees.
   A.   Fee report and implementation. The city may assess and collect a
development impact fee for costs of necessary public services, including all
professional services required for the preparation or revision of an
infrastructure improvements plan, fee report, development impact fee, and
required reports or audits conducted pursuant to this article. Development
impact fees shall be subject to the following requirements:
   1.   The city shall develop and adopt a fee report that analyzes and defines
the development impact fees to be charged in each service area for each capital
facility category, based on the infrastructure improvements plan and the plan-
based cost per SU.
   2.   Development impact fees shall be assessed against all new commercial,
residential, and industrial developments, provided that the city may assess
different amounts of development impact fees against specific categories of
development based on the actual burdens and costs that are associated with
providing necessary public services to that category of development. No
development impact fee shall exceed the plan-based cost per SU for any category
of development.
   3.   No development impact fees shall be charged, or credits issued, for any
capital facility that does not fall within one of the categories of necessary
public services for which development impact fees may be assessed.
   4.   Costs for necessary public services made necessary by new development
shall be based on the same level of service provided to existing development in
the same service area. Development impact fees may not be used to provide a
higher level of service to existing development or to meet stricter safety,
efficiency, environmental, or other regulatory standards to the extent that
these are applied to existing capital facilities that are serving existing
development.
   5.   Development impact fees may not be used to pay the city's
administrative, maintenance, or other operating costs.
   6.   Projected interest charges and financing costs can only be included in
development impact fees to the extent they represent principal and/or interest
on the portion of any financing or debt used to finance the construction or
expansion of a capital facility identified in the infrastructure improvements
plan.
   7.   Except for any fees included on interim fee schedules, all development
impact fees charged by the city must be included in a "fee schedule" prepared
pursuant to this article and included in the fee report.
   8.   All development impact fees shall meet the requirements of A.R.S. § 9-
463.05.
   B.   Costs per SU. The fee report shall summarize the costs of capital
facilities necessary to serve new development on a per SU basis as defined and
calculated in the infrastructure improvements plan. The fee report shall also
include all required offsets and shall recommend a development impact fee
structure for adoption by the city. The actual impact fees to be assessed shall
be disclosed and adopted in the form of impact fee schedules.
(Ord. No. 11203, § 1, 10-9-14, eff. 12-23-14)
Sec. 23A-76.   Administration of development impact fees.
   A.   Separate accounts. Development impact fees collected pursuant to this
article shall be placed in separate, interest-bearing accounts for each capital
facility category within each service area.
   B.   Limitations on use of fees. Development impact fees and any interest on
them collected pursuant to this article shall be spent to provide capital
facilities associated with the same category of necessary public services in
the same service area for which they were collected, including costs of
financing or debt used by the city to finance those capital facilities and
other costs authorized by this article that are included in the infrastructure
improvements plan.
   C.   Time limit. Development impact fees collected after July 31, 2014 shall
be used within ten (10) years of the date upon which they were collected for
all categories of necessary public services.
(Ord. No. 11203, § 1, 10-9-14, eff. 12-23-14)
Sec. 23A-77.   Land use assumptions.
   A.   Consistency. The infrastructure improvements plan shall be consistent
with the city's current land use assumptions for each service area and each
category of necessary public services as adopted by the city pursuant to A.R.S.
§ 9-463.05.
   B.   Reviewing the land use assumptions. Prior to the adoption or amendment
of an infrastructure improvements plan, the city shall review and evaluate the
land use assumptions on which the plan is to be based to ensure that the
assumptions within each service area conform to the General Plan.
   C.   Evaluating necessary changes. If the land use assumptions upon which an
infrastructure improvements plan is based have not been updated within the last
five (5) years, the city shall evaluate the land use assumptions to determine
whether changes are necessary. If, after general evaluation, the city
determines that the land use assumptions are still valid, the city shall issue
the report required in section
23A-80.
   D.   Required modifications to land use assumptions. If the city determines
that changes to the land use assumptions are necessary in order to adopt or
amend an infrastructure improvements plan, it shall make such changes as
necessary to the land use assumptions prior to or in conjunction with the
review and approval of the infrastructure improvements plan pursuant to section
23A-80.
(Ord. No. 11203, § 1, 10-9-14, eff. 12-23-14)
Sec. 23A-78.   Infrastructure improvements plan.
   A.   Infrastructure improvements plan contents. The infrastructure
improvements plan shall be developed by qualified professionals and may be
based upon or incorporated within the city's capital improvements plan. The
infrastructure improvements plan shall specify the categories of necessary
public services for which the city will impose a development impact fee, and
shall comply with all statutory requirements of A.R.S. § 9-463.05, including
those in A.R.S. §§ 9-463.05(E)(1) through (7).
   B.   Multiple plans. An infrastructure improvements plan adopted pursuant to
this section may address one (1) or more of the city's categories of necessary
public services in any or all of the city's service areas. Each capital
facility shall be subject to no more than one (1) infrastructure improvements
plan at any given time.
   C.   Reserved capacity. The city may reserve capacity in an infrastructure
improvements plan to serve one (1) or more planned future developments,
including capacity reserved through a development agreement pursuant to section
23A-83. All reservations of existing capacity must be disclosed in the
infrastructure improvements plan at the time it is adopted.
(Ord. No. 11203, § 1, 10-9-14, eff. 12-23-14)
Sec. 23A-79.   Adoption and modification procedures.
   A.   Adopting or amending the infrastructure improvements plan. The
infrastructure improvements plan shall be adopted or amended subject to the
following procedures:
   1.   Major amendments to the infrastructure improvements plan. Except as
provided in section
23A-79(A)(2), the adoption or amendment of an infrastructure improvement plan
shall occur after one (1) or more public hearings according to the following
schedule, and may occur concurrently with the adoption of an update of the
city's land use assumptions as provided in section
23A-77:
   a.   Sixty (60) days before the first public hearing regarding a new or
updated infrastructure improvements plan, the city shall provide public notice
of the hearing and post the infrastructure improvements plan and the underlying
land use assumptions on its website; the city shall additionally make available
to the public the documents used to prepare the infrastructure improvements
plan and underlying land use assumptions and the amount of any proposed changes
to the plan-based cost per SU.
   b.   The city shall conduct a public hearing on the infrastructure
improvements plan and underlying land use assumptions at least thirty (30)
days, but no more than sixty (60) days, before approving or disapproving the
infrastructure improvements plan.
   2.   Minor amendments to the infrastructure improvements plan.
Notwithstanding the other requirements of this section, the city may update the
infrastructure improvements plan and/or its underlying land use assumptions
without a public hearing if all of the following apply:
   a.   The changes in the infrastructure improvements plan and/or the
underlying land use assumptions will not add any new category of necessary
public services to any service area.
   b.   The changes in the infrastructure improvements plan and/or the
underlying land use assumptions will not increase the level of service to be
provided in any service area.
   c.   Based on an analysis of the fee report and the city's adopted
development impact fee schedules, the changes in the infrastructure
improvements plan and/or the underlying land use assumptions would not,
individually or cumulatively with other amendments undertaken pursuant to this
subsection, have caused a development impact fee in any service area to have
been increased by more than five percent (5%) above the development impact fee
that is provided in the current development impact fee schedule.
   d.   At least thirty (30) days prior to the date that the amendment pursuant
to this section is adopted, the city shall post the proposed amendments on the
city website.
   B.   Amendments to the fee report. Any adoption or amendment of a fee report
and fee schedule shall occur according to the following schedule:
   1.   The first public hearing on the fee report must be held at least thirty
(30) days after the adoption or approval of and infrastructure improvements
plan as provided in section
23A-79(A). The city must give at least thirty (30) days' notice prior to the
hearing, provided that this notice may be given on the same day as the approval
or disapproval of the infrastructure improvements plan.
   2.   The city shall make the infrastructure improvements plan and underlying
land use assumptions available to the public on the city's website thirty (30)
days prior to the public hearing described in section
23A-79(B)(1).
   3.   The fee report may be adopted by the city no sooner than thirty (30)
days, and no later than sixty (60) days, after the hearing described in
subparagraph section
23A-79(B)(1).
   4.   The development fee schedules in the fee report adopted pursuant to
this subsection shall become effective seventy-five (75) days after adoption of
the fee report by the city.
(Ord. No. 11203, § 1, 10-9-14, eff. 12-23-14)
Sec. 23A-80.   Timing for the renewal and updating of the infrastructure
improvements plan and the land use assumptions.
   A.   Renewing the infrastructure improvements plan. Except as provided in
section
23A-80(B), not later than every five (5) years the city shall update the
applicable infrastructure improvements plan and fee report related to each
category of necessary public services pursuant to section
23A-79 . The initial five (5) year period begins on the day the infrastructure
improvements plan is adopted. Subsequent five (5) year periods shall be
calculated from the date of the adoption of the infrastructure improvements
plan or the date of the adoption of the fee report, whichever occurs later.
   B.   Determination of no changes. Notwithstanding section
23A-80(A), if the city determines that no changes to an infrastructure
improvements plan, underlying land use assumptions, or fee report are needed,
the city may elect to continue the existing infrastructure improvements plan
and fee report without amendment by providing notice as follows:
   1.   Notice of the determination shall be published at least one hundred
eighty (180) days prior to the end of the five (5) year period described in
section
23A-80(A).
   2.   The notice shall identify the infrastructure improvements plan and fee
report that shall continue in force without amendment.
   3.   The notice shall provide a map and description of the service areas
covered by the infrastructure improvements plan and fee report.
   4.   The notice shall identify an address to which any resident of the city
may submit, within sixty (60) days, a written request that the city update the
infrastructure improvements plan, underlying land use assumptions, and/or fee
report and the reasons and basis for the request.
   C.   Response to comments. The city shall consider and respond within thirty
(30) days to any timely requests submitted pursuant to section
23A-80(B)(4).
(Ord. No. 11203, § 1, 10-9-14, eff. 12-23-14)
Sec. 23A-81.   Collection of development impact fees.
   A.   Collection. Development impact fees, together with administrative
charges assessed pursuant to section
23A-81(A)(4), shall be calculated and collected prior to and as a condition of
the issuance of permission to commence development; specifically:
   1.   Unless otherwise specified pursuant to a development agreement adopted
pursuant to section
23A-83, development impact fees shall be paid prior to and as a condition of
the issuance of a building permit according to the current development impact
fee schedule for the applicable service area(s) as adopted pursuant to this
article, or according to any other development impact fee schedule as
authorized in this article.
   2.   No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued if a
development impact fee is not paid as directed in the previous paragraphs.
   3.   If the building permit is for a change in the type of building use, an
increase in square footage, or a change to land use, the development impact fee
shall be assessed on the additional service units resulting from the expansion
or change, and following the development impact fee schedule applicable to any
new use type.
   4.   For issued permits that expire or are voided, development impact fees
and administrative charges shall be as follows:
   a.   If the original permittee is seeking to renew an expired or voided
permit, and the development impact fees paid for such development have not been
refunded, the permittee shall pay the difference between any development impact
fees paid at the time the permit was issued and those in the fee schedule at
the time the permit is reissued or renewed.
   b.   If a new or renewed permit for the same development is being sought by
someone other than the original permittee, the new permit applicant shall pay
the full development impact fees specified in the fee schedule in effect at the
time that the permits are reissued or renewed. If the original permittee has
assigned its rights under the permits to the new permit applicant, the new
permit applicant shall pay development impact fees as if it were the original
permittee.
   5.   Administrative charges. The city shall initially assess a $50
administrative charge to cover administrative expenses. The administrative
charge may not be paid with development impact fee credits. The administrative
charge shall be in addition to the amount of the development impact fee that is
due and shall be paid at the same time as the fee. The administrative charge
may be amended to reflect the actual administrative costs by the development
impact fee administrator. Any amendment shall be adopted as a development
standard with the approval of the mayor and council.
   B.   Exceptions. Development impact fees shall not be owed under any of the
following conditions:
   1.   Development impact fees have been paid for the development and the
permit that triggered the collection of the development impact fees has not
expired or been voided.
   2.   The approval that triggers the collection of development impact fees
involves modifications to existing residential or non-residential development
that do not:
   a.   add new SUs,
   b.   add square footage to existing residential development in existence for
at least ten (10) years and which does not constitute a new dwelling unit or,
   c.   increase the impact of existing SUs on existing or future capital
facilities or,
   d.   change the land-use type of the existing development to a different
category of development for which a higher development impact fee would have
been due.
To the extent that any modification does not meet the requirements of this
paragraph, the development impact fee due shall be the difference between the
development impact fee that was or would have been due on the existing
development and the development impact fee that is due on the development as
modified.
   3.   The approval that triggers the collection of development impact fees
involves construction of residential or nonresidential development on a site
with a previously approved demolition permit in final status within five (5)
years prior to application. The development impact fee due shall be the
difference between the development impact fee that was or would have been due
on the demolished structures and the development fee that is due on the new or
modified development.
   4.   A governmental entity controls and directs the development for a
governmental purpose on property owned by a governmental entity.
   C.   Temporary exemptions from development impact fee schedules. New
developments in the city shall be temporarily exempt from increases in
development impact fees that result from the adoption of new or modified
development impact fee schedules as follows:
   1.   Residential uses (other than multifamily). On or after the day that the
first building permit is issued for a residential development (other than
multifamily), the city shall, at the permittee's request, provide the permittee
with an applicable development impact fee schedule, as established by the prior
adoption of the fee schedule by the mayor and council, that shall be in force
for a period of twenty-four (24) months beginning on the day that the first
building permit is issued, and which shall expire at the end of the first
business day of the 25th month after the first building permit is issued.
During the effective period of the applicable development impact fee schedule,
any building permit issued for the same residential development shall not be
subject to any new or modified development impact fee schedule.
   2.   All other uses. On or after the city's approval of a site plan or final
subdivision plat for an industrial: light industrial, industrial: warehousing,
industrial: manufacturing, commercial/retail: general, commercial/retail: free
standing discount store, general office, institutional: schools, institutional:
religious facilities, institutional: medical (nursing home/assisted living),
institutional: medical (clinic, hospital), hotel or multifamily development,
the city shall, at the permittee's request, provide the permittee with an
applicable development impact fee schedule, as established by the prior
adoption of the fee schedule by the mayor and council, that shall be in force
for a period of twenty-four (24) months beginning on the day the site plan or
final subdivision plat was approved, and which shall expire at the end of the
first business day of the 25th month after the site plan or final subdivision
plat was approved. During the effective period of the applicable development
impact fee schedule, any building permit issued for the same development shall
not be subject to any new or modified development impact fee schedule.
   3.   Changes to development plans and final subdivision plats. During the
twenty-four (24) month period referred to in section
23A-81(C)(1) or (2), if changes are made to a development's site plan or final
subdivision plat that will increase the number of service units, the city may
assess any new or modified development impact fees against the additional
service units. If the city reduces the amount of an applicable development
impact fee during the twenty-four (24) month period referred to in section
23A-81(C)(1) or (2), the city shall assess the lower development impact fee.
   D.   Option to pursue special fee determination. Where a development is of a
type that does not closely fit within a particular category of development
appearing on an adopted development impact fee schedule, or where a development
has unique characteristics such that the actual burdens and costs associated
with providing necessary public services to that development will differ
substantially from that associated with other developments in a specified
category of development, the city may require the applicant to provide the
development impact fee administrator with an alternative development impact fee
analysis. Based on a projection of the actual burdens and costs that will be
associated with the development, the alternative development impact fee
analysis may propose a unique fee for the development based on the application
of an appropriate SU factor to the applicable plan-based cost per SU, or may
propose that the development be covered under the development impact fee
schedule governing a different and more analogous category of development. The
development impact fee administrator shall review the alternative impact fee
analysis and shall make a determination as to the development impact fee to be
charged. The decision shall be appealable pursuant to section
23A-84. The development impact fee administrator may require the applicant to
pay an administrative fee to cover the actual costs of reviewing the special
fee determination application.
   E.   Waivers. Development impact fees shall not be waived except in
accordance with the provisions set forth in section
23A-81(E)(1) and (2) below. When development impact fees are waived, the city
shall transmit non-development impact fee funds to cover the waivers into the
appropriate development impact fee account.
   1.   Affordable housing: Any waiver of development impact fees for eligible
affordable housing providers, including any waiver pursuant to an affordable
housing program approved by the Mayor and Council under which the city provides
a subsidy for eligible affordable housing projects, requires the prior approval
of the Mayor and Council.
   2.   Development agreements: Through a development agreement between the
city and the developer of a property, partial or full development impact fee
waivers may be granted for projects that provide a public benefit to the city
and result in a net financial benefit to the city. Development agreements
entered into under this section shall comply with the requirements of section
23A-83.
   F.   Mixed use incentive. New developments in the city shall be eligible for
reduced streets facilities development impact fees if in compliance with the
criteria below, as determined by the Impact Fee Administrator or their designee
during the development package review process. Developments which utilize this
incentive shall be subject to the fees in Section 23A-91 Table 3 - "Mixed Use
Incentive Fee" Rates. The purpose of this incentive is to encourage development
that increases commuting by transit, bicycle, and walking. This incentive
applies to development that meets the criteria below, which will result in
fewer vehicle trips and less demand on the street facilities system.
   1.   Transit access (required): Development must be located close to
transit. The development boundary must be within one-quarter mile walking
distance to a transit stop.
   2.   Residential proximity (one of the following two is required):
   a.   Development must contain a mix of uses, including both residential and
nonresidential. A minimum ratio of one (1) dwelling unit per 500 square feet of
nonresidential development must be provided.
   b.   Development must be located close to high-density residential. A
minimum of 2,000 units must be located within one-half mile of the development
boundary.
   3.   Multimodal options (one of the following two is required):
   a.   Development must be located close to planned or constructed publicly-
designated bicycle boulevard or multi-use path. The development boundary must
be within one-quarter mile walking distance to said boulevard or path.
   b.   Development must provide additional bicycle parking spaces, bicycle
connections and car share facilities. Bicycle parking must be provided at three
(3) times the standard rate. Internal bicycle circulation connections must be
provided from every public street to the buildings and bicycle parking areas on
the development site. Car share spaces must be provided at the following rates:
 
Number of Residential Units Number of Required Car Share Spaces
0-24                        0
25-99                       1
100+                        2, plus 1 for every 100 dwelling units over 100
 
 
Number of Parking Spaces for Number of Required Car Share Spaces
Nonresidential Uses
0-49                         0
50-99                        1
100+                         2, plus 1 for every 100 parking spaces over
                             100
 
(Ord. No. 11203, § 1, 10-9-14, eff. 12-23-14; Ord. No. 11624, § 1, 2-20-19,
eff. 3-22-19; Ord. No. 11759, § 1, 6-9-20, eff. 8-23-20; Ord. No. 11919, § 1,
3-22-22, eff. 4-21-22)
Sec. 23A-82.   Development impact fee credits and credit agreements.
   A.   Eligibility of capital facility. All development impact fee credits
must meet the following requirements:
   1.   One of the following is true:
   a.   The capital facility, or the financial contribution toward a capital
facility that will be provided by the developer and for which a credit will be
issued, must be identified in an adopted infrastructure improvements plan and
fee report as a capital facility for which a development impact fee was
assessed; or
   b.   The applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that,
given the class and type of improvement, the subject capital facility should
have been included in the infrastructure improvements plan in lieu of a
different capital facility that was included in the infrastructure improvements
plan and for which a development impact fee was assessed. If the subject
capital facility is determined to be eligible for a credit in this manner, the
city shall amend the infrastructure improvements plan to:
   i.   include the subject replacement facility, and
   ii.   delete the capital facility that will be replaced.
   2.   Credits shall not be available for any infrastructure provided by a
developer if the cost of the infrastructure will be repaid to the developer by
the city through another agreement or mechanism. To the extent that the
developer will be paid or reimbursed by the city for any contribution, payment,
construction, or dedication from any city funding source including an agreement
to reimburse the developer with future collected development impact fees
pursuant to section
23A-83, any credits claimed by the developer shall be:
   a.   deducted from any amounts to be paid or reimbursed by the city, or
   b.   reduced by the amount of the payment or reimbursement.
   B.   Eligibility of subject development. To be eligible for a credit, the
subject development must be located within the service area of the eligible
capital facility.
   C.   Calculation of credits. Credits will be based on that portion of the
costs for an eligible capital facility identified in the adopted infrastructure
improvements plan for which a development fee was assessed pursuant to the fee
report. If the gross impact fee for a particular category of necessary public
service is adopted at an amount lower than the plan-based cost per SU, the
amount of any credit shall be reduced in proportion to the difference between
the plan-based cost per SU and the gross impact fee adopted. A credit shall not
exceed the actual costs the applicant incurred in providing the eligible
capital facility.
   D.   Allocation of credits. Before credits can be issued to a subject
development (or portion of it), credits must be allocated to that development
as follows:
   1.   The developer and the city must execute a credit agreement including
all of the following:
   a.   The total amount of the credits resulting from provision of an eligible
capital facility.
   b.   The estimated number of SUs to be served within the subject
development.
   c.   The method by which the credit values will be distributed within the
subject development.
   2.   It is the responsibility of the developer to request allocation of
development impact fee credits through an application for a credit agreement
(which may be part of a development agreement entered into pursuant to section
23A-83).
   3.   If a building permit is issued, and a development impact fee is paid
prior to execution of a credit agreement for the subject development, no
credits may be allocated retroactively to that permit or connection. Credits
may be allocated to any remaining permits for the subject development in
accordance with this article.
   4.   If the entity that provides an eligible capital facility sells or
relinquishes a development (or portion of it) that it owns or controls prior to
execution of a credit agreement or development agreement, credits resulting
from the eligible capital facility will only be allocated to the development if
the entity legally assigns such rights and responsibilities to its successor(s)
in interest for the subject development.
   5.   If multiple entities jointly provide an eligible capital facility, both
entities must enter into a single credit agreement with the city, and any
request for the allocation of credit within the subject development must be
made jointly by the entities that provided the eligible capital facility.
   6.   Credits may only be reallocated from or within a subject development
with the city's approval of an amendment to an executed credit agreement,
subject to the following conditions:
   a.   The entity that executed the original agreement with the city, or its
legal successor in interest and the entity that currently controls the subject
development are parties to the request for reallocation.
   b.   The reallocation proposal does not change the value of any credits
already issued for the subject development.
   7.   A credit agreement may authorize the allocation of credits to a non-
contiguous parcel only if all of the following conditions are met:
   a.   The entity that executed the original agreement with the city or its
legal successor in interest, the entity that currently controls the subject
development, and the entity that controls the non-contiguous parcel are parties
to the request for reallocation.
   b.   The reallocation proposal does not change the value of any credits
already issued for the subject development.
   c.   The non-contiguous parcel is in the same service area as that served by
the eligible capital facility.
   d.   The non-contiguous parcel receives a necessary public service from the
eligible capital facility.
   e.   The credit agreement specifically states the value of the credits to be
allocated to each parcel and/or SU, or establishes a mechanism for future
determination of the value of the credits.
   f.   The credit agreement does not involve the transfer of credits to or
from any property subject to a development agreement.
   8.   Public funding credits. Credits for public funding sources shall be
provided as follows:
   Where all or a portion of the construction of a development is directly
funded with appropriated public funds duly authorized by a local, state or
federal government, a public funding credit shall be deducted from the
development impact fee calculated in the fee schedules contained in section
23A-90, or in the calculation of the fee pursuant to section
23A-81(D), prior to the assessment and payment of the fee. The public funding
credit shall be a percentage of the development impact fee and shall apply
equally to all development impact fees. The percentage shall be determined
based upon the amount of public monies as a percentage of the total cost of the
construction of the development project utilizing public funding. The public
funding credit shall not apply to guaranteed loans, tax credits or other
indirect government financing.
   E.   Credit agreement. Credits shall only be issued pursuant to a credit
agreement that conforms to the requirements set forth in section
23A-82(D). The development impact fee administrator is authorized by this
article to enter into a credit agreement with the controlling entity of a
subject development, subject to the following:
   1.   The developer requesting the credit agreement shall provide all
information requested by the city to allow it to determine the value of the
credit to be applied.
   2.   An application for a credit agreement shall be submitted to the city by
the developer within one (1) year of the date on which ownership or control of
the capital facility passes to the city.
   3.   The developer shall submit a draft credit agreement to the development
impact fee administrator for review in the form provided to the applicant by
the city. The draft credit agreement shall include, at a minimum, all of the
following information and supporting documentation:
   a.   A legal description and map depicting the location of the subject
development for which the credits are being applied. The map shall depict the
location of the capital facilities that have been or will be provided.
   b.   An estimate of the total SUs that will be developed within the subject
development depicted on the map and described in the legal description.
   c.   A list of the capital facilities associated physical attributes, and
the related costs as stated in the infrastructure improvements plan.
   d.   Documentation showing the date of acceptance by the city, if the
capital facilities have already been provided.
   e.   The total amount of the credits to be applied within the subject
development and the calculations leading to the total amount of the credits.
   f.   The credits to be applied to each SU within the subject development for
each category of necessary public services.
   4.   The credit agreement shall be approved by the development impact fee
administrator prior to its execution. The city's determination of the credits
to be allocated is final.
   5.   Upon execution of the credit agreement by the city and the applicant,
credits shall be deemed allocated to the subject development.
   6.   Any amendment to a previously approved credit agreement must be
initiated within two (2) years of the city's final acceptance of the eligible
capital facility for which the amendment is requested.
   7.   Any credit agreement approved as part of a development agreement shall
be amended in accordance with the terms of the development agreement and
section
23A-83.
   F.   Issuance of credits. Credits allocated pursuant to section
23A-82(D) may be issued and applied toward the gross impact fees due from a
development, subject to the following conditions:
   1.   Credits issued for an eligible capital facility may only be applied to
the development impact fee due for the applicable category of necessary public
services, and may not be applied to any fee due for another category of
necessary public services.
   2.   Credits shall only be issued when the eligible capital facility from
which the credits were derived has been accepted by the city or when adequate
security for the completion of the eligible capital facility has been provided
in accordance with all terms of an executed development agreement.
   3.   Where credits have been issued pursuant to section
23A-82(F)(2), an impact fee due at the time a building permit is issued shall
be reduced by the credits stated in or calculated from the executed credit
agreement. Where credits have not yet been issued, the gross impact fee shall
be paid in full, and a refund of the credits shall be due when the developer
demonstrates compliance with section
23A-82(F)(2) in a written request to the city.
   4.   Credits, once issued, may not be rescinded or reallocated to another
permit or parcel, except that credits may be released for reuse on the same
subject development if a building permit for which the credits were issued has
expired or been voided and is otherwise eligible for a refund under section
23A-85(A)(2)(a).
   5.   Notwithstanding the other provisions of this section, credits issued
prior to January 1, 2012, may only be used for the subject development for
which they were issued. The credits may be transferred to a new owner of all or
part of the subject development in proportion to the percentage of ownership in
the subject development to be held by the new owner.
(Ord. No. 11203, § 1, 10-9-14, eff. 12-23-14)
Sec. 23A-83.   Development agreements.
   A.   General. Development agreements containing provisions regarding
development impact fees, development impact fee credits, and/or disbursement of
revenues from development impact fee accounts shall comply with the
requirements of this section.
   B.   Development agreement required. A development agreement is required to
authorize any of the following:
   1.   To issue credits prior to the city's acceptance of an eligible capital
facility.
   2.   To allocate credits to a parcel that is not contiguous with the subject
development and that does not meet the requirements of section
23A-82(D)(7).
   3.   To reimburse the developer of an eligible capital facility using funds
from development impact fee accounts.
   4.   To allocate different credit amounts per SU to different parcels within
a subject development.
   5.   For a single family residential dwelling unit, to allow development
impact fees to be paid at a later time than the issuance of a building permit
as provided in section
23A-83(H).
   C.   General requirements. All development agreements shall be prepared and
executed in accordance with A.R.S. § 9-500.05 and any applicable requirements
of the City Code. Except where specifically modified by this section, all
provisions of section
23A-82  shall apply to any credit agreement that is authorized as part of a
development agreement.
   D.   Early issuance of credits. A development agreement may authorize the
issuance of credits prior to acceptance of an eligible capital facility by the
city when the development agreement specifically states the form and value of
the security (i.e. bond, letter of credit, etc.) to be provided to the city
prior to issuance of any credits. The city shall determine the acceptable form
and value of the security to be provided.
   E.   Non-contiguous allocation of credits. A development agreement may
authorize the allocation of credits to a non-contiguous parcel only if all of
the following conditions are met:
   1.   The non-contiguous parcel is in the same service area as that served by
the eligible capital facility.
   2.   The non-contiguous parcel receives a necessary public service from the
eligible capital facility.
   3.   The development agreement specifically states the value of the credits
to be allocated to each parcel and/or SU, or establishes a mechanism for future
determination of the credits.
   F.   Uneven allocation of credits. The development agreement must specify
how credits will be allocated amongst different parcels on a per-SU basis, if
the credits are not to be allocated evenly. If the development agreement is
silent on this topic, all credits will be allocated evenly amongst all parcels
on a per-SU basis.
   G.   Use of reimbursements. Funds reimbursed to developers from impact fee
accounts for construction of an eligible capital facility must be utilized in
accordance with applicable law for the use of city funds in construction or
acquisition of capital facilities, including A.R.S. § 34-201, et seq.
   H.   Deferral of fees. A development agreement may provide for the deferral
of payment of development impact fees for a residential development beyond the
issuance of a building permit; provided that a development impact fee may not
be paid later than fifteen (15) days after the issuance of the certificate of
occupancy for that dwelling unit. The development agreement shall provide for
the value of any deferred development impact fees to be supported by
appropriate security, including a surety bond, letter of credit, or cash bond.
   I.   Waiver of fees. If the city agrees to waive any development impact fees
assessed on development in a development agreement, the city shall reimburse
the appropriate development impact fee account for the amount that was waived.
   J.   No obligation. Nothing in this section obligates the city to enter into
any development agreement or to authorize any type of credit agreement
permitted by this section.
(Ord. No. 11203, § 1, 10-9-14, eff. 12-23-14)
Sec. 23A-84.   Appeals.
   A.    Mayor and council appeal. A development impact fee or credit
determination by the development impact fee administrator may be appealed in
accordance with the mayor and council appeal procedure set forth in the Unified
Development Code (UDC),
Chapter 23B, Section 3.9.2, and in conformance with the procedures set forth in
this section.
   B.   Limited scope. An appeal shall be limited to disputes regarding the
calculation of the development impact fees or credits for a specific
development and/or permit and calculation of SU's for the development.
   C.   Form of appeal. Appeals shall be filed in writing with the city clerk's
office with a copy to the development impact fee administrator, within fourteen
(14) days of a decision and no later than fourteen (14) days after the
determination of the final development impact fee to be charged or credit to be
issued for a project.
   D.   Final decision. The mayor and council's decision regarding the appeal
is final.
   E.   Fees during pendency. Notwithstanding UDC,
Chapter 23B, Section 3.9.2.B, building permits may be issued during the
pendency of an appeal if the applicant pays the full development impact fee at
the time the appeal is filed.   
   Upon final disposition of an appeal, the development impact fee shall be
adjusted in accordance with the decision rendered and a refund shall be made,
if applicable.
   F.   Takings appeal. Any assertion that the assessment of the development
impact fee on an individual development constitutes an unconstitutional taking
may be appealed in accordance with the takings appeal procedure pursuant to
UDC,
Chapter 23B, Section 3.9.3. Building permits may be issued during the pendency
of a takings appeal as set forth under section
23A-84(E) above.
   G.   Interpretations. Any dispute or challenge to the interpretation of this
article shall be determined by the development impact fee administrator.
(Ord. No. 11203, § 1, 10-9-14, eff. 12-23-14)
Sec. 23A-85.   Refunds of development impact fees.
   A.   Refunds. A refund (or partial refund) will be paid to any current owner
of property within the city who submits a written request to the development
impact fee administrator and demonstrates that:
   1.   The permit that triggered the collection of the development impact fee
has expired or been voided prior to the commencement of the development for
which the permit was issued and the development impact fees collected have not
been expended, encumbered, or pledged for the repayment of financing or debt;
or
   2.   The owner of the subject real property or its predecessor in interest
paid a development impact fee for the applicable capital facility on or after
August 1, 2014, and one of the following conditions exists:
   a.   The capital facility designed to serve the subject real property has
been constructed, has the capacity to serve the subject real property and any
development for which there is reserved capacity, and the service which was to
be provided by that capital facility has not been provided to the subject real
property from that capital facility or from any other infrastructure.
   b.   After collecting the fee to construct a capital facility the city fails
to complete construction of the capital facility within the time period
identified in the infrastructure improvements plan, as it may be amended, and
the corresponding service is otherwise unavailable to the subject real property
from that capital facility or any other infrastructure.
   c.   For a category of necessary public services, any part of a development
impact fee is not spent within ten (10) years of the city's receipt of the
development impact fee.
   d.   The development impact fee was calculated and collected for the
construction cost to provide all or a portion of a specific capital facility
serving the subject real property and the actual construction costs for the
capital facility are less than the construction costs projected in the
infrastructure improvements plan by a factor of ten percent (10%) or more. In
such event, the current owner of the subject real property shall, upon request
as set forth in this section, be entitled to a refund for the difference
between the amounts of the development impact fee charged for and attributable
to such construction cost and the amount the development impact fee would have
been calculated to be if the actual construction cost had been included in the
fee report. The refund contemplated by this subsection shall relate only to the
costs specific to the construction of the applicable capital facility and shall
not include any related design, administrative, or other costs not directly
incurred for construction of the capital facility that are included in the
development impact fee as permitted by A.R.S. § 9-463.05.
   B.   Earned interest. A refund of a development impact fee shall include any
interest actually earned on the refunded portion of the development impact fee
by the city from the date of collection to the date of refund. All refunds
shall be made to the record owner of the property at the time the refund is
paid.
   C.   Refund to government. If a development impact fee was paid by a
governmental entity, any refund shall be paid to that governmental entity.
(Ord. No. 11203, § 1, 10-9-14, eff. 12-23-14)
Sec. 23A-86.   Oversight of development impact fee program.
   A.   Annual report. Within ninety (90) days of the end of each fiscal year,
the city shall file with the city clerk an unaudited annual report accounting
for the collection and use of the fees for each service area and shall post the
report on its website in accordance with A.R.S. § 9-463.05 (N) and (O).
   B.   Biennial audit. In addition to the annual report described in section
23A-86(A), the city shall provide for a biennial, certified audit of the city's
land use assumptions, infrastructure improvements plan and development impact
fees.
   1.   An audit pursuant to this subsection shall be conducted by one (1) or
more qualified professionals who are not employees or officials of the city and
who did not prepare the infrastructure improvements plan.
   2.   The audit shall review the collection and expenditures of development
fees for each project in the plan and provide written comments describing the
amount of development impact fees assessed, collected, and spent on capital
facilities.
   3.   The audit shall describe the level of service in each service area, and
evaluate any inequities in implementing the infrastructure improvements plan or
imposing the development impact fee.
   4.   The city shall post the findings of the audit on the city's website and
shall conduct a public hearing on the audit within sixty (60) days of the
release of the audit to the public.
   5.   For purposes of this section a certified audit shall mean any audit
authenticated by one (1) or more of the qualified professionals conducting the
audit pursuant to section
23A-86(B)(1).
(Ord. No. 11203, § 1, 10-9-14, eff. 12-23-14)
DIVISION 3.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 23A-87.   Miscellaneous provisions.
   A.   Other development requirements. Nothing in this article shall restrict
the city from requiring the construction of reasonable project improvements
required to serve the development project, whether or not such improvements are
of a type for which credits are available under section
23A-82 above.
   B.   Record keeping. The development impact fee administrator shall maintain
accurate records of the development impact fees paid and any other matters that
the city deems appropriate or necessary to the accurate accounting of such
fees. Records shall be available for review by the public during normal
business hours and with reasonable advance notice. Records pertaining to
individual developments shall be maintained for a minimum of ten (10) years
from the date the development impact fee is paid or credits are issued, or for
three (3) years after the completion of the development, whichever is later.
   C.   Amendment of development impact fee assessments. A development impact
fee may be amended after it has been assessed and paid where there is an error
or mistake in the calculation of the fee or applicable credits, or where the
actual cost of credits changes after the calculation of credits. Any amounts
overpaid by an applicant shall be refunded by the development impact fee
administrator to the applicant within thirty (30) days after the acceptance of
the recalculated amount. Any amounts underpaid by the applicant shall be paid
to the development impact fee administrator within thirty (30) days after the
acceptance of the recalculated amount. In the case of an underpayment to the
development impact fee administrator, the city may not issue any additional
permits or approvals for the project for which the impact fee was previously
underpaid until such underpayment is corrected, and if amounts owed to the city
are not paid within such thirty (30) day period, the city may also rescind any
permits issued in reliance on the previous payment of such impact fee.
(Ord. No. 11203, § 1, 10-9-14, eff. 12-23-14)
Sec. 23A-88.   Severability.
   If a provision of this article or its application to any person or
circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions
or applications of the article that can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this article are
severable.
(Ord. No. 11203, § 1, 10-9-14, eff. 12-23-14)
Sec. 23A-89.   Violation.
   Furnishing false information on any matter relating to the administration of
this article, including without limitation the furnishing of false information
regarding the expected size, use, or impacts from a proposed development, shall
be a violation of this article.
(Ord. No. 11203, § 1, 10-9-14, eff. 12-23-14)
DIVISION 4. DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE SCHEDULES AND EFFECTIVE DATES
Sec. 23A-90.   Effective dates.
   For the period from August 18, 2025 through and including June 30, 2027
(years one and two), development impact fees shall be assessed and paid at the
"phase-in" rates represented in Table 1 of Section
23A-91. Commencing July 1, 2027 through and including June 30, 2030 (years
three through five), development impact fees shall be fully assessed and paid
thereafter at the "full adopted" fee rates represented in Table 2 of Section
23A-91. Nothing in this section or any other provision of this article shall
prohibit the mayor and council from moving the implementation date of the "full
adopted" fee rates to an earlier or later effective date. Any such amendment to
the implementation date shall not be deemed to be an increase to the
development impact fees as provided in this article, as mayor and council
expressly adopt and approve the "full adopted" fee rates represented in Table 2
of Section
23A-91.
(Ord. No. 11203, § 1, 10-9-14, eff. 12-23-14; Ord. No. 11375, § 1, 6-21-16;
Ord. No. 11471, § 1, 6-20-17; Ord. No. 11565, § 1, 6-19-18; Ord. No. 11632, §
1, 3-19-19; Ord. 11717, § 1, 12-17-19; Ord. No. 11759, § 1, 6-9-20, eff. 7-1-
21; Ord. No. 11833, § 1, 5-4-21; Ord. No. 12169, § 1, 6-3-25)
Sec. 23A-91.   Fee schedule tables.
   CITY OF TUCSON - Development Impact Fee Schedules
Note 1:    For the residential land use categories (single-family residential,
condo/townhomes, multi-family residential/apartments), fees shown are per
residential unit. For the non-residential land use categories (retail, office,
industrial), fees shown are per one thousand (1,000) square feet of building
area.
Note 2:    The tables do not include an administrative fee.
TABLE 1 - "PHASE-IN" FEE RATES*
*Assessed Beginning August 18, 2025 Through and Including June 30, 2027 (years
one and two) Unless the "Phase-In" Period is Changed by the Mayor and Council
Pursuant to Section 23A-90.
"PHASE-IN" FEE RATES TABLES
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
Fees are per housing unit
   Year 1 (August 18, 2025 - June 30, 2026)
Size of                               Proposed               Proposed Phase-In
Housing Unit Demand Unit Proposed P&R Police   Proposed Fire Streets  (80%)
(Sq. Ft.)
Size of                                Proposed Proposed Proposed Phase-In
Housing Unit Demand Unit  Proposed P&R Police   Fire     Streets  (80%)
(Sq. Ft.)
750 or Less  Housing Unit $1,033       $221     $191     $1,680   $3,125
751 to 1,250 Housing Unit $1,609       $344     $298     $2,566   $4,818
1,251 to     Housing Unit $2,145       $458     $398     $3,374   $6,374
1,750
1,751 to     Housing Unit $2,533       $542     $470     $3,965   $7,509
2,250
2,251 to     Housing Unit $2,830       $605     $526     $4,429   $8,390
2,750
2,751 to     Housing Unit $3,089       $660     $573     $4,811   $9,133
3,250
3,251 to     Housing Unit $3,298       $705     $612     $5,135   $9,750
3,750
3,751 or     Housing Unit $3,486       $745     $647     $5,418   $10,295
More
 
   Year 2 (July 1, 2026 - June 30, 2027)
Size of                               Proposed               Proposed Phase-In
Housing Unit Demand Unit Proposed P&R Police   Proposed Fire Streets  (90%)
(Sq. Ft.)
Size of                                Proposed Proposed Proposed Phase-In
Housing Unit Demand Unit  Proposed P&R Police   Fire     Streets  (90%)
(Sq. Ft.)
750 or Less  Housing Unit $1,162       $248     $215     $1,890   $3,515
751 to 1,250 Housing Unit $1,810       $387     $336     $2,887   $5,420
1,251 to     Housing Unit $2,413       $516     $447     $3,795   $7,171
1,750
1,751 to     Housing Unit $2,849       $609     $528     $4,460   $8,447
2,250
2,251 to     Housing Unit $3,184       $680     $591     $4,982   $9,438
2,750
2,751 to     Housing Unit $3,475       $743     $644     $5,413   $10,274
3,250
3,251 to     Housing Unit $3,710       $793     $689     $5,777   $10,968
3,750
3,751 or     Housing Unit $3,921       $838     $728     $6,095   $11,582
More
 
   NON-RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
   Fees are per demand unit
   Year 1 (August 18, 2025 - June 30, 2026)
Type ITE Code Demand Unit Proposed P&R Proposed Proposed Proposed Phase- In
                                       Police   Fire     Streets  (80%)
Type           ITE Code Demand    Proposed Proposed Proposed Proposed Phase- In
                        Unit      P&R      Police   Fire     Streets  (80%)
Industrial:             1,000 sq.
Light          110      ft.       $154     $104     $90      $1,236   $1,584
Industrial
Industrial:    140      1,000 sq. $185     $102     $88      $1,206   $1,580
Manufacturing           ft.
Industrial:    150      1,000 sq. $33      $36      $31      $434     $534
Warehousing             ft.
Commercial/             1,000 sq.
Retail :       820      ft.       $259     $654     $570     $5,172   $6,655
General*
Commercial/
Retail :                1,000 sq.
Freestanding   815      ft.       $267     $953     $830     $7,527   $9,577
Discount
Store*
General Office 710      1,000 sq. $318     $232     $202     $2,754   $3,506
                        ft.
Institutional: 520      1,000 sq. $90      $276     $241     $3,273   $3,880
Schools                 ft.
Institutional:          1,000 sq.
Religious      560      ft.       $135     $98      $86      $1,164   $1,482
Facilities
Institutional:
Medical        620      1,000 sq. $199     $94      $82      $1,112   $1,486
(Nursing Hm./           ft.
Asstd. Living)
Institutional:
Medical        630      1,000 sq. $264     $532     $463     $6,303   $7,562
(Clinic,                ft.
Hospital)
Hotel*         310      Room      $68      $224     $195     $1,770   $2,257
*Based on the Impact Fee Report, the proposed fees for these development types
have already been reduced and will not be subject to a Phase-In schedule
 
   Year 2 (July 1, 2026 - June 30, 2027)
Type ITE Code Demand Unit Proposed P&R Proposed Proposed Proposed Phase- In
                                       Police   Fire     Streets  (90%)
Type           ITE Code Demand    Proposed Proposed Proposed Proposed Phase- In
                        Unit      P&R      Police   Fire     Streets  (90%)
Industrial:             1,000 sq.
Light          110      ft.       $173     $117     $102     $1,391   $1,782
Industrial
Industrial:    140      1,000 sq. $208     $114     $99      $1,356   $1,778
Manufacturing           ft.
Industrial:    150      1,000 sq. $37      $41      $35      $489     $601
Warehousing             ft.
Commercial/             1,000 sq.
Retail :       820      ft.       $259     $654     $570     $5,172   $6,655
General*
Commercial/
Retail :                1,000 sq.
Freestanding   815      ft.       $267     $953     $830     $7,527   $9,577
Discount
Store*
General Office 710      1,000 sq. $358     $261     $228     $3,098   $3,945
                        ft.
Institutional: 520      1,000 sq. $102     $311     $271     $3,682   $4,365
Schools                 ft.
Institutional:          1,000 sq.
Religious      560      ft.       $152     $110     $96      $1,310   $1,688
Facilities
Institutional:
Medical        620      1,000 sq. $224     $105     $92      $1,251   $1,672
(Nursing Hm./           ft.
Asstd. Living)
Institutional:
Medical        630      1,000 sq. $297     $599     $521     $7,091   $8,508
(Clinic,                ft.
Hospital)
Hotel*         310      Room      $68      $224     $195     $1,770   $2,257
*Based on the Impact Fee Report, the proposed fees for these development types
have already been reduced and will not be subject to a Phase-In schedule
 
   MIXED USE INCENTIVE
   RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
   Fees are per Housing Unit
   Year 1 (August 18, 2025 - June 30, 2026)
Size of                               Proposed               Proposed Phase-In
Housing Unit Demand Unit Proposed P&R Police   Proposed Fire Streets  (80%)
(Sq. Ft.)
Size of                                Proposed Proposed Proposed Phase-In
Housing Unit Demand Unit  Proposed P&R Police   Fire     Streets  (80%)
(Sq. Ft.)
750 or less  Housing Unit $1,033       $221     $191     $1,449   $2,894
751 to 1,250 Housing Unit $1,609       $344     $298     $2,214   $4,465
1,251 to     Housing Unit $2,145       $458     $398     $2,910   $5,910
1,750
1,751 to     Housing Unit $2,533       $542     $470     $3,419   $6,963
2,250
2,251 to     Housing Unit $2,830       $605     $526     $3,579   $7,540
2,750
2,751 to     Housing Unit $3,089       $660     $573     $4,150   $8,471
3,250
3,251 to     Housing Unit $3,298       $705     $612     $4,429   $9,043
3,750
3,751 or     Housing Unit $3,486       $745     $647     $4,672   $9,550
More
 
   Year 2 (July 1, 2026 - June 30, 2027)
Size of                               Proposed               Proposed Phase-In
Housing Unit Demand Unit Proposed P&R Police   Proposed Fire Streets  (90%)
(Sq. Ft.)
Size of                                Proposed Proposed Proposed Phase-In
Housing Unit Demand Unit  Proposed P&R Police   Fire     Streets  (90%)
(Sq. Ft.)
750 or less  Housing Unit $1,162       $248     $215     $1,630   $3,255
751 to 1,250 Housing Unit $1,810       $387     $336     $2,490   $5,023
1,251 to     Housing Unit $2,413       $516     $447     $3,273   $6,649
1,750
1,751 to     Housing Unit $2,849       $609     $528     $3,847   $7,834
2,250
2,251 to     Housing Unit $3,184       $680     $591     $4,027   $8,483
2,750
2,751 to     Housing Unit $3,475       $743     $644     $4,668   $9,530
3,250
3,251 to     Housing Unit $3,710       $793     $689     $4,982   $10,174
3,750
3,751 or     Housing Unit $3,921       $838     $728     $5,256   $10,743
More
 
   NON-RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
   Fees are per Demand Unit
   Year 1 (August 18, 2025 - June 30, 2026)
Type ITE Code Demand Unit Proposed P&R Proposed Proposed Proposed Phase-In
                                       Police   Fire     Streets  (80%)
Type           ITE Code Demand    Proposed Proposed Proposed Proposed Phase-In
                        Unit      P&R      Police   Fire     Streets  (80%)
Industrial:             1,000 Sq.
Light          110      Ft.       $154     $104     $90      $1,066   $1,414
Industrial
Industrial:    140      1,000 Sq. $185     $102     $88      $1,040   $1,414
Manufacturing           Ft.
Industrial:    150      1,000 Sq. $33      $36      $31      $374     $474
Warehousing             Ft.
Commercial/             1,000 Sq.
Retail :       820      Ft.       $259     $654     $570     $4,460   $5,943
General*
Commercial/
Retail : Free           1,000 Sq.
Standing       815      Ft.       $267     $953     $830     $6,491   $8,541
Discount
Store*
General Office 710      1,000 Sq. $318     $232     $202     $2,374   $3,127
                        Ft.
Institutional: 520      1,000 Sq. $90      $276     $241     $2,822   $3,430
Schools                 Ft.
Institutional:          1,000 Sq.
Religious      560      Ft.       $135     $98      $86      $1,004   $1,322
Facilities
Institutional:
Medical        620      1,000 Sq. $199     $94      $82      $959     $1,334
(Nursing Hm./           Ft.
Asstd. living)
Institutional:
Medical        630      1,000 Sq. $264     $532     $463     $5,436   $6,695
(Clinic,                Ft.
Hospital)
Hotel*         310      Room      $68      $224     $195     $1,527   $2,014
*Based on the Impact Fee Report, the proposed fees for these development types
have already been reduced and will not be subject to a Phase-In schedule
 
   Year 2 (July 1, 2026 - June 30, 2027)
Type ITE Code Demand Unit Proposed P&R Proposed Proposed Proposed Phase-In
                                       Police   Fire     Streets  (90%)
Type           ITE Code Demand    Proposed Proposed Proposed Proposed Phase-In
                        Unit      P&R      Police   Fire     Streets  (90%)
Industrial:             1,000 Sq.
Light          110      Ft.       $173     $117     $102     $1,200   $1,591
Industrial
Industrial:    140      1,000 Sq. $208     $114     $99      $1,170   $1,591
Manufacturing           Ft.
Industrial:    150      1,000 Sq. $37      $41      $35      $421     $534
Warehousing             Ft.
Commercial/             1,000 Sq.
Retail :       820      Ft.       $259     $654     $570     $4,460   $5,943
General*
Commercial/
Retail : Free           1,000 Sq.
Standing       815      Ft.       $267     $953     $830     $6,491   $8,541
Discount
Store*
General Office 710      1,000 Sq. $358     $261     $228     $2,671   $3,518
                        Ft.
Institutional: 520      1,000 Sq. $102     $311     $271     $3,175   $3,858
Schools                 Ft.
Institutional           1,000 Sq.
Religious      560      Ft.       $152     $110     $96      $1,130   $1,488
Facilities
Institutional
Medical        620      1,000 Sq. $224     $105     $92      $1,079   $1,500
(Nursing Hm./           Ft.
Asstd Living)
Institutional:
Medical        630      1,000 Sq. $297     $599     $521     $6,116   $7,532
(Clinic,                Ft.
Hospital)
Hotel*         310      Room      $68      $224     $195     $1,527   $2,014
*Based on the Impact Fee Report, the proposed fees for these development types
have already been reduced and will not be subject to a Phase-In schedule
 
TABLE 2 - "FULL ADOPTED FEE" RATES*
*Assessed Commencing July 1, 2027 Through and Including June 30, 2030 (years
three through five), and Thereafter Unless the “Phase-In” Period is Changed by
the Mayor and Council Pursuant to Section 23A-90.
"FULL ADOPTED FEE" TABLES
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
Fees are per housing unit
Size of Housing Unit (Sq. Ft.) Parks & Recreation Police Fire Streets Total Fee
Size of Housing Unit (Sq. Ft.) Parks & Recreation Police Fire Streets Total Fee
750 or Less                    $924               $216   $146 $1,412  $2,698
751 to 1,250                   $1,488             $348   $235 $2,189  $4,260
1,251 to 1,750                 $1,987             $464   $314 $2,887  $5,652
1,751 to 2,250                 $2,357             $551   $372 $3,397  $6,677
2,251 to 2,750                 $2,644             $618   $418 $3,798  $7,478
2,751 to 3,250                 $2,884             $674   $456 $4,132  $8,146
3,251 to 3,750                 $3,088             $722   $488 $4,415  $8,713
3,751 or More                  $3,263             $763   $516 $4,661  $9,203
 
   Years 3 - 5 (July 1, 2027 - June 30, 2030)
Size of                               Proposed Proposed Proposed Full Adopted
Housing Unit Demand Unit Proposed P&R Police   Fire     Streets  (100%)
(Sq. Ft.)
Size of                                Proposed Proposed Proposed Full Adopted
Housing Unit Demand Unit  Proposed P&R Police   Fire     Streets  (100%)
(Sq. Ft.)
750 or Less  Housing Unit $1,291       $276     $239     $2,100   $3,906
751 to 1,250 Housing Unit $2,011       $430     $373     $3,208   $6,022
1,251 to     Housing Unit $2,681       $573     $497     $4,217   $7,968
1,750
1,751 to     Housing Unit $3,166       $677     $587     $4,956   $9,386
2,250
2,251 to     Housing Unit $3,538       $756     $657     $5,536   $10,487
2,750
2,751 to     Housing Unit $3,861       $825     $716     $6,014   $11,416
3,250
3,251 to     Housing Unit $4,122       $881     $765     $6,419   $12,187
3,750
3,751 or     Housing Unit $4,357       $931     $809     $6,772   $12,869
More
 
   NON-RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
   Fees are per demand unit
Size of
Housing   ITE Code Demand Unit Proposed Proposed Proposed Proposed Full Adopted
Unit (Sq.                      P&R      Police   Fire     Streets  (100%)
Ft.)
Size of                 Demand    Proposed Proposed Proposed Proposed Full
Housing Unit   ITE Code Unit      P&R      Police   Fire     Streets  Adopted
(Sq. Ft.)                                                             (100%)
Industrial:             1,000 Sq.
Light          110      Ft.       $192     $130     $113     $1,545   $1,980
Industrial
Industrial:    140      1,000 Sq. $231     $127     $110     $1,507   $1,975
Manufacturin g          Ft.
Industrial:    150      1,000 Sq. $41      $45      $39      $543     $668
Warehousing             Ft.
Commercial/             1,000 Sq.
Retail:        820      Ft.       $259     $654     $570     $5,172   $6,655
General
Commercial/
Retail: Free   815      1,000 Sq. $267     $953     $830     $7,527   $9,577
Standing                Ft.
Discount Store
General Office 710      1,000 Sq. $398     $290     $253     $3,442   $4,383
                        Ft.
Institutional: 520      1,000 Sq. $113     $345     $301     $4,091   $4,850
Schools                 Ft.
Institutional:          1,000 Sq.
Religious      560      Ft.       $169     $122     $107     $1,455   $1,853
Facilities
Institutional:
Medical        620      1,000 Sq. $249     $117     $102     $1,390   $1,858
(Nursing Hm./           Ft.
Asstd Living)
Institutional:
Medical        630      1,000 Sq. $330     $665     $579     $7,879   $9,453
(Clinic,                Ft.
Hospital)
Hotel          310      Room      $68      $224     $195     $1,770   $2,257
 
   TABLE 3 - "MIXED USE INCENTIVE FEE"
   RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
   Fees are per housing unit
   Years 3 - 5 (July 1, 2027 - June 30, 2030)
Size of                               Proposed Proposed Proposed Full Adopted
Housing Unit Demand Unit Proposed P&R Police   Fire     Streets  (100%)
(Sq. Ft.)
Size of                                Proposed Proposed Proposed Full Adopted
Housing Unit Demand Unit  Proposed P&R Police   Fire     Streets  (100%)
(Sq. Ft.)
750 or Less  Housing Unit $1,291       $276     $239     $1,811   $3,617
751 to 1,250 Housing Unit $2,011       $430     $373     $2,767   $5,581
1,251 to     Housing Unit $2,681       $573     $497     $3,637   $7,388
1,750
1,751 to     Housing Unit $3,166       $677     $587     $4,274   $8,704
2,250
2,251 to     Housing Unit $3,538       $756     $657     $4,474   $9,425
2,750
2,751 to     Housing Unit $3,861       $825     $716     $5,187   $10,589
3,250
3,251 to     Housing Unit $4,122       $881     $765     $5,536   $11,304
3,750
3,751 or     Housing Unit $4,357       $931     $809     $5,840   $11,937
More
 
NON-RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
Fees are per demand unit
   Years 3-5 (July 1, 2027 - June 30, 2030)
Type ITE Code Demand Unit Proposed P&R Proposed Proposed Proposed Full Adopted
                                       Police   Fire     Streets  (100%)
                                   Proposed Proposed Proposed Proposed Full
Type          ITE Code Demand Unit P&R      Police   Fire     Streets  Adopted
                                                                       (100%)
Industrial:            1,000 Sq.
Light         110      Ft.         $192     $130     $113     $1,333   $1,768
Industrial
Industrial:   140      1,000 Sq.   $231     $127     $110     $1,300   $1,768
Manufacturing          Ft.
Industrial:   150      1,000 Sq.   $41      $45      $39      $468     $593
Warehousing            Ft.
Commercial/            1,000 Sq.
Retail :      820      Ft.         $259     $654     $570     $4,460   $5,943
General*
Commercial/
Retail : Free          1,000 Sq.
Standing      815      Ft.         $267     $953     $830     $6,491   $8,541
Discount
Store*
General       710      1,000 Sq.   $398     $290     $253     $2,968   $3,909
Office                 Ft.
Institutional 520      1,000 Sq.   $113     $345     $301     $3,528   $4,287
Schools                Ft.
Institutional          1,000 Sq.
Religious     560      Ft.         $169     $122     $107     $1,255   $1,653
Facilities
Institutional
Medical       620      1,000 Sq.   $249     $117     $102     $1,199   $1,667
(Nursing Hm./          Ft.
Asstd Living)
Institution
at Medical    630      1,000 Sq.   $330     $665     $579     $6,795   $8,369
(Clinic,               Ft.
Hospital)
Hotel*        310      Room        $68      $224     $195     $1,527   $2,014
 
(Ord. No. 11203, § 1, 10-9-14, eff. 12-23-14; Ord. No. 11375, § 1, 6-21-16;
Ord. No. 11471, § 1, 6-20-17; Ord. No. 11565, § 1, 6-19-18; Ord. No. 11632, §
1, 3-19-19; Ord. 11717, § 1, 12-17-19; Ord. No. 11759, § 1, 6-9-20, eff. 7-1-
21; Ord. No. 11833, § 1, 5-4-21; Ord. No. 12169, § 1, 6-3-25)
ARTICLE IV.
DEFINITIONS*
__________
*   Editors Note: Formerly Art. III. See editor's note at Art. III.
__________
DIVISION 1.
GENERAL PROVISIONS*
__________
*   Editors Note: Section 3 of Ord. No. 10053 renumbered Art. IV, Div. 1, §§
23A-71--23A-73 as Art. IV, Div. 1, §§ 23A-101--23A-103, respectively.
__________
Sec. 23A-101. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to promote consistency and precision in the
interpretation of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 9392, § 2(3.1.1), 5-22-00; Ord. No. 10053, § 3, 9-27-04)
Sec. 23A-102. General rules of application.
   (a)   Meaning and construction. The meaning and construction of words and
phrases as set forth apply throughout the chapter, except where the context of
such words or phrases clearly indicates a different meaning or construction.
   (b)   Land Use Code (LUC). Where the word or term is applicable to the Land
Use Code (LUC), the definition in the LUC applies.
(Ord. No. 9392, § 2(3.1.2), 5-22-00; Ord. No. 10053, § 3, 9-27-04)
Sec. 23A-103. General rules for construction of language.
The following general rules of construction apply to the textual provisions of
the chapter.
   (1)   Headings. Section and subsection headings do not govern, limit,
modify, or in any manner affect the scope, meaning, or intent of any provision
of the chapter.
   (2)   Illustration. In case of any difference of meaning or implication
between the text of any provision and any illustration, the text prevails.
   (3)   Tenses and numbers. Words used in the present tense include the
future, and words used in the singular include the plural and the plural the
singular, unless the context clearly indicates contrary.
   (4)   Conjunctions. Unless the context clearly indicates contrary, the
following conjunctions will be interpreted as follows:
   a.   "And" indicates that all connected items or provisions apply.
   b.   "Or" indicates that the connected items or provisions may apply
individually or in any combination.
   c.   "Either . . . or" indicates that the connected items or provisions
apply individually but not in combination.
(Ord. No. 9392, § 2(3.1.3), 5-22-00; Ord. No. 10053, § 3, 9-27-04)
Secs. 23A-104--23A-110. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
(RESERVED) ‡
__________
‡Editor’s note – Division 2, "Listing of Words and Terms," of Article IV,
Definitions, is repealed by Ord. No. 11203, effective December 23, 2014.
__________
Chapter 23B
UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE*
__________
   *Editor's note – Ordinance No. 11025, adopted October 9, 2012, enacted the
Unified Development Code. The Unified Development Code is effective January 2,
2013. Three copies of the Land Use Code shall be filed with the city clerk's
office and maintained as public records of the City of Tucson. The Unified
Development Code shall be published separately from the Tucson Code.
   Section 6 or Ordinance No. 11025 provides: "Any owner of record, as of
October 9, 2012 wishing to develop real property which would be governed by the
provisions of this ordinance, where such development occurs between the
effective date of the UDC, and the date of repeal of the LUC, January 1, 2016
shall have the option of electing which code to apply to the full development.
Once an election is made, the code chosen shall be the only code applicable to
the subject development for all development and applications therefore from
January 2, 2013 until January 1, 2016 except as provided by Section 9 herein."
__________
Chapter 24
SEWERAGE AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL*
__________
*   Editors Note: Ord. No. 4207, § 1, adopted July 8, 1974, amended this Code
by repealing former ch. 24, §§ 24-1--24-4, 24-7 and 24-8, and enacting in lieu
thereof new ch. 24, §§ 24-1--24-8, pertaining to the same general subject
matter. Former ch. 24 was derived from 1953 Code, ch. 23, § 7; Ord. No. 2139,
§§ 1--3, adopted Mar. 6, 1961; Ord. No. 3456, § 1, adopted May 25, 1970; and
Ord. No. 3488, § 1, adopted July 21, 1970.
   Editors Note: Resolution No. 10860, adopted June 26, 1979, approved the
execution of the Intergovernmental Agreement with Pima County, Arizona, that
transferred all of the ownership and maintenance responsibilities for the City
of Tucson sewer system to Pima County, Arizona, and superseded the provisions
of this Chapter for the duration of the Intergovernmental Agreement.
   Cross References: Plumbing regulations generally, §
6-121 et seq.; obstructing or depositing offensive matter in waters and natural
drainage channels, §§
11-58 et seq.; excavations, §
25-13 et seq.; obstructing water flow in streets, gutters or conduits, §
25-52; water, ch.
27.
__________
Art. I.   General and Administrative, §§ 24-1--24-3
Art. II.   Connection Fees, §§ 24-4--24-19
Art. III.   User Fees, §§ 24-20--24-39
Art. IV.   Industrial Waste Control and Industrial Cost Recovery Program, §§
24-40--24-53
Article I. General and Administrative
Sec.
24-1.   Definition of terms.
Sec.
24-2.   General considerations.
Sec.
24-3.   Application for approval to construct sewerage systems, extensions or
waste treatment works.
Article II. Connection Fees
Sec.
24-4.   Fees for connection to sanitary sewers.
Sec.
24-5.   Construction of sewer systems under private contract authorized.
Sec.
24-6.   Provision for refund of cost of sewers installed by private contract
under certain conditions authorized.
Sec.
24-7.   Permits for temporary installations for areas not contiguous to sewers.
Sec.
24-8.   Failure to obtain permits and approvals as required.
Secs.
24-9--24-19.   Reserved.
Article III. User Fees
Sec.
24-20.   Definition of terms.
Sec.
24-21.   User fees.
Sec. 2422.   Review of established fees; powers of the director.
Sec.
24-23.   Minimum and maximum sewer user fees.
Sec.
24-24.   Setting of fee.
Sec.
24-25.   Private wells and private water companies.
Sec.
24-26.   Sales taxes; business privilege taxes; in-lieu-of-franchise taxes.
Sec.
24-27.   Billing.
Sec.
24-28.   Deposits.
Sec.
24-29.   Use of fund revenues.
Sec.
24-30.   When and where bills are due and payable.
Sec.
24-31.   User fees and water charges; application of payment.
Sec.
24-32.   Enforcement.
Secs.
24-33--24-39.   Reserved.
Article IV. Industrial Waste Control and Industrial Cost Recovery Program
Sec.
24-40.   Definitions of terms.
Sec.
24-41.   Rules and regulations.
Sec.
24-42.   Permit for industrial wastewater discharge.
Sec.
24-43.   Industrial wastewater permit requirements; restrictions and
conditions.
Sec.
24-44.   Truckers' discharge permit.
Sec.
24-45.   Prohibition of specific substances.
Sec.
24-46.   Industrial cost recovery.
Sec.
24-47   Power and authority of inspectors.
Sec.
24-48.   Enforcement.
Sec.
24-49.   Appeal procedure.
Sec.
24-50.   Billing.
Sec.
24-51.   Deposits.
Sec.
24-52.   Use of funds.
Sec.
24-53.   Effective date.
ARTICLE I.
GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE
Sec. 24-1. Definition of terms.
   Acre shall mean forty-three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet
of land, excluding easements or rights-of-way and any other unusable portions
of land.
   Applicant for development shall be defined as an applicant for sewer service
for an area under development for marketing purposes.
   Applicant for service shall be defined as an applicant for sewer service for
personal use requiring the extension of an existing sewer.
   Area under development refers to an area in which sanitary sewer
improvements are being constructed and may include single-family and multiple-
family residential subdivisions, mobile home subdivisions or parks, improvement
districts, plats or development plans with intent of developing land for
residential, commercial or industrial use. Generally the category includes all
development in which "on-site" sewerage improvements have been provided by the
applicant by improvement district or contract.
   Director of water and sewers refers to the administrator of the city
department of water and sewers and is hereafter referred to as "director."
   Improvement district shall mean a district formed under the provisions of
A.R.S. title 18, chapter 4, article 2, as amended, or formed by the city for
the purpose of installation of sanitary sewers, which district shall be
considered as an area under development
   Industrial wastes shall mean the liquid, gaseous or solid wastes produced as
a result of any industrial operation.
   Multifamily residence shall mean a residential complex under single or
corporate ownership, designed for use by more than one (1) family unit,
including apartments, mobile home parks, hotels, motels, school dormitories,
guest ranches and churches, but excluding townhouses and condominium projects,
excepting those fixtures to which the public has general access such as
restaurants, bars, laundromats, etc., which should be continued under the
commercial classification.
   Nonparticipating property shall mean any property either residential,
commercial or industrial that has not participated directly in the construction
cost of a sanitary sewer providing service to that property.
   Off-site sewerage improvements shall include all sewerage construction
necessary to connect "on-site" facilities to an existing system as required by
the director of water and sewers.
   On-site sewerage improvements shall mean all sewage facilities within any
plat, improvement plan, development plan or other improvement but shall exclude
capacities in excess of capacities necessary to serve the development as may be
required by the director.
   Participating property shall mean any property, either residential,
commercial or industrial, that has participated directly in the construction
cost of a sanitary sewer providing service to that property.
   Person shall mean the state, a municipality, county or other political
subdivision, a cooperative, institution, corporation, company, firm,
partnership or individual person.
   Pollution shall mean contamination or other alteration of the physical,
chemical or biological properties of any waters in the city, discharge of any
liquid, gaseous or solid substance into any waters, onto or under any land
within the city that creates a nuisance or renders such waters or land harmful
or injurious to public health, safety or welfare, to domestic, commercial,
industrial, agricultural, recreational or other lawful beneficial uses, or to
livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life.
   Residential shall mean an area under development where a family unit
normally resides.
   Sewage shall mean the wastes from toilets, baths, sinks, lavatories,
laundries and other plumbing fixtures in residences, institutions, public and
business buildings, mobile homes, and other places of human habitation,
employment or recreation.
   Sewerage system shall mean pipelines or conduits, pumping stations, force
mains and all other devices, appurtenances, and facilities used for collecting
and conducting wastes to a point of treatment and disposal.
   Subdivision shall mean any tract of land which is hereafter divided into
five (5) or more parcels along an existing or proposed street, highway,
easement or right-of-way for sale, lease or rent as residential, industrial or
commercial building plots regardless of whether the lots or plots are described
by metes and bounds, by reference to a map or survey of the property, or by any
other method.
   Waste treatment works shall mean any plant, disposal field, lagoon, pumping
station, incinerator or other works used for the purpose of treating or
stabilizing sewage and industrial wastes.
   Waters of the city shall mean all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes,
watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, irrigation systems, drainage systems,
and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface and underground,
natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow
through the border upon the corporate limits of the city or any portion
thereof.
(Ord. No. 4207, § 1, 7-8-74; Ord. No. 4340, § 1, 4-7-75; Ord. No. 4594, § 1,
11-22-76; Ord. No. 4672, § 1, 6-20-77)
Sec. 24-2. General considerations.
   (a)   No sewage or industrial wastes shall be permitted to flow into waters
within the city or upon or under any lands within the city in any manner
determined by the director to be detrimental to the health, safety or welfare
of persons who may be affected by the resulting environmental condition.
   (b)   No individual disposal system, development plan or improvement plan
shall be approved, nor shall any sewage disposal system be installed in a
subdivision or development consisting of lots one (1) acre in size or less,
except as approved by the director.
   (c)   Where soil conditions or topography are such that in the opinion of
the director, based on his experience, knowledge or engineering data, a septic
tank system cannot be expected to function satisfactorily or where groundwater
conditions are such that septic tank systems may cause pollution of the
groundwater supply, other sewage disposal methods satisfactory to the director
shall be provided; and in no such case shall an individual disposal system be
approved or installed.
   (d)   Subdivisions consisting of lots of one (1) acre or less within the
corporate limits of the city shall be connected to a sewerage system.
(Ord. No. 4207, § 1, 7-8-74; Ord. No. 4594, § 2, 11-22-76)
Sec. 24-3. Application for approval to construct sewerage systems, extensions
or waste treatment works.
Before any person shall construct or contract for the construction of sewerage
systems, sewerage system extensions, or waste treatment works or shall install
any such process, device or equipment, either in whole or in part, an
application for approval to construct the contemplated works shall be made to
the director on forms provided by the director. The director shall act on the
complete application within thirty (30) days upon receipt thereof by
designating either approval or disapproval. In case of a disapproval, the
director shall state in writing the reasons for the disapproval. No
construction shall be commenced until approval has been obtained from the
director.
(Ord. No. 4207, § 1, 7-8-74; Ord. No. 4594, § 3, 11-22-76)
ARTICLE II.
CONNECTION FEES
Sec. 24-4. Fees for connection to sanitary sewers.
   (a)   Connection Fees Relating to Participating Property in Areas Under
Development.
   (1)   Single-family residential. For service of residential subdivisions and
residential improvement districts, the fee shall be charged at the rate of
three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) per residential lot payable in cash at
the time of application or upon execution of a written agreement between the
owner and city for the sewer service.
   (2)   Multifamily residential. For service of residential subdivisions and
residential improvement districts, the fee shall be charged at the rate of two
hundred seventeen dollars ($217.00) per residential unit payable in cash at the
time of application or upon execution of a written agreement between the owner
and the city for the sewer service.
   (3)   Commercial and industrial. For service of commercial and industrial
property, the fee shall be charged at the rate of thirty-five dollars ($35.00)
for each fixture unit so connected as determined from the Uniform Plumbing Code
as adopted by the city [section
6-124], and according to the following tables:
TABLE 1
Kind of Fixture Minimum Trap and Trap Arm Size (inches) Units
TABLE 1
Kind of Fixture                        Minimum Trap and Trap Arm Size  Units
                                       (inches)
Bathtubs                               1 1/2                           2
Bidets                                 1 1/2                           2
Dental units or cuspidors              1 1/2                           1
Drinking fountains                     1 1/4                           1
Floor drains                           2                               2
*Interceptors for grease, oil, solids, 2                               3
etc.
*Interceptors for sand, auto wash,     3                               6
etc.
Laundry tubs                           1 1/2                           2
Clothes washers                        2                               2
*Receptors (floor sinks) indirect
waste receptors for refrigerators,     1 1/2                           1
coffee urns, water stations, etc.
*Receptors, indirect waste receptors
for commercial sinks, dishwashers,     2                               3
airwashers, etc.
Showers, single stalls                 2                               2
Showers, gang, (one unit per head)     2                                
Sinks, bar, private (1 1/2" min.       1 1/2                           1
waste)
Sinks, bar, commercial (2" min. waste) 1 1/2                           2
Sinks, commercial or industrial,
schools etc., including dishwashers,   1 1/2                           3
wash up sinks and wash fountains (2"
min. waste)
Sinks, flushing rim, clinic            3                               6
Sinks, and/or dishwashers              1 1/2                           2
(residential) (2" min.waste)
Sinks, service                         2                               3
Trailer park traps (one for each       3                               6
trailer)
Urinals, pedestal                      3                               6
Urinals, stall                         2                               2
Urinals, wall (2" min. waste)          1 1/2                           2
Urinals, wall trough (2" min. waste)   1 1/2                           3
Wash basins (lavatories) single        1 1/2                           1
Wash basins, in sets                   1 1/2                           2
Water closets                          3                               6
 
   *Note--The size and discharge rating of each indirect waste receptor and
each interceptor shall be based on the total rated discharge capacity of all
fixtures, equipment or appliances discharging thereinto in, accordance with
table 2.
Drainage piping serving batteries of appliances capable of producing continuous
flows shall be adequately sized to provide for peak loads. Clothes washers in
groups of 3 or more shall be rated at 6 units each for the purpose of common
waste pipe sizing.
Where trap sizes are increased over the minimums shown in table 1 or greater
waste loadings are evident, the discharge rating shall be determined in
accordance with table 2.
Trap sizes shall not be increased to a point where the fixture discharge may be
inadequate to maintain their self- scouring properties.
TABLE 2
DISCHARGE CAPACITY
(in gals. per min.)
 
Up to 7 1/2 Equals 1 unit
8 to 15     Equals 2 units
16 to 30    Equals 4 units
31 to 50    Equals 6 units
 
Over 50 gals. shall be determined by the administrative authority.
   (b)   Connection Fees Relating to Nonparticipating Property in Areas Under
Development.
   (1)   Single-family residential. For service of single-family residential
property, the fee shall be charged at the rate of thirty-five dollars ($35.00)
per fixture unit as determined from the Uniform Plumbing Code as adopted by the
city [section
6-124].
   (2)   Multifamily residential. For service of multifamily residential
property, the fee shall be charged at the rate of twenty-eight dollars ($28.00)
per fixture as determined from the Uniform Plumbing Code as adopted by the
city, but not less than two hundred seventeen dollars ($217.00) per residential
unit.
   (3)   Commercial and industrial. For service of commercial and industrial
property, the fee shall be charged at the rate of seventy dollars ($70.00) per
fixture unit as determined from the Uniform Plumbing Code as adopted by the
city.
   (c)   Special Facilities. If the property to be connected to the sanitary
sewer system necessitates the construction of special facilities required to
handle the waste, the director may require the applicant to provide these
special facilities at his own expense.
(Ord. No. 4207, § 1, 7-8-74; Ord. No. 4594, § 4, 11-22-76; Ord. No. 4854, § 1,
7-3-78; Ord. No. 4860, § 1, 8-7-78)
Sec. 24-5. Construction of sewer systems under private contract authorized.
   (a)   Generally. Upon written application, the director may permit
construction of permanent sanitary sewer systems for sewer service where no
existing sewer is available. The sewer will be constructed at the sole expense
and cost of the applicant within streets, avenues, alleys and rights-of-way
pursuant to grants of easements and subject to approval of the director. The
applicant will be required to construct all on-site and off-site facilities
large enough to provide service to his development, and in no case shall a line
be less than eight (8) inches in internal diameter.
   (b)   Permits for Construction; Inspections; Title to Sewer. Plans for
construction will be provided by the applicant, certified by a registered
professional engineer and the director. The construction of sewer facilities
authorized by the permit will be inspected by the director or his authorized
representative. An inspection fee shall be charged. The inspection fee will be
computed to be two and five-tenths (2.5) percent of the value of the proposed
construction. Upon completion of the sewers and acceptance by the director,
title to such sewers shall be transferred to the city.
   (c)   Agreement for Construction. With each application for a permit for the
construction of sewers authorized by this section, the applicant shall execute
and deliver to the director, in duplicate, the agreement for the construction
thereof by private contract. If the proposed construction is approved and the
agreement otherwise conforms with the provisions of this chapter, it shall be
the duty of the director to approve the agreement, for and on behalf of the
city, and issue the permit in accordance therewith.
(Ord. No. 4207, § 1, 7-8-74; Ord. No. 4594, § 5, 11-22-76)
Sec. 24-6. Provision for refund of cost of sewers installed by private contract
under certain conditions authorized.
   (a)   In cases of sewers installed by applicant for development by private
contract, should the director require an applicant to install an on-site or
off-site sewer system of a size and/or capacity larger than is required to
collect the waste of the area under development, as determined by the director,
an agreement for refund of the cost of the oversizing may be made with the
applicant. In no case will the agreed refund amount exceed the total fees to be
collected as authorized in section
24-4(a) above.
   (b)   Sewers installed by an applicant for service by private contract:
   (1)   Should a sewer system installed by an applicant for service be
installed in such a manner as to provide service to a nonparticipating
property, an agreement for refund of the cost of the sewer system may be made
with the applicant. In no case will the agreed refund amount exceed the total
fees to be collected as authorized in section
24-4(a) above, plus the fees when collected by the city, as authorized in
section
24-4(b) in excess of the fees authorized in section
24-4(a). Such refunds shall be made until the full sum has been refunded, or
for a maximum period of five (5) years from the date of the refund agreement,
whichever shall first occur. In the event the full sum has not been refunded
within the five-year period, any balances remaining unpaid shall be considered
canceled, and the city shall be fully discharged from any further obligation
under the agreement.
(Ord. No. 4207, § 1, 7-8-74)
Sec. 24-7. Permits for temporary installations for areas not contiguous to
sewers.
Upon written application, the director may issue a permit authorizing an area
not contiguous to any sewer to be temporarily connected to a nearby sewer.
All permits issued and installations made pursuant to this section shall be on
a temporary basis only, and shall be subject to the following terms and
conditions:
   (1)   The temporary line referred to in this section shall be only at such
locations as shall be approved by the director.
   (2)   All such installations shall be made without cost or expense to the
city.
   (3)   Upon the installation of permanent sewers contiguous to the area being
serviced by such temporary installations, the temporary line shall be
abandoned, and connection shall be made to the permanent sewers; and the area
serviced shall be subject to the same charge set forth in section
24-4 above.
   (4)   All charges and expenditures, including rental charges incurred or
paid by the applicant in installing and maintaining such temporary line, shall
in no manner be considered as having been incurred or paid with respect to any
permanent sewer improvement district, private contract authorized by this
chapter, or any sewer installed by the city.
(Ord. No. 4207, § 1, 7-8-74; Ord. No. 4594, § 6, 11-22-76)
Sec. 24-8. Failure to obtain permits and approvals as required.
By this chapter prior to the commencement of construction of sewer systems,
temporary installations of waste treatment works shall be a misdemeanor and may
be punishable by a fine of not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00), or by
imprisonment in the city jail not to exceed six (6) months, or by both such
fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. No. 4207, § 1, 7-8-74)
Secs. 24-9--24-19. Reserved.
ARTICLE III.
USER FEES
Sec. 24-20. Definition of terms.
In addition to the definitions contained in section
24-1, the following definitions shall apply:
   Annual wastewater budget shall mean the amount budgeted in any one (1)
fiscal year by the city and county for the total operation, maintenance, repair
and replacement cost of the joint wastewater system.
   Average discharge volume shall mean total wastewater discharge for a
residential user class divided by the number of users in the class.
   Average user fee shall mean a user fee based upon the average discharge
volume of a residential user class.
   BOD (biochemical oxygen demand) shall mean the organic material in domestic
or industrial wastewaters measured by the oxygen utilized over a period of five
(5) days at twenty degrees Celsius (200C), determined by procedures in
"Standard Methods."
   Building drain shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other
drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building
sewer, beginning five (5) feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the
building wall.
   Building sewer shall mean a sewer connecting a drain to a public sewer or
other place of disposal. Also called "house connection" and "industrial
connection sewer."
   COD (chemical oxygen demand) shall mean the chemically oxidizable material
in wastewater as represented by the reduction of chromate ion, measured in
accordance with "Standard Methods."
   Domestic wastewater shall mean water-carried wastes produced by
noncommercial and nonindustrial activities which result from normal human
living processes.
   Effluent shall mean the liquid outflow of any facility used to treat, convey
or retain wastewater.
   Engineering estimate shall mean an estimate by the city engineering staff
using the best available data, judgment and experience.
   House connection sewer shall mean a sewer connecting a building drain to a
public sewer for the purpose of conveying domestic wastewater. Also called
"building sewer."
   Industrial connection sewer shall mean a sewer connecting a building sewer
or building waste drainage system to the public sewer for the purpose of
conveying industrial wastewater.
   Industrial wastewater shall mean all wastewater of the community except
domestic wastewater and uncontaminated water; it includes all wastewater from
any producing, manufacturing, processing, institutional, commercial,
agricultural or other operation where the wastewater discharged contains
significant quantities of waste of nonhuman origin.
   Inspector shall mean a person authorized by the director to inspect
wastewater generation, conveyance, processing and disposal facilities.
   Joint wastewater system shall mean the combined sewerage systems and waste
treatment works of the city and county.
   Mayor and council means the governing body of the city.
   Milligrams per liter (mg/l) shall mean the same as parts per million by
weight.
   Parts per million (ppm) shall mean a weight-to-weight ratio; the parts per
million value multiplied by the factor 8.345 shall be equivalent to pounds per
million gallons of water.
   pH is defined as the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen
ion concentration expressed in moles per liter. Determined by procedures in
"Standard Methods."
   Pretreatment shall mean the treatment of wastewater from a source before
introduction into the wastewater system.
Private water company shall refer to a company, irrigation district or water
cooperative that provides water to users.
   Private well shall mean a water well not owned by the city, or a private
water company.
   Public sewer shall mean a common sewer controlled by a governmental agency
or public utility.
   Radioactive material is defined as material containing chemical elements
that spontaneously change their atomic structure by emitting any particles,
rays or energy forms.
   Residential user shall mean one discharging domestic wastewater from a
dwelling unit and includes, but is not limited to, persons residing in single-
family dwellings, apartments, condominiums, townhouses and mobile homes
regardless of whether the mobile home is located on a separate residential lot
or within a mobile home park.
   Residential user class refers to a grouping of residential users having
similar per unit monthly discharge quantities and residing in the same type of
dwelling unit.
   Sanitary sewer is defined as a sewer for conveyance of sewage or industrial
wastes, and into which there is no intentional admission of stormwaters,
surfacewaters and groundwaters or unpolluted industrial wastes.
   Solid waste shall mean waste normally considered suitable for disposal at
sanitary landfills.
   Standard Methods refers to the most recent edition of "Standard Methods for
the Examination of Water and Wastewater," published jointly by the American
Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water
Pollution Control Federation.
   Storm sewer shall mean a sewer that carries stormwater, surfacewater and
groundwater drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes.
   Stormwater runoff shall mean rainfall that is drained into the storm sewers.
   Strength is defined as the relative difficulty of treatment of wastewater,
expressed in terms of chemical oxygen demand (COD) and suspended solids.
   Suspended solids refers to solids that float on or are suspended in water,
sewage or industrial wastes, and which are removable by a laboratory filtration
device. Quantitative determination of suspended solids shall be made by
procedures in "Standard Methods."
   User shall mean one who discharges wastewater to the joint wastewater
system.
   User class shall mean a grouping of users having similar discharge strength,
conducting a similar business, or living in the same dwelling unit type.
   User fee shall mean the basic monthly charge levied on users of the public
sewer system.
   Wastewater is defined as liquid discharge resulting from the use of water
for domestic, commercial or industrial purposes.
   Watercourse is defined as a natural or artificial channel in which water
flows continuously or intermittently.
(Ord. No. 4376, § 2, 9275; Ord. No. 4527, §§ 1--3, 6-28-76; Ord. No. 4594, § 7,
11-22-76)
Sec. 24-21. User fees.
   (a)   A monthly fee shall be levied and collected from all users for the
service of sewage collection, treatment and disposal provided through the joint
wastewater system. User fees shall be calculated according to the following
formula:
Monthly User Fee (A × Volume) + (B × COD) (C × SS)
Where:
Volume = Monthly sewage discharge or the best engineering estimate thereof.
COD =    Monthly discharge of chemical oxygen demand or the best engineering
         estimate thereof.
SS =     Monthly discharge of suspended solids or the best engineering estimate
         thereof.
A =      Unit cost of flow volume based upon the adopted annual wastewater
         budget and the total volume discharge by all users.
B =      Unit cost of COD based upon the adopted annual wastewater budget and
         the total annual quantity of COD contributed by all users.
         Unit cost of suspended solids based upon the adopted annual wastewater
C =      budget and the total annual quantity of suspended solids contributed
         by all users.
 
   (b)   The monthly volume of discharge for residential users shall be
presumed to be ninety (90) percent of the average water use as reflected by the
billings for the months of December, January and February. If metered water use
data is not available for a residential user, the discharge shall be estimated
from the average residential class. The volume of discharge for all commercial
and industrial users shall be presumed to be ninety-five (95) percent of the
average water use as reflected by the billings for the months of December,
January and February.
   (c)   The quantities of COD and suspended solids used in the user fee
formula may be established by engineering estimation, by short-term sampling
and analysis extrapolated to a yearly total, or by extensive sampling and
analysis by the user or the city. The director shall set the standards for
sampling and analysis.
   (d)   Where data of flow volume, quantities or COD or suspended solids are
reported to the city by the user and form the basis for the user's fee, such
data shall be subject to city verification. If subsequent measurements or other
investigations reveal that such user is discharging a volume of flow, COD or
suspended solids significantly in excess of that reported to the city, the
director may assess such user according to the data obtained by the city
retroactive to the time of the user's latest report together with any
applicable delinquent charges, penalties and interest as provided in section
24-32. Prior to revising a user fee pursuant to this subsection, the city shall
obtain at least two (2) twenty-four-hour samples and flow measurements.
   (e)   The per-unit cost factors A, B and C in the user fee formula shall be
established each fiscal year prior to the beginning of the fiscal year for the
joint wastewater system according to the following method:
   (1)   After adoption of an annual wastewater budget, a finding shall be made
apportioning the budgeted amount among the three (3) user fee factors. Budgeted
expenditures shall be apportioned to the factor to which they are attributable
or primarily related.
   (2)   The per-unit cost of each factor shall be computed by dividing the
amount of the adopted annual wastewater budget apportioned to such factor by
the number of units of such factor discharged into the joint wastewater system
in the preceding fiscal year.
   (f)   The discharge volumes for all users shall be estimated annually but
may be changed at any time to reflect the actual measured volume. The director,
upon a finding that the methods enumerated in subsection (b) do not reasonably
reflect the average volume discharge of a user or user class, may establish a
more accurate method and notify the affected users. Such revised methods for
user classes shall be subject to the approval of the mayor and council.
(Ord. No. 4376, § 1, 9-2-75; Ord. No. 4527, §§ 4--8, 6-28-76; Ord. No. 4594, §
8, 11-22-76; Ord. No. 4672, § 2, 6-20-77; Ord. No. 4854, § 2, 7-3-78)
Sec. 2422. Review of established fees; powers of the director.
   (a)   Any user dissatisfied with a fee as established by the city, or with
any monthly discharge factor used in the fee, shall notify the director in
writing within sixty (60) days after notice of the established fee, protesting
the fee as established and requesting a review thereof. Such written protests
shall include itemized objections to the fee as established, or any monthly
discharge factor used in its computation.
   (b)   A user whose fee is reviewed pursuant to this section shall have the
burden of showing that any or all of the monthly discharge factors used in
computing its fee were erroneous or misapplied. The director, upon finding that
a user's protests are well founded, shall adjust the established fee and make
equitable reimbursements for any overpayments made.
   (c)   Adjustments may be made by the director upon a satisfactory showing
that the water use as reflected in the billings for December, January and
February does not reflect annual average discharge to the sewerage system.
   (d)   The director may promulgate rules applicable in protest proceedings
and may adopt standards to be applied in measuring the validity of established
fees and monthly discharge factors. Such rules and standards shall be subject
to approval by the mayor and council.
(Ord. No. 4376, § 2, 9-2-75; Ord. No. 4527, §§ 9--11, 6-28-76; Ord. No. 4594, §
9, 11-22-76; Ord. No. 4672, § 3, 6-20-77)
Sec. 24-23. Minimum and maximum sewer user fees.
   (a)   The user fee levied upon any sewer connection shall in no event be
less than one dollar and ten cents ($1.10) per month.
   (b)   No user fee levied upon a single-family residential sewer connection
shall be in excess of nine dollars and seventy cents ($9.70) per month.
(Ord. No. 4376, § 2, 9-2-75; Ord. No. 4672, § 4, 6-20-77; Ord. No. 4854, § 3,
7-3-78)
Sec. 24-24. Setting of fee.
The sewer user fee shall be established annually by the mayor and council,
subject to change at any time in their discretion.
(Ord. No. 4376, § 2, 9-2-75)
Sec. 24-25. Private wells and private water companies.
   (a)   Commercial and industrial users with private wells shall provide
monthly quantity of discharge information to the city on forms approved by the
director. To provide such information, the user shall either install a city-
approved permanent flow meter on his water well or install an approved
wastewater metering device on each building sewer. A residential user with a
private well may, in lieu of being charged the average user fee for his user
class, provide monthly quantity of discharge information as provided above.
   (b)   A user whose water is supplied by a private water company shall be
subject to the data reporting provisions of subsection (a) unless the private
water company provides the city with itemized monthly records of delivered
water in a form approved by the director.
   (c)   Inspectors shall have access at all reasonable times to metering
devices on building sewers on private wells.
(Ord. No. 4376, § 2, 9-2-75; Ord. No. 4527, §§ 12, 13, 6-28-76)
Sec. 24-26. Sales taxes; business privilege taxes; in-lieu-of-franchise taxes.
All applicable sales taxes, business privilege taxes and in-lieu-of-franchise
taxes shall be added to sewer user fees.
(Ord. No. 4376, § 2, 9-2-75)
Sec. 24-27. Billing.
   (a)   User fees shall be billed by the city water utility and collected by
the director of finance of the city. He shall account for all receipts and
disbursements.
   (b)   A user fee billing shall be voided upon a showing by the one in
receipt of the bill that he is not a user. Such a showing shall be made within
sixty (60) days of the billing date and shall be demonstrated through the use
of a dye test.
(Ord. No. 4376, § 2, 9-2-75)
Sec. 24-28. Deposits.
The director or his agent may require a deposit of not less than two (2)
months' nor more than twelve (12) months' estimated sewer user fees from any
user.
(Ord. No. 4376, § 2, 9-2-75; Ord. No. 4527, § 14, 6-28-76)
Sec. 24-29. Use of fund revenues.
Revenues derived from the sewer user fee shall be applied to meet all expenses
budgeted for the annual operation, maintenance, repair and replacement of the
joint wastewater system.
(Ord. No. 4376, § 2, 9-2-75; Ord. No. 4527, § 15, 6-28-76; Ord. No. 4594, § 10,
11-22-76)
Sec. 24-30. When and where bills are due and payable.
User fees are due and payable at the office of the city water utility not later
than twenty (20) days after the date of the bill. User fee payments not
received within such twenty-day period are delinquent.
(Ord. No. 4376, § 2, 9-2-75)
Sec. 24-31. User fees and water charges; application of payment.
User fees levied in conjunction with city water charges shall be in addition to
such water charges. The user fee combined with the water charge shall be the
total amount due for any one (1) billing period. If any lesser amount is paid,
it shall first be applied to the amount due for the water charge and any excess
applied to the amount due for the user fee.
(Ord. No. 4376, § 2, 9-2-75)
Sec. 24-32. Enforcement.
   (a)   A basic penalty charge of ten (10) percent of the unpaid balance, or
five dollars ($5.00), whichever is greater, may be added to any user fee
payment that is delinquent. Interest at the rate of one-half (0.5) percent per
month shall accrue on the sum of delinquent payments and penalty charges,
compounded monthly.
   (b)   When a user fee payment has been delinquent for more than sixty (60)
days, a written notice may be sent to the address listed for such account
stating the total amount of delinquent payments and penalty charges then due
and the period of time for which the payment has been delinquent.
   (c)   If the delinquent payments and penalty charges are not paid within ten
(10) working days from the date of the delinquency notice, the director or his
agents may take appropriate steps to ensure that the sewer connection giving
rise to the delinquency is no longer utilized until the delinquency is paid.
(Ord. No. 4376, § 2, 9-2-75; Ord. No. 4527, § 16, 6-28-76)
Secs. 24-33--24-39. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE CONTROL AND INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY PROGRAM
Sec. 24-40. Definitions of terms.
In addition to the definitions contained in sections
24-1 and
24-20, the following definitions shall apply:
   Sec. 24-40(1). Excessive peak flows means peak flow rates which are greater
than four (4.0) times the average twenty-four-hour flow or two and five tenths
(2.5) times the average flow during the greatest eight-hour flow period in the
day.
   Sec. 24-40(2). Incompatible wastes means all wastes except those which the
wastewater treatment plant is specifically designed to remove. Pollutants other
than suspended solids, COD and pH are considered incompatible.
   Sec. 24-40(3). Industrial user means any user of publicly owned treatment
works identified with Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, Office
of Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented, under the following
divisions:
   (a)   Division A--Agriculture, forestry and fishing;
   (b)   Division B--Mining;
   (c)   Division D--Manufacturing;
   (d)   Division E--Transportation, communications, electric, gas and sanitary
services;
   (e)   Division I--Services.
   Sec. 24-40(4). Major industrial user means any industrial user with a
wastewater discharge equal or exceeding a rate of fifty thousand (50,000)
gallons per day for a duration of thirty (30) minutes, or twenty thousand
(20,000) gallons per day for any twenty-four-hour period.
   Sec. 24-40(5). Minor industrial user means any industrial user discharging
less than a major industrial user.
   Sec. 24-40(6). Permit means industrial discharge permit unless otherwise
noted, or if spelled with a lower-case "p".
   Sec. 24-40(7). Trade secrets shall include, but not be limited to, process,
tool, mechanism, compound, procedure, production data, or compilation of
information which is not patented, which is known only to certain individuals
within a commercial concern who are using it to fabricate, produce or compound
an article of trade or a service having commercial value, and which gives its
user an opportunity to obtain a business advantage over competitors who do not
know or use it.
(Ord. No. 4672, § 5, 6-20-77)
Sec. 24-41. Rules and regulations.
All rules, regulations, guidelines and charges adopted in conjunction with
administration of this article shall be in writing; and a copy shall be filed
in the office of the city clerk.
(Ord. No. 4672, § 5, 6-20-77)
Sec. 24-42. Permit for industrial wastewater discharge.
   Sec. 24-42(1). General Conditions of the Industrial Wastewater Discharge
Permit.
   (a)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged industrial
wastewater into the public sewer without first obtaining a permit for
industrial wastewater discharge for each connection. However, certain persons
as defined in minor section
24-42(2) are exempt from obtaining a discharge permit. Exemption from obtaining
a permit shall not be construed as exempting a person from any other provisions
in this article. In situations where an establishment or class of
establishments exempt from obtaining a permit is shown to discharge prohibited
substances or to exceed the concentration limitations of restricted substances,
that establishment or class of establishments may be required to install
pretreatment facilities or take other action to prevent the prohibited
discharges.
   (b)   The permit may require pretreatment of industrial wastewater prior to
discharge, restriction of peak discharges, relocation of a point discharge,
disposal of certain restricted wastes by alternative methods, reuse of process
wastewater where economically feasible, installation of metering and sampling
manholes, the reporting of discharge volumes and wastewater sampling data, and
the repayment of excessive treatment costs not covered by the user charge.
   (c)   No permit is transferable without written consent of the director.
   (d)   No person shall discharge industrial wastewater in excess of the
quantity or quality limitations set by the permit.
   (e)   Any person desiring to discharge wastewater or use facilities which
are not in conformance with the permit should apply to the director for an
amended permit. Major industrial users shall apply for an amended permit not
less often than annually. Such amended permit shall be based on the monitoring
required by minor section
24-43(5).
   Sec. 24-42(2). Identification of Persons Required To Obtain A Permit.
   (a)   Any user discharging to the public sewer system, not specifically
exempt in paragraph (b), identified in the Standard Industrial Classification
(SIC) Manual, 1972, Office of Management and Budget, as amended and
supplemented, under the following divisions shall apply for a permit from the
department of water and sewers within three (3) months after the passage of
this article or prior to making a new connection:
   1.   Division A--Agriculture, forestry, and fishing;
   2.   Division B--Mining;
   3.   Division D--Manufacturing;
   4.   Division E--Transportation, communications, electric, gas and sanitary
services;
   5.   Division I--Services.
   (b)   A user in the divisions listed may be exempt from obtaining a permit
if it is determined that the discharges will be from primarily sanitary
conveniences. The director shall establish guidelines for deciding whether a
permit is required in those cases where the term "primarily" is doubtful.
   (c)   Where more than one (1) SIC classification is applicable to an
establishment, the classification that requires the most stringent requirement
shall be used.
   Sec. 24-42(3). Procedure for Obtaining an Industrial Wastewater Discharge
Permit. Applicants for a permit shall complete an application form available
from the department of water and sewers. The completed form, along with any
required plans and data, shall be processed by the department. The application
shall be approved if the applicant has complied with all applicable
requirements of this article and furnished to the director all requested
information, and if the director determines that there is adequate capacity in
the agency's facilities, based upon sound engineering criteria, to convey,
treat and dispose of the wastewater. Upon approval, the director or his
designated representative, will sign the application form. When properly
signed, the application form shall constitute a valid industrial wastewater
discharge permit.
   Sec. 24-42(4). Change of permit restrictions. The director may change the
restrictions or conditions of a permit when necessary to comply with
Environmental Protection Agency regulations on wastewater discharges to
municipal treatment systems, to reduce the levels of incompatible wastes in the
treated wastewater effluent thereby allowing beneficial reuse of the effluent
wastewater to comply with the requirements of the NPDES permit to discharge, or
as circumstances may require.
(Ord. No. 4672, § 5, 6-20-77)
Sec. 24-43. Industrial wastewater permit requirements; restrictions and
conditions.
   Sec. 24-43(1). Pretreatment of Industrial Waste water. 
An industrial wastewater pretreatment system or device may be required by the
director to treat industrial flows prior to discharge to the sewer when it is
necessary to restrict or prevent the discharge of certain waste constituents to
the sewer system, to smooth out peak flow rates, or to accomplish any
pretreatment required by the director. All pretreatment systems or devices
shall be approved by the director, but such approval shall not absolve the
industrial discharger of the responsibility of meeting any industrial effluent
limitation set by the director.
A gravity separation interceptor, equalizing tank, neutralizing chamber, and
control manhole will be required to remove prohibited settleable and flotable
solids, to equalize wastewater streams varying greatly in quantity and/or
quality, to neutralize low or high pH flows, and to facilitate inspection, flow
measurements and sampling, respectively. Floor drains from commercial or
manufacturing buildings, warehouses, or multiuse structures shall not discharge
directly to the sewer, but shall first discharge to a gravity separation
interceptor.
   Sec. 24-43(2). Separation of Domestic and Industrial Wastewaters. Wastewater
from sanitary plumbing fixtures, including, but not limited to, restrooms,
showers and drinking fountains, shall be kept separate from industrial
wastewaters until the industrial wastewater passes through any required
pretreatment device and the control manhole, unless the wastes are compatible
with the pretreatment process.
   Sec. 24-43(3). Control Manhole. The director may require a control manhole
of a design approved by the director in accordance with adopted standards to be
furnished and installed by major industrial wastewater dischargers to
facilitate inspection, sampling and flow measurement by department personnel.
Any required control manhole shall be located such that it is accessible at all
times. When it is necessary to install a control manhole within a fenced-off
area, the department's monitoring and inspection personnel shall have access to
the manhole through an adjacent locked gate for which the department shall have
keys. All control manholes shall be kept free from obstructions which prevent
entering the manhole and shall be maintained to permit safe entry and working
conditions. Major industrial wastewater dischargers may be required to install
flow metering equipment in the control manhole. This equipment must be
maintained in proper working condition and calibrated regularly to maintain
accuracy.
   Sec. 24-43(4). Annual Treatability Charge. An annual treatability charge or
a charge per unit of offending constituent as established shall be paid by
persons discharging industrial wastes which result in unusual operation and
maintenance costs to the department which are not accounted for by normal unit
charges for volume, suspended solids and COD under the sewer user fee system.
Examples of such constituents are excessive peak flows, excessive chlorine
demand, excessive immediate oxygen demand, etc. Such charges shall be
reasonably calculated to defray the costs attributable to such wastes. If there
is a substantial change in the strength, volume, or delivery flow rate
characteristics introduced into the treatment works by an industrial user, such
users' share shall be adjusted accordingly.
   Sec. 24-43(5). Sampling and Metering Waste Discharges. 
Industrial waste discharges shall be periodically sampled to determine quality
and/or metered to determine quantity. The frequency of required sampling and/or
metering of discharge volumes shall be stated on the industrial discharge
permit in accordance with the nature of the wastes discharged and policies set
by the director. Major industrial waste discharges shall be sampled to
determine quality and metered to determine quantity, no less than annually.
Samples shall be collected in such a manner as to be representative of the
composition of the wastes. Samples shall be iced or preserved by methods
approved by the director. Samples shall be analyzed for the constituents stated
on the permit by an independent laboratory approved by the director or by the
department's wastewater laboratory. The person discharging shall pay all costs
of sampling and analyzing samples, whether or not the analyses are performed by
a private laboratory or by the department. A person discharging wastes may
request that the analysis be performed by the department's laboratory, but such
requests may be refused due to the lack of manpower or testing apparatus.
The director may at any time sample and/or analyze industrial waste discharges
in lieu of required sampling by the person discharging. A charge for sampling
and/or analysis by the department's laboratory will be set by the director; and
such charges shall be paid by the person discharging the wastes, whether the
sampling and/or analyses are in lieu of required samples or are requested by
the person discharging in fulfillment of his permit requirements.
(Ord. No. 4672, § 5, 6-20-77)
Sec. 24-44. Truckers' discharge permit.
   Sec. 24-44(1). Any person owning vacuum or "cesspool" pump trucks, or other
liquid waste transport trucks, and desiring to discharge collected wastes to
the public sewerage facilities, shall obtain a valid trucker's discharge permit
from the department. All applicants for a trucker's discharge permit shall
complete the application form, pay the appropriate fee, and agree in writing to
abide by the department's regulations governing discharge of liquid wastes from
trucks. The trucker's discharge permit shall designate specific points for
discharging various types of permitted waste discharges, and it shall be valid
for one (1) year from the date of issuance.
   Sec. 24-44(2). The director may require payment for treatment and disposal
costs or may refuse permission to discharge certain prohibited wastes. Any
person negligently or willfully violating the department requirements for
liquid waste discharges from trucks shall be in violation of this article and
may have his permit revoked, in addition to any other remedies provided by law.
(Ord. No. 4672, § 5, 6-20-77)
Sec. 24-45. Prohibition of specific substances.
   Sec. 24-45(1). No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any
stormwater runoff, roof runoff, cooling water which has not been concentrated
to a factor of 3 or greater, or other unpolluted waters to any sanitary sewer,
except as provided for in minor section
24-45(2).
   Sec. 24-45(2). Upon the approval of the director or his appointed
representative, a permit may be issued to allow discharge of swimming pool
drainage, cooling water concentrated by a factor less than 3 or unpolluted
process waters where, in the opinion of the director or his appointed
representative, other methods of disposal would produce a public nuisance. In
no case shall water be discharged upon public property, such as alleys or
streets.
   Sec. 24-45(3). No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of
the following described waters or wastes to any public sewer:
   (a)   Any solids, liquids or gases which by themselves or by interaction
with other substances may cause fire or explosion hazards, or in any other way
be injurious to persons, property or the operation of the wastewater system.
   (b)   Any noxious or malodorous solids, liquids or gases, which, either
singly or by interaction with other substances, are capable of interfering with
wastewater treatment processes, creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or
preventing entry into sewers for their maintenance and repair.
   (c)   Any ashes, asphalt, dead animals, offal, cinders, sand, mud, straw,
shavings, metal, glass, rags, paper towels, feathers, tar, sanitary napkins,
plastics, wood, whole blood, paunch manure, bones, hair and fleshings,
entrails, paper dishes, paper cups, milk containers, or other similar paper
products or any other solids, greases, slurries or viscous materials of such
character or in such quantity that, in the opinion of the director, may cause
an obstruction to the flow in the sewer or otherwise interfere with the proper
function of the wastewater system.
   (d)   Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of any character and
quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials
at the wastewater treatment plant.
   (e)   Any toxic substances, chemical elements, or compounds in quantities
sufficient to impair the operation or efficiency of the wastewater treatment
facilities, or that will pass through the wastewater treatment plant and cause
the effluent thereof to exceed state or federal water quality requirements.
   (f)   Any liquids having a pH lower than 6.0 or higher than 9.0, or having
any corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazards to structures,
equipment or personnel of the wastewater system.
   (g)   Any pumping wastes from grease traps, or grease and/or grit
interceptors.
   (h)   Recognizable portions of the human anatomy.
   (i)   Any waste that is considered infectious without complete disinfection
before discharging into the sanitary sewer.
   (j)   Any water added for the purpose of diluting wastes which would
otherwise exceed applicable maximum concentration limitations.
   Sec. 24-45(4). This section limits the concentration of certain incompatible
wastes which, when present in excessive quantities, interfere with collection
and treatment of wastewater, cause a degradation of the wastewater treatment
plant effluent, or increase the operation and maintenance costs of the
wastewater system. Whereas, it is desirable to achieve the best possible
wastewater treatment, while minimizing the economic impact on wastewater
dischargers, the list given below contains concentration guidelines rather than
strict limits. These guidelines permit the control of undesirable substances at
lower concentrations than would otherwise be allowed by strict limits which
would be imposed on all users regardless of the volume of the discharge, or the
relative cost of treatment to meet the concentration limit. Except in
quantities or concentrations stipulated herein, it shall be unlawful for any
person to discharge waters or wastes to the sanitary sewer containing:
   (a)   Biodegradable oils and greases in a concentration which permits
deposits in a sanitary sewer at any point within or downstream of the building
connection sewer, or which exceeds a concentration of one hundred (100)
milligrams per liter.
   (b)   Nonbiodegradable cutting oils, commonly called soluble oil, which form
persistent water emulsions in concentrations exceeding twenty (20) milligrams
per liter.
   (c)   Nonbiodegradable petroleum oils, mineral oils, refined petroleum
products or chlorinated hydrocarbons in concentrations exceeding twenty (20)
milligrams per liter.
   (d)   Radioactive material in concentrations greater than one hundred (100)
microcuries per liter.
   (e)   Any material or concentrations producing an immediate oxygen demand
greater than ten (10) milligrams per liter of oxygen.
   (f)   Any waste producing detectable discoloration of the treatment plant
effluent.
   (g)   Any garbage or waste that is not ground sufficiently to pass through a
three- eighths-inch screen.
   (h)   Any of the ions or compounds in solution or suspension in
concentrations exceeding the guidelines listed in the table that follows:
Ion or Compound.... Concentration (mg/l)
Ion or Compound.... Concentration (mg/l)
Arsenic....         1.5
Barium....          30.0
Cadmium....         3.0
Chromium....        1.5
Lead....            1.5
Mercury....         0.06
Selenium....        0.3
Silver....          1.5
Boron....           10
Copper....          No excessive amounts
Iron....            No excessive amounts
Manganese....       30
Molybdenum....      30
Nickel....          No excessive amounts
Tin....             No excessive amounts
Zinc....            No excessive amounts
 
The term "no excessive amounts" indicates that discharges shall be limited
through the permit process.
The concentration guideline listed indicates the maximum allowable
concentration permitted for discharge to the sanitary sewer without specific
pretreatment or specific steps taken to prevent contamination of the wastewater
discharge. No discharger shall exceed the concentration given in the table
unless specifically allowed by an industrial wastewater discharge permit.
   Sec. 24-45(5). Permits to discharge in excess of the guidelines listed in
minor section
24-45(4) shall be approved only with the following provisions and stipulations:
   (a)   The discharger must submit a written statement containing all
pertinent facts necessary to show that it is technically or economically
impractical to reduce the substance under consideration to the guidelines
concentration.
   (b)   The discharger shall propose measures to reduce the concentration of
the substance in question to a specific level.
   (c)   The discharger must show that at the specified discharge concentration
the pollutant in question will not significantly degrade effluent quality, nor
will it increase the pollutant's concentration in the treatment plant effluent
beyond that permitted by EPA drinking water standards.
   (d)   The discharger (must agree to pay the unit charge imposed by the
utility for the specific substances in violation of the concentration
guidelines.
   Sec. 24-45(6). In certain instances, the environmental protection agency
(EPA) has established pretreatment standards for discharge to municipal sewage
systems for specific industrial classes. Where the EPA pretreatment standards
are more stringent than those given in the preceding paragraphs, the EPA
standards shall apply.
(Ord. No. 4672, § 5, 6-20-77)
Sec. 24-46. Industrial cost recovery.
   Sec. 24-46(1). Federal Requirement for an Industrial Cost Recovery (ICR)
Program. As required by Public Law 92-500, this section provides for the
recovery of industry's share of federal grant funding of the regional sewage
collection and treatment facilities. The environmental protection agency's
(EPA) regulations for industrial cost recovery read, in part:
"Each year during the industrial cost recovery period, each industrial user of
the treatment works shall pay its share of the total (federal) grant amount
divided by the recovery period thirty (30) years or the life of the facility,
whichever is less."
   Sec. 24-46(2). Use of Funds Collected by the ICR Program.
   (a)   Fifty (50) percent of the total ICR funds collected shall be invested
in obligations guaranteed by the U.S. Government in accordance with federal
regulations (40 C.F.R. 35.928-2C). These funds, along with interest earned,
shall be returned to the federal treasury not later than one hundred twenty
(120) days after the end of the fiscal year ending June 30.
   (b)   Pending use, forty (40) percent of the total ICR funds collected shall
be invested in obligations guaranteed by the U.S. Government in accordance with
federal regulations (40 C.F.R. 35.928-2C). These funds shall be used solely for
eligible costs of expansion or reconstruction of treatment works associated
with the project and necessary to meet the requirements of Public Law 92-500,
as approved in writing by the regional administrator of the EPA.
   (c)   The ten (10) percent of ICR funds remaining shall be used to help
defer the cost of enforcing this sewer use article.
   Sec. 24-46(3). ICR Charges. In accordance with Public Law 92-500, all
industrial users shall be required to pay ICR charges, unless excluded. An
industrial user may be excluded from ICR charges if he meets the following
criterion: The user discharges only nonprocess segregated domestic wastes, or
wastes from sanitary conveniences (for example, the so-called "dry" industries)
and is not a significant industrial user under the regulations (40 C.F.R.
35.925-12).
   Sec. 24-46(4). ICR Charge Computation for Industrial Users.
   (a)   The ICR charge computation for industrial users is based upon the
benefits and responsibilities for any given project allocated only to those
users actually served by a given project. Furthermore, if a user benefits from
only part of a project, then ICR funds are recovered only for that portion of
the project which benefits the user.
The ICR computation for industrial users functions to encourage industrial
development where it would have the least impact on the wastewater treatment
and collection system as well as to distribute the cost of grant-funded capital
improvements to those users directly responsible for such improvements.
   (b)   The ICR charges for an industrial user shall be computed according to
the following formulas:
1. Total treatment:     
                      ICR = TGF × VCF × AWD
                       DCT
                      + TGF × CCF × ACD
                       DCC
                      + TGF × SCF × ASD
                       DCS
2. Annual treatment:   ICR = Total Treatment ICR
                       30 years
                      (See minor section
                       24-46(6))
3. Interceptor:        ICR = IGF × PUF × PWD
                       DCV
4. Annual interceptor: ICR = Interceptor ICR
                       30 years
                      (See minor section
                       24-46(6))
5. Total annual:I       
CT =                   Annual Treatment ICR + Annual Interceptor ICR
                       Treatment grant funds equals total EPA grant funds
                       received for planning, design and construction of the
TGF =                  treatment project to which the user is tributary and
                       which is in operation at the beginning of the recovery
                       period.
                       Volume cost factor, or the ratio of the costs allocated
                       to volume to the total cost of grant improvements.
VCF =                  Pending future capital cost analysis, this factor shall
                       be assumed equal to .53 or 53% of the total cost of
                       treatment works.
AWD =                  Average wastewater discharge as found on the user's
                       industrial wastewater discharge permit.
DCT =                  Design capacity for treatment expressed as the average
                       daily dry weather flow.
                       COD cost factor. This factor shall be assumed equal to
CCF =                  .31 until detailed capital cost analysis shows
                       otherwise.
ACD =                  Average amount of COD discharge taken from permit, in
                       pounds per day.
DCC =                  Design capacity for COD, in pounds per day.
                       SS cost factor. This factor shall be assumed equal to
SCF =                  .16 until detailed capital cost analysis shows
                       otherwise.
ASD =                  Average amount of SS discharge taken from permit, in
                       pounds per day.
DCS =                  Design capacity for SS, in pounds per day.
                       Interceptor grant funds equals total EPA grand funds
                       received from planning, design and construction of each
IGF =                  interceptor project to which the user is tributary and
                       which is in service at the beginning of the cost
                       recovery period.
                       Percent utilization factor equals the average percentage
PUF =                  of EPA funded interceptor projects utilized (estimated
                       by dividing the funded interceptor length tributary to
                       the user by the total interceptor length).
                       Peak wastewater discharge as found on the user's
                       industrial wastewater discharge permit. Wastewater
PWD =                  permits of major industrial users shall be amended at
                       least annually following monitoring as required by minor
                       section
                       24-43(5).
DCV =                  Design capacity for volume equals total peak dry weather
                       design capacity for all tributary interceptors.
 
The above formula for total annual ICR charges reflects each industrial
customer's annual contribution for federally funded treatment plants and
individual federally funded interceptor projects which specifically benefit the
industrial user.
   Sec. 24-46(5). An industrial user's charge for ICR shall be reviewed no less
than annually to include any new tributary grant funded projects in operation
and to correct the ICR charge for any change in the user's wastewater discharge
characteristics.
   Sec. 24-46(6). The useful life of wastewater improvements will normally
equal or exceed thirty (30) years. Thirty (30) years will be used as the
maximum cost recovery period. Capital improvements with useful lives of less
than thirty (30) years shall have a cost recovery period equal to the useful
life of the project in accordance with EPA regulations.
   Sec. 24-46(7). The total ICR recovered from an industry which discontinues
use during the ICR period shall be the federal cost of the capacity used
multiplied by the ratio of its period of use to the ICR period.
   Sec. 24-46(8). A new industry which connects to a treatment works after such
works has been put into service shall begin ICR payments on the date use is
initiated and shall continue for the unexpired portion of the ICR period or
until the industry ceases use of the facility, whichever occurs first. The
total ICR recovered from a new industry shall be the federal cost of the
capacity used multiplied by the ratio of its period of use to the ICR period.
(Ord. No. 4672, § 5, 6-20-77)
Sec. 24-47 Power and authority of inspectors.
   Sec. 24-47(1). Inspection of every facility that is involved directly or
indirectly with the discharge of wastewater to the utility's sewage system may
be made by departmental inspectors as deemed necessary by the director. These
facilities shall include but not be limited to: sewers; sewage pumping plants;
pollution control plants; all industrial processes; industrial wastewater
generation, conveyance and pretreatment facilities, devices and connection
sewers; and all similar sewerage facilities. Inspections may be made to
determine that such facilities are maintained and operated properly and are
adequate to meet the provisions of this article.
   Sec. 24-47(2). Adequate identification shall be provided by the director for
all inspectors and other authorized personnel, and these persons shall identify
themselves when entering any property for inspection purposes, or when
inspecting the work of any contractor.
   Sec. 24-47(3). Access to all of the above facilities or to other facilities
directly or indirectly connected to the public sewerage systems shall be given
to authorized personnel of the department of water and sewers at all reasonable
times, including those occasioned by emergency conditions. Any permanent or
temporary obstruction to easy access to the sewerage facility to be inspected
shall promptly be removed by the facility user or owner at the request of the
director, and shall not be replaced.
   Sec. 24-47(4). No person shall interfere with; delay, resist or refuse
entrance to an authorized inspector attempting to inspect any wastewater
generation, conveyance or treatment facility connected directly or indirectly
to the public sewerage system.
   Sec. 24-47(5). Any trade secrets obtained through the permit process or in
the course of implementation or enforcement of this article shall not be made
public except to that extent necessary to enforce this article.
(Ord. No. 4672, § 5, 6-20-77)
Sec. 24-48. Enforcement.
   Sec. 24-48(1). Any person violating any provisions of this article or any
condition or limitation of a permit issued pursuant thereto, is guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction is punishable by a fine not to exceed three
hundred dollars ($300.00), and imprisonment not to exceed sixty (60) days, or
both. Each day during which any violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense punishable as provided above.
   Sec. 24-48(2). Any person who intentionally or negligently allows discharge
to the wastewater collection and treatment system any industrial wastewater
which is detrimental to the treatment works or its proper and efficient
operation and maintenance, shall be civilly liable to the city for a sum not to
exceed six thousand dollars ($6,000.00) for each day in which such violation
occurs. In the event of such violation, the director shall, upon authorization
from the city manager, petition the courts to impose, assess and recover such
sums expended by the department of water and sewers to correct the resultant
damage to its sewerage systems.
   Sec. 24-48(3). All charges for the industrial surcharge, for sampling and/or
analysis of wastewater, for excessive sewer maintenance, for the annual
treatability charge, or any other charge authorized by this article shall be
paid within twenty (20) days of the date of the billing. After twenty (20) days
from the date of billing the unpaid balance shall be subject to a basic penalty
charge of ten (10) percent. Interest at the rate of one-half (0.5) percent per
month shall accrue on the sum of delinquent payments and penalty charges
compounded monthly.
   Sec. 24-48(4). Wastewater dischargers existing on the effective date of this
article who cannot comply with wastewater quality limitations with existing
pretreatment equipment may receive a permit allowing discharge of wastes which
are in violation of section
24-45 of this article. This permit will be valid for a period set by the
director, which is consistent with the time required to install the equipment
necessary to comply with the standards set forth in section
24-45. In no case shall this period for compliance exceed two (2) years. The
above temporary permit shall require compliance with section
24-45, except where specifically stated in the permit. The permit holder shall
be subject to treatability charges as outlined in minor section
24-43(4), and he is in no way relieved of any charges for excessive sewer
maintenance resulting from discharges which adversely affect the sewage
collection and treatment facilities.
   Sec. 24-48(5). Should measurements or other investigations reveal that an
industrial discharger is discharging waste volume or pollutant quantities in
excess of those permitted by the discharge permit, or in excess of the
quantities reported to the utility by the discharger, the discharger shall
apply for an amended permit and shall be assessed for delinquent charges with
penalty and interest as outlined in minor section
24-48(3) above. For purposes of determining that the discharger is exceeding
reported or permitted values, the following metering and/or sampling data shall
be considered adequate:
The sample analysis and/or metering data must show that on three (3) separate
twenty-four-hour periods, the discharger exceeded the reported or permitted
wastewater quality or quantity parameters by ten (10) percent or more. For the
purpose of estimating delinquent charges any discharger found in violation
shall, in the absence of other evidence or previous discharge verifications, be
presumed to have been discharging the preceding three (3) years at the
determined parameter values.
   Sec. 24-48(6). Suspension of Permit for Industrial Wastewater Discharge. The
director may suspend a permit for industrial wastewater discharge for a period
not to exceed forty-five (45) days when such suspension is necessary in order
to stop a discharge which presents an imminent hazard to the public health,
safety or welfare, to the local environment or to the city's sewerage system.
Any discharger notified of a suspension of his industrial wastewater permit
shall immediately cease and desist the discharge of all industrial wastewater
to the sewerage system. In the event of a failure of the discharger to comply
voluntarily with the suspension order, the director shall take such steps as
are reasonably necessary to ensure compliance.
Any suspended discharger may file with the director a request for an appeal
board hearing in which event the appeal board shall meet within fourteen (14)
days of the receipt by the director of such request. The board shall hold a
hearing on the suspension and shall either confirm or deny the action of the
director. Reasonable notice of the hearing shall be given to the suspended
discharger in the manner provided for in minor section
24-48(8), five (5) days prior to the hearing date. At this hearing, the
suspended discharger may appear personally or through counsel, cross-examine
witnesses, and present evidence in his own behalf. In the event that (a) the
board fails to meet within the time set forth above, or (b) fails to make a
determination within five (5) days after the close of the hearing, the order of
suspension shall be stayed until a determination is made either confirming or
revoking the action of the director.
The director shall reinstate the industrial wastewater permit upon proof of
satisfactory compliance with all discharge requirements of the city. Upon the
failure of the suspended discharger to meet the requirements of the city, the
director shall institute a separate revocation hearing pursuant to minor
section
24-48(7).
   Sec. 24-48(7). Revocation of Permit for Industrial Wastewater Discharge. The
appeal board may revoke a permit for industrial wastewater discharge upon a
finding that the discharger has violated any provision of this article. No
revocation shall be ordered until a hearing on the question has been held by
the appeal board. At this hearing the discharger may appeal personally or
through counsel, cross-examine witnesses and present evidence in his own
behalf. Notice of the hearing shall be given to the discharger in accordance
with minor section
24-48(8) at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of hearing.
Any discharger whose industrial wastewater permit has been revoked shall
immediately stop all discharge of any liquid-carried wastes covered by the
permit to any public sewer that is tributary to a sewer or sewerage system of
the city. The director may disconnect or permanently block from such public
sewer the industrial connection sewer of any discharger whose permit has been
revoked, if such action is necessary to ensure compliance with the order of
revocation.
Before any further discharge of industrial wastewater may be made by the
discharger, he must apply for a new city permit for industrial wastewater
discharge, pay all charges that would be required upon initial application
together with all delinquent fees, charges and penalties, and such other sums
as the discharger may owe to the city. Costs incurred by the city in revoking
the permit and disconnecting the industrial connection sewer shall be paid for
by the discharger before issuance of a new permit for industrial wastewater
discharge.
   Sec. 24-48(8). Notice of Violation.
   (a)   The director shall notify any person found to be in violation of this
article or of any limitation or requirement of a permit issued hereunder except
where the director finds that there is an imminent hazard to public health,
safety or welfare, to the local environment or to the city's sewerage system.
The director shall take no enforcement action under this article until ten (10)
days from date notice is given, unless a different time period is required by
law.
   (b)   Any notice required to be given by the director under this article
shall be in writing and served by registered or certified mail. If served by
mail, the notice shall be sent to the last address known to the director. Where
the address is unknown, service may be made the owner of record of the property
involved.
   (c)   Notice shall be deemed to have been given at the time of deposit,
postage prepaid, in a facility regularly serviced by the United States Postal
Service.
   Sec. 24-48(9). Enjoinment From Discharge. Any holder of a permit for
industrial wastewater discharge may be enjoined from discharging all industrial
wastewater to the sewerage system until such person has complied with this
article.
(Ord. No. 4672, § 5, 6-20-77)
Sec. 24-49. Appeal procedure.
   Sec. 24-49(1). Except in cases brought under minor section
24-48(6), any user, permit applicant, permit holder or other person affected by
any decision, action or determination made by the director or his staff,
interpreting or implementing the provisions of this article or on any permit
issued herein, may file with the director a written request for reconsideration
within ten (10) days of such decision, action or determination, setting forth
in detail the facts supporting the user's request for reconsideration. The
director shall act upon the request in writing within thirty (30) days from the
date of filing.
   Sec. 24-49(2). If the ruling made by the director is not acceptable to the
person requesting reconsideration, he may within ten (10) days after
notification of the director's action, file a written appeal to the appeal
board designated by the mayor and council with the responsibility and authority
to rule on appeals. The written appeal shall be heard by the mayor and council
or the appeal board within thirty (30) days from the date of filing, and a
ruling on the appeal shall be made within forty-five (45) days from the date of
filing. Failure to rule shall be deemed a denial of the applicant's request.
   Sec. 24-49(3). Any user, permit applicant or permit holder shall take
immediate action as required to abide by any decision, action or determination,
including cease and desist orders if such immediate action is requested by the
director to protect the public from a serious threat to health or property. In
situations other than that given in minor section
24-49(2), the person requesting reconsideration by the director or his staff
may delay compliance to a decision, action or determination until notified of
the director's ruling on the appeal. The director's ruling on any appeal shall
be complied with during any period of further appeal to the appeal board.
   Sec. 24-49(4). The determination of the board of appeals of a suspension,
revocation or any other appeal is final. Further action shall be taken by the
aggrieved party in the superior court.
   Sec. 24-49(5). Hearings of the board of appeals shall be open to the public.
Notice of the time and place of the public hearing shall be given at least
fifteen (15) and not more than thirty (30) calendar days prior to the hearing
by:
   (a)   Publication at least once in a newspaper of general circulation
published or circulated in the city;
   (b)   By posting notice in conspicuous places close to the property
affected;
   (c)   Such other manner as is deemed desirable.
(Ord. No. 4672, § 5, 6-20-77)
Sec. 24-50. Billing.
Industrial wastewater surcharges for industrial cost recovery shall be billed
by the city water utility and collected by the director of finance for the
city. He shall account for all receipts and disbursements.
(Ord. No. 4672, § 5, 6-20-77)
Sec. 24-51. Deposits.
The director or his designated agent may require a deposit of not less than two
(2) months' nor more than twelve (12) months' estimated surcharge from any
industrial discharger.
(Ord. No. 4672, § 5, 6-20-77)
Sec. 24-52. Use of funds.
Revenues derived from the industrial cost recovery shall be expended according
to minor section
24-46(1) and (2).
(Ord. No. 4672, § 5, 6-20-77)
Sec. 24-53. Effective date.
The effective date of this article shall be July 1, 1977.
(Ord. No. 4672, § 5, 6-20-77)
Chapter 25
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS*
__________
*   Editors Note: See editor's footnotes, articles I, II and III. Ordinance No.
8727, § 3, adopted September 9, 1996, repealed division 1--3 titles.
   Cross References: Operating bicycles on sidewalks, pedestrian paths, or
through underpasses prohibited, §
5-2; motor vehicles and traffic, ch.
20; subdivisions, § 23-532 et seq.
__________
Art. I.   Repairs and Improvements in Public Rights-of-way, §§ 25-1--25-44
Art. II.   Duties and Prohibitions, §§ 25-45--25-62
Art. III.   Address Numbering, §§ 25-63--25-79
Art. IV.   Underground Utility Districts, §§ 25-80--25-100
Art. V.   Temporary Work Zone Traffic Management, §§ 25-101--25-105
Article I. Repairs and Improvements in Public Rights-of-way
Sec.
25-1.   Permits required.
Sec.
25-2.   Application forms.
Sec.
25-3.   Conditions for obtaining permit.
Sec.
25-4.   Public right-of-way improvement permit fees.
Sec.
25-5.   Permit expiration.
Sec.
25-6.   Grade and alignment standards.
Sec.
25-7.   Variance from standards.
Sec.
25-8.   Grade and line required.
Sec.
25-9.   Construction standards.
Sec.
25-10.   Inspection of work.
Sec.
25-11.   Conformance to rules and regulations.
Sec.
25-12.   Repair of sidewalk by abutting owners; failure to repair; no permit
fee required.
Sec.
25-13.   Permit required.
Sec.
25-14.   Unimproved portions of public right-of-way may be improved.
Sec.
25-15.   Guards required separating private property from improved right-of-
way.
Sec.
25-16.   Additional requirements for improved portions of right-of-way.
Sec.
25-17.   Exceptions to permit requirement.
Sec.
25-18.   Application forms.
Sec.
25-19.   Reserved.
Sec.
25-20.   Conditions for obtaining permit.
Sec.
25-21.   Permits required from other city departments or governmental agencies.
Sec.
25-22.   Conformance to rules and regulations.
Sec.
25-23.   Inspection of work.
Sec.
25-24.   Barricades; notice.
Sec.
25-25.   Resurfacing.
Sec.
25-26.   Permit expiration.
Sec.
25-27.   Backfilling and filling.
Sec.
25-28.   Variance from standards.
Sec.
25-29.   "Driveway" defined.
Sec.
25-30.   Permit required.
Sec.
25-31.   Application forms.
Sec.
25-32.   Reserved.
Sec.
25-33.   Conditions for obtaining permit.
Sec.
25-34.   Variance from standards.
Sec.
25-35.   Permit expiration.
Sec.
25-36.   Conformance to rules and regulations.
Sec.
25-37.   Inspection of work.
Sec.
25-38.   Special requirements in residential districts.
Sec.
25-39.   Special requirements in business districts.
Sec.
25-40.   Special requirements in industrial districts.
Sec.
25-41.   Variances from curb cuts and driveway requirements.
Sec.
25-42.   Driveways may be denied.
Sec.
25-43.   Curb cut replacements.
Sec.
25-44.   Permit and fee curb cut replacements.
Article II. Duties and Prohibitions
Sec.
25-45.   Destroying grade or line stakes; trespassing on closed streets.
Sec.
25-45.1.   Violation declared civil infraction.
Sec.
25-46.   Obstructing streets prohibited.
Sec.
25-47.   Duty to remove street obstruction after notice.
Sec.
25-48.   Injuring, tearing up pavement or sidewalks.
Sec.
25-49.   Digging, removing earth from streets, public places.
Sec.
25-50.   Selling, displaying merchandise on streets near schools.
Sec.
25-51.   Obstructing sidewalks prohibited; placing benches on sidewalks.
Sec.
25-52.   Obstructing water flow in streets, gutters, conduits.
Sec.
25-52.1.   Planting within pedestrian area right-of-way.
Sec.
25-53.   Duty to trim.
Sec.
25-54.   Notice to trim.
Sec.
25-55.   Notice to remove; duty to keep area between curb and property line
free from grass and weeds.
Sec.
25-56.   Owners, occupants of building to keep gutters and sidewalks clean.
Sec.
25-57.   Placing flower pots, tree pots, planters on sidewalks.
Sec.
25-57.1.   Attaching newspaper vending machines to public right-of-way.
Sec.
25-58.   Under-sidewalk elevators--Where permitted.
Sec.
25-59.   Same--Permit required; application; insurance.
Sec.
25-60.   Same--Issuance of permit; terms and conditions.
Sec.
25-61.   Sale of abandoned streets, alleys; cost of moving nonconforming
improvements; installing conforming improvements.
Sec.
25-62.   Changes in street names.
Article III. Address Numbering
Sec.
25-63.   System established; compliance required.
Sec.
25-64.   East-west base line.
Sec.
25-65.   North-south base line.
Sec.
25-66.   Assignment of numbers--Generally.
Sec.
25-67.   Same--Ways not extending through to base line.
Sec.
25-68.   Display of numbers; size, material.
Sec.
25-69.   Plat book required; public inspection; assignment of numbers.
Sec.
25-70.   Numbers to be furnished upon application; determination of proper
number in case of conflict; appeal.
Sec.
25-71.   Duty to procure and display numbers; violation; withholding of permit
or approval.
Sec.
25-72.   Address numbering code.
Secs.
25-73--25-79.   Reserved.
Article IV. Underground Utility Districts
Sec.
25-80.   Establishment of districts.
Sec.
25-81.   Definitions.
Sec.
25-82.   Procedure to establish district.
Sec.
25-83.   Notice.
Sec.
25-84.   Findings required.
Sec.
25-85.   Provisions of ordinance.
Sec.
25-86.   Exceptions.
Sec.
25-87.   Publicly owned equipment.
Article V. Temporary Work Zone Traffic Management
Sec.
25-88.   Temporary work zone traffic management program established.
Sec.
25-89.   Definitions.
Sec.
25-90.   Temporary work zone traffic management.
Sec.
25-91.   Fee schedule.
Sec.
25-92.   Violations and civil sanctions.
ARTICLE I.
REPAIRS AND IMPROVEMENTS IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY*
__________
*   Editors Note: Ord. No. 2657, §§ 1--4, adopted Oct. 29, 1964, amended ch. 24
of the 1953 Code in its entirety. The editor has codified this ordinance as ch.
25 of this Code which is the comparable chapter. Sections 1 and 2 of this
ordinance repealed §§ 1, 11, 18--22 of the 1953 Code and assigned all sections
saved from repeal to article II of this chapter (see footnote, article II), and
substituted the present §§
25-1--
25-44 as article I. Article II was redesignated as article III by § 3 of this
ordinance (see note, article III). Section 4 of that ordinance created an
article IV, dealing with change of street names, the provisions of which appear
in §
25-62, a designation made by the editors to simplify amendments to the Code
(see footnote, that section). The subject matter of those sections repealed by
Ord. No. 2657, § 1, is restated and expanded upon in the present §§
25-1--
25-44.
__________
Sec. 25-1. Permits required.
No public sidewalks shall be repaired or installed by any person without first
having a written permit from the city.
(Ord. No. 2657, § 1, 10-19-64)
Sec. 25-2. Application forms.
   (a)   Application for a sidewalk repair or installation permit shall be made
on forms furnished by the city.
   (b)   Applications may be made by mail or telephone. Such applicants must
have a cash deposit with the city sufficient to cover fees, or include fees
with the mailed application.
(Ord. No. 2657, § 1, 10-19-64)
Sec. 25-3. Conditions for obtaining permit.
The conditions set forth in section
25-20 may be required before issuance of a permit.
(Ord. No. 2657, § 1, 10-19-64)
Sec. 25-4. Public right-of-way improvement permit fees.
   (a)   Permit fees for sidewalk installation, street excavations,
improvements to unimproved portions of public right of way, curb cuts, driveway
installations and repairs, are defined in the Planning and Permitting Fee
Schedule, UDC Admin Manual, Sec. 4.
   (b)   A permit shall cover only contiguous construction and the work to be
done as one (1) continuous operation. Such fees shall be tripled if work is
commenced prior to obtaining permit. Payment of triple fees shall not waive
other penalties.
(Ord. No. 2657, § 1, 10-19-75; Ord. No. 6967, § 1, 6-6-88; Ord. No. 7212, § 1,
6-12-89; Ord. No. 8727, § 1, 9-9-96; Ord. No. 12108, § 2, 6-18-24)
Sec. 25-5. Permit expiration.
A permit shall expire for work not started within thirty (30) days or completed
within sixty (60) days after issuance of a permit, and a new permit shall be
required before beginning or completing the work.
(Ord. No. 2657, § 1, 10-19-64)
Sec. 25-6. Grade and alignment standards.
Applicants shall follow the standard provisions herein set forth for sidewalk
construction:
   (1)   Minimum width: Four (4) feet.
   (2)   Beginning distance from property line: Two (2) feet.
   (3)   Grade: To follow a line sloping up and away from the top of the curb
at a slope of one-fourth inch per foot.
(Ord. No. 2657, § 1, 10-19-64)
Sec. 25-7. Variance from standards.
The city engineer may authorize variances from standard sidewalk provisions
where no curb exists or when unusual topographical conditions, nature of
existing construction, or similar factors would make adherence to standard
provisions unreasonable.
(Ord. No. 2657, § 1, 10-19-64)
Sec. 25-8. Grade and line required.
No sidewalk shall be installed unless a grade and line are established
therefor. If no grades or lines are available, sidewalks may be installed, but
they shall be removed, modified or replaced to conform to grades and lines when
established by the city at the sole cost of the property owner abutting said
sidewalk.
(Ord. No. 2657, § 1, 10-19-64)
Sec. 25-9. Construction standards.
Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with details and specifications as
established by the city engineer.
(Ord. No. 2657, § 1, 10-19-64)
Sec. 25-10. Inspection of work.
All work shall be subject to inspection by the city, during construction and
upon completion.
The street and sidewalk inspector shall be notified by the permittee after
forms are set, and no concrete shall be poured or further construction started
until approved by the inspector.
(Ord. No. 2657, § 1, 10-19-64)
Sec. 25-11. Conformance to rules and regulations.
All work shall conform to the rules and regulations established by the director
of public works and to instructions issued pursuant thereto by the street and
sidewalk inspector.
(Ord. No. 2657, § 1, 10-19-64)
Sec. 25-12. Repair of sidewalk by abutting owners; failure to repair; no permit
fee required.
   (a)   All owners or agents of owners with property abutting and fronting
upon any plaza, street or alley within the corporate limits of the city are
required to keep the public sidewalks immediately abutting their property in
good order and repair. Each owner shall be liable to the city for all losses to
the city or recoveries from the city for damages to person or property of
others caused by his failure or that of his agents to repair and. keep in good
order and reasonably safe condition all such sidewalks abutting and fronting
his property upon any plaza, street or alley within the corporate limits of the
city. The city may, at its discretion, through the director of public works,
notify such owner that repairs are necessary to put such sidewalk in good order
and such owner shall, within ten (10) days after such notification, under the
supervision of the director of public works, complete such repairs, as
specified in such notice. If the person fails to make the required repairs, the
city may repair same and the owner shall be liable to the cite for the cost of
the repairs.
   (b)   A permit shall be required to make repairs pursuant to this section.
However, there will be no change for such a permit unless it is proposed to
make a change in the grade, location or dimensions of the sidewalk.
(Ord. No. 2657, § 1, 10-19-64)
Sec. 25-13. Permit required.
No street, alley, public property or public right-of-way shall be cut,
trenched, excavated, improved or removed or any object placed therein by any
person without first having a written permit from the city.
(Ord. No. 2657, § 1, 10-19-64)
Sec. 25-14. Unimproved portions of public right-of-way may be improved.
Where there are no curbs and sidewalks, the area between the traveled portion
of the public right-of-way and the property line may be improved and surface
treated according to city standards.
(Ord. No. 2657, § 1, 10-19-64)
Sec. 25-15. Guards required separating private property from improved right-of-
way.
When the public right-of-way is paved to the property line and no curbs are
provided, guards shall be installed within the private property to protect
pedestrians using the right-of-way, and to prevent vehicles from access to the
private property except at access points designated according to curb cut and
driveway requirements set forth in sections
25-38 through
25-40.
(Ord. No. 2657, § 1, 10-19-64)
Sec. 25-16. Additional requirements for improved portions of right-of-way.
When the public right-of-way is paved to the property line, and when in his
judgment traffic safety requires it, the traffic engineer may also require:
   (1)   Installation of guards within the right-of-way to serve as a curb or a
barrier between the traveled portions of the right-of-way and the parking area
at designated places and with designated openings for access to the parking
area within the right-of-way.
   (2)   Installations to prevent backing of vehicles into traffic lanes.
   (3)   Markings to designate parking angles, areas and traffic flow.
(Ord. No. 2657, § 1, 10-19-64)
Sec. 25-17. Exceptions to permit requirement.
Section
25-13 shall not apply in the following cases:
   (1)   When work is only for the purpose of repairing or installing a
sidewalk and a permit has been obtained for such work.
   (2)   When work is only for purposes of removing or changing a curb or
installing or repairing a driveway and a permit has been obtained for such
work.
   (3)   When work is done for municipal purposes by public works department or
under a contract administered by the department of public works.
   (4)   When, in an emergency, it is impractical to obtain a permit before
work is done. The police department shall be immediately notified and a permit
shall be obtained within forty- eight (48) hours thereafter.
(Ord. No. 2657, § 1, 10-19-64)
Sec. 25-18. Application forms.
   (a)    Application for a street excavation or for improvements to unimproved
portions of the public right-of-way shall be made on forms furnished by the
city.
   (b)    Applications may be made by mail or telephone. Such applicants must
have a cash deposit with the city sufficient to cover fees or include fees with
the mailed applications.
(Ord. No. 2657, § 1, 10-19-64; Ord. No. 12108, § 2, 6-18-24)
Sec. 25-19. Reserved.
   Editors Note: Ordinance No. 8727, § 2, adopted September 9, 1996, repealed §
25-19 in its entirety. Formerly, such section pertained to fees and derived
from Ord. No. 2657, § 1, 10-19-64; Ord. No. 6967, § 2, 6-6-88; Ord. No. 7212, §
2, 6-12-89.
Sec. 25-20. Conditions for obtaining permit.
Applicant for a permit and/or his agent and/or the contractor doing the work
may be required, before the issuance of the permit, to:
   (1)   Furnish bond or insurance to hold the city harmless and/or fee of
liability arising out of the work.
   (2)   Prove he is not delinquent in payments due the city on prior similar
work.
   (3)   Prove he is competent and equipped to do the proposed work.
   (4)   Show he has proper licenses to do the work.
   (5)   Submit a plan of subject property and adjacent properties showing
existing curb cuts, driveways and their sizes.
(Ord. No. 2657, § 1, 10-19-64)
Sec. 25-21. Permits required from other city departments or governmental
agencies.
Permits are required for work done by city departments other than the public
works department and by other governmental agencies. No permit fee shall be
charged for such permits.
(Ord. No. 2657, § 1, 10-19-64)
Sec. 25-22. Conformance to rules and regulations.
All work shall conform to specifications and to the rules and regulations
established by the director of public works and to instructions issued pursuant
thereto by the street and sidewalk inspector.
(Ord. No. 2657, § 1, 10-19-64)
Sec. 25-23. Inspection of work.
   (a)   All work shall be subject to inspection by the city.
   (b)   The street and sidewalk inspector shall be notified by permittee
before starting work, and before starting backfill, and upon completion of the
work. The permittee shall not proceed with any further work in each instance
until being authorized by the street and sidewalk inspector.
(Ord. No. 2657, § 1, 10-19-64)
Sec. 25-24. Barricades; notice.
   (a)   The applicant shall adequately barricade work in accordance with the
latest edition of the "Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices," including
additions by the city, and shall install sufficient warning lights and signs to
protect the public. The applicant shall notify and obtain approval from the
traffic engineer seventy-two (72) hours in advance, except in emergencies,
before closing or barricading any street or public right-of-way, or portion
thereof.
   (b)   Three (3) copies of the "Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices,"
including additions by the city, shall be filed in the office of the city clerk
and are made public records and shall be available for public use and
inspection during regular office hours.
(Ord. No. 2657, § 1, 10-19-64; Ord. No. 6148, § 5, 1-7-85; Ord. No. 10140, § 1,
4-12-05)
Sec. 25-25. Resurfacing.
   (a)   Unless otherwise stipulated in the permit, all pavement resurfacing
after excavation shall be done by the city. The city shall make a charge for
such work according to a schedule of costs established by the director of
public works, copies of which schedule shall be kept on file with the city
clerk, as revised from time to time.
   (b)   The applicant shall pay in advance the estimated change. Any
difference shall be corrected after work is completed.
(Ord. No. 2657, § 1, 10-19-64)
Sec. 25-26. Permit expiration.
A permit shall expire for work not started within thirty (30) days or completed
within sixty (60) days after issuance of a permit, and a new permit shall be
required before beginning or completing the work.
(Ord. No. 2657, § 1, 10-19-64)
Sec. 25-27. Backfilling and filling.
Backfilling and filling material and the method of filling and backfilling
shall meet city specifications. Excavated material not suitable for backfilling
shall be removed from the site.
(Ord. No. 2657, § 1, 10-19-64)
Sec. 25-28. Variance from standards.
Variance from standards may be authorized pursuant to the provisions of section
25-7.
(Ord. No. 2657, § 1, 10-19-64)
Sec. 25-29. "Driveway" defined.
For the purposes of this chapter, "driveway" means that portion of the public
right-of-way from the private property line to the curb, or, where there is no
curb, to the improved or traveled part of the roadway, which area is used to
provide vehicular access from the private property to the curb or to the
improved or traveled part of the roadway.
(Ord. No. 2657, § 1, 10-19-64)
Sec. 25-30. Permit required.
   (a)   No curb shall be changed or removed, and no driveway on or across a
public street or a public right-of-way or public property shall be repaired or
installed without first having a written permit from the city.
   (b)   This section shall not apply when the work is done by the public works
department for municipal purposes or under a contract administered by the
department of public works.
(Ord. No. 2657, § 1, 10-19-64)
Sec. 25-31. Application forms.
Application for curb cuts and driveway permits shall be made on forms furnished
by the city.
Applications may be made by mail or phone.
Such applicants must have a cash deposit with the city sufficient to cover
fees, or include fees with the mailed application.
(Ord. No. 2657, § 1, 10-19-64; Ord. No. 12108, § 2, 6-18-24)
   Editors Note: Former section
25-31, pertaining to changes in street names, has been recodified as §
25-62.
Sec. 25-32. Reserved.
   Editors Note: Ordinance No. 8727, § 2, adopted September 9, 1996, repealed §
25-32 in its entirety. Formerly, such section pertained to fees and derived
from Ord. No. 2657, § 1, 10-19-64; Ord. No. 6967, § 3, 6-6-88; Ord. No. 7212, §
3, 6-12-89.
Sec. 25-33. Conditions for obtaining permit.
The conditions set forth in section
25-20 may be required before issuance of a permit.
(Ord. No. 2657, § 1, 10-19-64)
Sec. 25-34. Variance from standards.
Variance from standards may be authorized pursuant to the provisions of section
26-7.
(Ord. No. 2657, § 1, 10-19-64)
Sec. 25-35. Permit expiration.
A permit shall expire for work not started within thirty (30) days or completed
within sixty (60) days after issuance of a permit, and a new permit shall be
required before beginning or completing the work.
(Ord. No. 2657, § 1, 10-19-64)
Sec. 25-36. Conformance to rules and regulations.
All work shall conform to specifications and to the rules and regulations
established by the director of public works and to instruction issued pursuant
thereto by the street and sidewalk inspector.
(Ord. No. 2657, § 1, 10-19-64)
Sec. 25-37. Inspection of work.
   (a)   All work shall be subject to inspection by the city during
construction and upon completion thereof.
   (b)   The street and sidewalk inspector shall be notified by permittee
before concrete is poured and/or surfacing is applied, and the permittee shall
not proceed further with the work until being authorized by the street and
sidewalk inspector.
(Ord. No. 2657, § 1, 10-19-64)
Sec. 25-38. Special requirements in residential districts.
   (a)   Curb cuts and driveways shall conform to the following requirements in
all residential zoned districts:
   Minimum curb cut width . . . . . 10 feet
   Maximum curb cut width . . . . . 20 feet
   Maximum curb cut width for 2 adjoining properties . . . . . 30 feet
   Minimum distance between curb cuts . . . . . 12 feet
   Minimum distance of curb cut from street light standards, or catch basins .
. . . . 5 feet
   Minimum distance of curb cut from a fire hydrant of city water hydrant . . .
. . 20 feet
   Minimum distance of curb cut from end of a curb return . . . . . 4 feet
   OR
   from a curb line or a cross street at a street intersection, whichever is
more restrictive . . . . . 20 feet
See Tucson Code Chapter
23, Land Use Code, particularly Section 3.2.14 and Development Standards,
Section 3, Transportation, for additional requirements and standards.
   (b)   Any nonresidential use which would generate more than five (5) times
the amount of traffic that would be generated as a result of (a) the existing
use of the property if developed for residential use, or (b) the predominant
use on the residential block if the property is vacant, shall not have access
to an interior residential neighborhood street after June 1, 1998.
   (1)   "Interior residential neighborhood street" as used in this subsection
shall include any block consisting entirely of residentially zoned properties
except for streets which have been designated as arterial or collector streets
in the major streets and routes plan.
   (2)   A waiver to this requirement may be granted at the discretion of the
director of the department of transportation where justified by a traffic
mitigation plan or unique circumstances which substantially achieve the level
of traffic on the affected area as required by this subsection. No waiver may
be granted without providing notice and an opportunity for comment to the
residential property owners on the block for which the waiver is proposed. Any
decision of the director of the department of transportation may be appealed to
the mayor and council by the applicant or an affected property owner.
(Ord. No. 2657, § 1, 10-19-64; Ord. No. 9065, § 1, 6-1-98; Ord. No. 9065, § 1,
6-1-98)
Sec. 25-39. Special requirements in business districts.
Curb cuts and driveways shall conform to the following requirements in all
business zoned districts:
   Maximum curb cut width . . . . . 35 feet
   Maximum driveway width at the property line . . . . . 30 feet
   Minimum distance between curb cuts or driveways . . . . . 20 feet
   Maximum number of curb cuts or driveways per 100 feet of street frontage . .
. . . 2
   Minimum distance of curb cuts from street light standards, or catch basins .
. . . . 5 feet
   Minimum distance from a fire hydrant of city water hydrant . . . . . 20 feet
   Minimum distance from end of a curb return . . . . . 4 feet
   OR
   From a curb line on a cross street at a street intersection . . . . . 20
feet
whichever is more restrictive.
(Ord. No. 2657, § 1, 10-19-64)
Sec. 25-40. Special requirements in industrial districts.
   (a)   Curb cuts and driveways shall conform to the following requirements in
all industrial zoned districts:
The provisions established for curb cuts and driveways in section
25-39 for business zoned districts shall prevail in all industrial zoned
districts for properties fronting on a through street, as defined in this Code,
or on a major street as shown on the latest major streets and routes plan on
file with the city engineer.
   (b)   If the property does not front on a through or major street, only the
following provisions shall prevail:
   Minimum distance of curb cut from street light standards or catch basins . .
. . . 5 feet
   Minimum distance from a fire hydrant or city water hydrant . . . . . 20 feet
   Minimum distance from end of a curb return . . . . . 4 feet
   OR
   from the curbline on a cross street at a street intersection . . . . . 23
feet
whichever is the more restrictive.
(Ord. No. 2657, § 1, 10-19-64)
Sec. 25-41. Variances from curb cuts and driveway requirements.
The director of public works may grant written variances from the minimum and
maximum requirements set forth for the location of curb cuts and driveways in
section
25-38 through
25-40 upon written approval by the traffic engineer, provided:
   (1)   The area has peculiar, visible conditions not ordinarily existing in
similar areas; or
   (2)   The nature of the business on the property is exceptional; or
   (3)   The nature of the abutting property is exceptional; and
   (4)   The variance is not against the public interest, safety, convenience
or general welfare.
(Ord. No. 2657, § 1, 10-19-64)
Sec. 25-42. Driveways may be denied.
   (a)   No property owner shall be denied a reasonable driveway access to his
property. However, where there is not an adequate extension of a driveway
within the private property to park a vehicle entirely off the right-of-way, a
curb cut shall be denied.
   (b)   Where there is not adequate parking area for the use to which the
property is put, to park off the right-of-way, or where there is not adequate
area to maneuver safely in and out, and to preclude backing into the street, a
curb cut shall be denied. A minimum of forty (40) feet of depth for right-angle
parking shall be required from all street property lines for this purpose.
(Ord. No. 2657, § 1, 10-19-64)
Sec. 25-43. Curb cut replacements.
Where private property use has been modified so that an existing curb cut is no
longer needed, or where Code provisions do not permit curb cuts at existing
locations, the traffic engineer, for the promotion of traffic safety and public
convenience, may require the abutting property owner to replace the curb at his
expense as follows:
   (1)   The traffic engineer shall order the abutting property owner to
replace the curb stating the reason.
   (2)   The owner shall either protest, and show cause in writing why the curb
should not be replaced within thirty (30) days, or commence the work within
sixty (60) days.
   (3)   The protest shall be reviewed by the director of public works and city
manager, who may uphold the traffic engineer or revoke or modify his order.
   (4)   If the abutting owner fails to comply with the order the city may do
the work and bill the owner for the cost.
(Ord. No. 2657, § 1, 10-19-64)
Sec. 25-44. Permit and fee curb cut replacements.
A permit but no fee shall be required for curb cut replacements.
(Ord. No. 2657, § 1, 10-19-64)
ARTICLE II.
DUTIES AND PROHIBITIONS*
__________
*   Editors Note: See footnote, article I. Ord. No. 2657, § 2, redesignated §§
23, 9, 10, 13--15, 12, 23, 16--17, 6--7, 12a--12d and 25 of the 1953 Code as
article II, §§ 45--61 respectively. These sections have been assigned numbers
25-45--25-61 of this Code by the editor. Prior to codification of this
ordinance, these sections appeared in article I of this chapter of this Code in
the same sequence they presently appear in article Il. The comparable sections
of this Code which were repealed by § 1 of Ord. No. 2657 are §§
25-13, and
25-18--
25-29 (see Code Comparative Table, page 3719 and footnote, article I).
__________
Sec. 25-45. Destroying grade or line stakes; trespassing on closed streets.
No person shall displace or destroy any grade line stakes set up by or under
the order and direction of the city engineer, and no person shall trespass on
any street closed for construction purposes.
(1953 Code, ch. 24, § 23; Ord. No. 6195, § 1, 3-11-85)
Sec. 25-45.1. Violation declared civil infraction.
It shall be a civil infraction for any person to violate any of the provisions
of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 6195, §, 3-11-85)
Sec. 25-46. Obstructing streets prohibited.
No person shall place, cause to be placed, maintain or cause to be maintained
any fence, building, post or other obstruction in any street or alley of the
city.
(1953 Code, ch. 24, § 9; Ord. No. 6195, § 3, 3-11-85)
   Cross References: Obstructing intersections or crosswalks, §
20-156.
Sec. 25-47. Duty to remove street obstruction after notice.
All persons having, keeping or maintaining any building or part of building, or
any fence or part of fence or post or other obstruction in any street or alley
of the city shall remove such obstruction within five (5) days after receipt of
notice from the city engineer. Each day that any fence or part of fence,
building or part of building, or post or other obstruction is kept or
maintained in any street or alley of the city after the expiration of such
five-day period shall constitute a separate violation.
(1953 Code, ch. 24, § 10; Ord. No. 6195, § 3, 3-11-85)
Sec. 25-48. Injuring, tearing up pavement or sidewalks.
No person shall injure or tear up any pavement or sidewalk without a permit
from the city engineer.
(1953 code, ch. 24, § 13; Ord. No. 6195, § 3, 3-11-85)
   Cross References: Injuring lampposts, hydrants or bracket prohibited, §
11-31.
Sec. 25-49. Digging, removing earth from streets, public places.
No person shall, without first having obtained permission from the city
engineer, dig, remove or carry away or cause or procure the same to be done,
any sod, stone, earth, sand, or gravel from any street, alley, or public ground
in the city.
(1953 Code, ch. 24, § 14; Ord. No. 6195, § 3, 3-11-85)
   Cross References: Injuring public property, §
11-49.
Sec. 25-50. Selling, displaying merchandise on streets near schools.
No person shall sell, solicit or receive an order for, keep or expose for sale,
deliver for value, peddle, keep with intent to sell, or traffic in, any goods,
wares or merchandise whatsoever on any public street or alley of the city
within three hundred (300) feet of a public or parochial school between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday or
Fridays, except during legal holidays or school holidays when such holidays
fall on those days.
(1953 Code, ch. 24, § 15; Ord. No. 6195, § 3, 3-11-85; Ord. No. 7329, § 2, 12-
18-89)
   Cross References: Bond required for transient peddlers, solicitors, etc., §
19-27; fees for peddlers, §
19-28(110).
Sec. 25-51. Obstructing sidewalks prohibited; placing benches on sidewalks.
   (a)   No person shall obstruct any portion of any public sidewalk in the
city, by placing, depositing or allowing to remain thereon any item or object
such that the item or object interferes, in any manner with the full, free and
unobstructed public use of any portion of the public sidewalks; however, after
approval by the mayor and council suitable benches for the convenience of city
residents and visitors may be located upon the public sidewalks with the
written approval of the city manager or manager's designee. Such approval shall
be duly filed with the city clerk, shall be cancellable for good cause shown,
and may be subject to such requirements and conditions as to type of bench,
location upon the sidewalk and otherwise, as the city manager or designee may
deem necessary or desirable in the interest of the public safety and
convenience; further, where it is necessary to place garbage and trash
containers upon a public sidewalk to allow the removal of such garbage and
trash, such containers may be placed upon a public sidewalk for the reasonable
period of time necessary for such removal.
   (b)   Under this section, any item or object that is placed on a sidewalk
shall be deemed an obstruction and in violation of subsection (a) above, if the
item or object is on the sidewalk between 7 a.m. and 10 p.m. During the hours
between 10 p.m. and 7 a.m., an item or object will not be deemed an obstruction
if all of the following conditions are satisfied:
   (1)   The item(s) or object(s) are, in aggregate, four (4) cubic feet or
smaller; and
   (2)   The item or object is personally attended by its owner; and
   (3)   The item or object is not affixed in any manner; and
   (4)   The item or object is placed at least five feet (5') back from the
edge of the sidewalk that is adjacent to the street; and
   (5)   Where the sidewalk is wider than eight feet (8'), the item or object
is placed only within the three feet (3') of width of the portion of the
sidewalk that is furthest back from the adjacent street. By way of example, if
the sidewalk is twelve feet (12') wide, the item or object can only be placed
such that the nine feet (9') of sidewalk that is closest to the adjacent street
is left entirely free and unobstructed; and
   (6)   The sidewalk is not part of an underpass (for example, the Fourth
Avenue Underpass) or overpass, as provided in subsection (c) below.
   (c)   If a sidewalk is designed for the use of pedestrians or bicyclists to
travel through an underpass or across an overpass, no person shall obstruct any
portion of such sidewalk by placing or leaving any item or object upon such
sidewalk at any time, unless the person has first obtained a permit from the
Director of Transportation. This prohibition also applies to any portion of a
sidewalk within twenty-five feet (25') of an underpass or overpass. The
exception provided under subsection (b) above does not apply to the
prohibitions in this subsection (c).
(1953 Code, ch. 24, § 12; Ord. No. 6195, § 3, 3-11-85; Ord. No. 11331, § 5, 12-
8-15)
Sec. 25-52. Obstructing water flow in streets, gutters, conduits.
No person shall obstruct the flow of water by the deposit of building
materials, or in any other manner, in the streets, alleys or gutters, or water
conduits of the streets, alleys or other public ways of the city.
(1953 Code, ch. 24, § 24; Ord. No. 6195, § 3, 3-11-85)
   Cross References: Obstructing or depositing offensive matter in water
ditches or natural drainage channels, §
11-58 et seq.
Sec. 25-52.1. Planting within pedestrian area right-of-way.
   Sec. 25-52.1(1). "Pedestrian area of right-of-way" defined. For purposes of
this section, the "pedestrian area of the right-of-way" means that portion of
the public right-of-way from the private property line to the curb, or, where
there is no curb, to the improved or traveled part of the roadway.
   Sec. 25-52.1(2). Permits required. No person shall plant any tree, shrub, or
other vegetation in the pedestrian area of the right-of-way without first
obtaining a written permit from the city. A permit may be issued upon the terms
and conditions hereinafter prescribed.
   Sec. 25-52.1(3). Application for permit. The applicant will complete and
sign a written application upon a form to be supplied by the city engineer. If
the applicant is a homeowner's association, neighborhood association, or other
organization, the applicant must obtain permission from the abutting property
owner to plant in the pedestrian area of the right-of-way adjacent to such
property.
   Sec. 25-52.1(4). Conditions for obtaining permit.
   (a)   Applicants shall follow the standard provisions for application for
street excavation and improvements to unimproved portions of the public right-
of-way as described in section
25-13 and as required by the city engineer, including the submission of a plan
of subject property showing the location and sizes of existing curb lines,
property lines, utility lines, utility poles, utility boxes, overhead wires,
driveways, alleyways, sidewalks, fire hydrants, traffic signs, and proposed
site of excavation. Underground utilities must be located prior to submitting a
plan for excavation in public streets and easements. The city engineer will
then approve or deny an application to excavate in the public right-of-way.
   (b)   Trees, shrubs, and other vegetation shall not interfere with the clear
visibility of traffic signs and signals, traffic on the roadway or entering or
leaving the roadway, or with pedestrian access. Planting guidelines shall
adhere to the following sight visibility conditions:
No tree, shrub, or other vegetation taller than thirty (30) inches in height at
maturity shall be planted within the designated sight visibility triangle zone
in the pedestrian area of the right-of-way within fifty (50) feet of a stop
sign, yield sign, traffic signal, or any approach to an intersection where
operators of motor vehicles need to clearly view traffic conditions. (Reference
section 23-388 of the City Code and the City of Tucson Development Standards
for sight visibility triangle requirements.)
All trees, shrubs, and other vegetation must be planted and maintained to allow
for the continuous visibility of the street, sidewalk, alleyway, driveway,
traffic sign or signal.
Trees, shrubs, or other vegetation must be kept trimmed to permit the
continuous visibility of a stop or yield sign for a distance of one hundred
twenty-five (125) feet from the sign.
In order to maintain continuous visibility of traffic conditions and to provide
pedestrian access, trees within affected locations must be kept so that
branches, limbs, twigs, leaves, or other parts of such trees that overhang the
vehicular or pedestrian path of travel are maintained to provide barrier-free
pedestrian travel and continuous sight visibility within an unobstructed area
between thirty (30) inches and eighty (80) inches from the ground.
Vegetation must be trimmed and maintained to provide a minimum four foot-wide
pedestrian path.
   (c)   The minimum width of a tree planting area shall be no less than four
(4) feet from curb to sidewalk. If there is no curb, there must be an eight-
foot clear zone from the pavement to the tree planting area.
   (d)   As part of the application process, applicants shall select a pre-
approved species of tree from the city's low water use plant list for street
trees in pedestrian right-of-way. Other vegetation must be selected from the
drought tolerant plant list in Development Standard 9-06.0. These lists shall
be maintained by the city engineer and three (3) copies shall be kept on file
in the office of the city clerk. Depending on site constraints, the city
engineer, after consultation with the city parks and recreation department, may
approve or disapprove the plant species or require other or different plants to
be selected from these lists.
   (e)   Applicants must follow the written guidelines developed by the city
for planting trees and other vegetation in the public right-of-way, including
setbacks from utility lines, overhead lines, and clear traffic visibility
safety standards. The abutting property owner shall agree in writing to
maintain and trim trees or other vegetation planted in the public right-of-way
pursuant to this permit. The city engineer approval of the proposed planting
plan is contingent upon adherence to these guidelines.
   (f)   The city engineer may impose other special requirements as a condition
of issuing a permit.
   Sec. 25-52.1(5) Request for administrative review. Upon request of the
person submitting an application for planting in the pedestrian area of the
right-of-way, the city engineer shall provide an administrative review of any
site specific variances to the standard provisions contained in this section or
the written guidelines developed by the city for planting trees or other
vegetation in the public right-of-way. The applicant shall be given the
opportunity to present evidence that a variance from the standard provisions
contained herein shall not present a nuisance or hazardous condition for
motorists or pedestrians. In those instances where the planting of a tree or
other vegetation will not cause a nuisance or hazardous condition, the city
engineer may provide for such a variance of these provisions.
   Sec. 25-52.1(6). Issuance of permit. Upon approval of the proposed plan by
the city engineer, a permit for planting within the pedestrian area of the
right-of-way will be issued at the development services center under the
following conditions:
   (a)   Fees for planting vegetation in the pedestrian area of the right-of-
way may be waived by the city engineer.
   (b)   If, at any time, any portion of the pedestrian area of the right-of-
way used by the permittee may be needed or required by the city, or if the
owner, occupant, or agent in charge of any such lot or adjoining right-of-way
fails to maintain such plantings as hereinafter prescribed, the use of the
pedestrian area of the right-of-way may be revoked by the city. The city may
remove from the pedestrian area of the right-of-way any and all trees or other
vegetation in such circumstances without compensation from the city.
   (c)   All approved applications shall be filed with the development services
center.
(Ord. No. 8327, § 1, 7-5-94)
Sec. 25-53. Duty to trim.
The owner, occupant, or agent in charge of any lot, piece or parcel of land
within the corporate limits of the city shall not allow any tree, shrub, or
other form of vegetation of any kind upon such property or upon the right-of-
way, street, or alley adjoining the same to extend over or under the sidewalk
space or roadway in such street or alley in such a manner as to interfere with
the reasonable use of such street, sidewalk, or alley for pedestrian or
vehicular traffic of any kind or to obstruct the view or light distribution of
traffic-control devices or luminaries. It shall be the duty of every such
owner, occupant or agent in charge to keep such trees, shrubs, or any other
vegetation trimmed in such manner that the same will not interfere with the
reasonable use of such street or alley for pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
(1953 Code, ch. 24, § 16; Ord. No. 6195, § 3, 3-11-85; Ord. No. 8327, § 2, 7-5-
94)
Sec. 25-54. Notice to trim.
The owner, occupant or agent in charge of any lot, piece or parcel of land
within the corporate limits of the city shall, within thirty (30) days after
receipt of a notice from any city department, trim any such trees, shrubs, or
other vegetation upon the right-of-way, street, or alley adjoining the same in
accordance with the instructions contained in such notice.
(1953 Code, ch. 24, § 17; Ord. No. 8327, § 3, 7-5-94; Ord. No. 8671, § 1, 4-8-
96)
Sec. 25-55. Notice to remove; duty to keep area between curb and property line
free from grass and weeds.
The owner, occupant or agent in charge of any lot, piece or parcel of land
within the corporate limits of the city shall, within thirty (30) days after
receipt of a notice from any city department, remove any trees, shrubs, or
other vegetation growing upon the right-of-way, street or alley adjoining the
same in accordance with the instructions contained in such notice. It shall be
the duty of each owner, occupant or agent in charge of property within the city
to keep the space between the property line adjacent to the street and the
curbline of the street free from rank grass and weeds at all times.
(1953 Code, ch. 24, § 6; Ord. No. 8327, § 4, 7-5-94; Ord. No. 8671, § 2, 4-8-
96)
Sec. 25-56. Owners, occupants of building to keep gutters and sidewalks clean.
The owner, occupant or agent in charge of any and all buildings in the city
shall, within thirty (30) days after receipt of a notice from any city
department, remove from the gutters and sidewalks in front of such building any
offensive substance, liquid or solid, or any dirt, rubbish, water or stones, or
any other things harmful to the public health, safety and welfare. It shall be
the duty of all owners, occupants or agents in charge of any and all buildings
in the city to keep the gutter and sidewalk in front of such building free from
any offensive substance, liquid or solid, or any dirt, rubbish, water or
stones, or any other things harmful to the public health, safety and welfare.
(1953 Code, ch. 24, § 7; Ord. No. 8671, § 3, 4-8-96)
Sec. 25-57. Placing flower pots, tree pots, planters on sidewalks.
   Sec. 25-57(1). License authorized. A license to permit the placing of flower
pots, tree pots or planters and other objects of beautification upon the public
sidewalks may be issued upon the terms and conditions hereinafter prescribed
and upon such specific terms and conditions as are required in writing by the
director of public works.
   Sec. 25-57(2). Application for license, approval, disapproval. The applicant
will submit a written application upon a form to be supplied by the office of
the director of public works. The director of public works will then approve or
deny such application. If denied, the applicant may request a review of such
denial by the city manager. The mayor and council may, if it so desires,
exercise the power of review as to all matters herein described, and its
decision shall be final.
   Sec. 25-57(3). Issuance of license. Upon approval of the proposed plan, a
license for such use will be issued by the director of public works.
   Sec. 25-57(4). Revocation of license. If, at any time hereafter, any portion
of the sidewalk occupied and used by the licensee may be needed or required by
the city, or if the licensee fails to maintain such use as hereinafter
prescribed and as prescribed by such specific terms and conditions set forth by
the director of public works, any license granted pursuant to this section may
be revoked by the city, and all right thereunder terminated. The licensee shall
and will promptly remove all property belonging to the licensee from the
sidewalk area upon receipt of written notice of revocation. If removal is not
accomplished by the licensee within a reasonable time, the city will cause such
flowers or trees or other items to be removed and stored, and the cost thereof
shall be charged to the licensee.
   Sec. 25-57(5). Terms and conditions. No license shall issue except under the
following general terms and conditions:
   (a)   The applicant has filed the proper form with the office of the
director of public works.
   (b)   The applicant must maintain at all times public liability insurance in
amounts not less than:
Public liability and bodily injury--Each person $20,000.00, each accident
$50,000.00; and
Property damage, each accident $1,000.00, aggregate $10,000.00;
to indemnify the city against all claims for damages which may result from the
installation, maintenance and use of such flower pots and tree pots or
planters, or other objects of beautification. Satisfactory evidence of the
policy shall be filed with the director of public works of the city.
   (c)   The applicant shall furnish all such flowers, trees and containers and
bear the cost of installation, maintenance and repair thereof, according to the
directives of the director of public works.
   (d)   The director of public works shall exercise supervision of all
requirements as to size, type, maximum and minimum heights, watering and
upkeep, of such flowers and trees; color, type of construction, location upon
the sidewalk area and spacing of the pots or planters and other related
particulars of such flowers, trees and containers.
   (e)   All applications, whether approved, denied or revoked, shall be filed
with the office of the director of public works.
(1953 Code, ch. 24, § 12a; Ord. No. 2042, § 1, 3-20-61)
Sec. 25-57.1. Attaching newspaper vending machines to public right-of-way.
It is intended that the provisions that follow operate so as to regulate the
permanent attachment of newspaper vending machines on the public right-of-way
to the end that the health, safety and welfare of this community may be
maintained.
   Sec. 25-57.1(1). License authorized. A license to permit the attachment of
newspaper vending machines to the public right-of-way be issued upon compliance
with terms and conditions set forth in this article and upon such specific
terms and conditions as are required in writing by the city engineer.
   Sec. 25-57.1(2). Application for license; approval denial. For each machine
the applicant shall submit a written application upon a form to be supplied by
the director of finance. Insurance verification forms, bonds, plans, procedures
and fees as required in minor sections
25-57.1(3) and
25-57.1(5) shall be submitted with the application. The director of finance
will approve or deny an application. The director of finance will approve or
deny an application within thirty (30) days of submission. If denied, the
applicant may request a review of such denial by the city manager. Upon
approval of the application, the director of finance shall issue a license
which will be valid until either the machine is moved from the location by the
licensee or until the city revokes the license.
   Sec. 25-57.1(3). License fees. A nonrefundable application fee per machine
shall be paid at the time of application.
   Sec. 25-57.1(4). Revocation of license. If, at any time, any portion of the
right-of- way occupied and used by the licensee may be needed or required by
the city, or if the licensee fails to abide by the terms and conditions set
forth herein, any license granted by the city may be revoked by the city. The
licensee shall promptly remove all property belonging to licensee from right-
of-way area upon receipt of written notice of revocation. If removal is not
accomplished within a reasonable time, the city will move and store such
property and the expense shall be charged to the licensee.
   Sec. 25-57.1(5). Terms and conditions. No license shall be issued except
under the following terms and conditions:
   (a)   The applicant has filed the required forms with the director of
finance.
   (b)   No vending machine may be located within fifteen (15) feet of a fire
hydrant, fire alarm box, fire department connections to fire protection
systems, nor shall any vending machine block fire department accessibility into
a building or an emergency exit of a building.
   (c)   The city engineer shall prescribe minimum standards for size, type,
maximum and minimum heights, method of installation and other related
particulars of such newspaper vending machines. Installation procedures, plans,
dimensions and locations shall be submitted in such detail as the city engineer
may require in writing.
   (d)   The applicant must maintain at all times public liability insurance in
amounts not less than:
Public liability and bodily injury--Each person one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00); each accident three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00); and
Property damage; aggregate--Fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00);
to indemnify the city against all claims for damages which may result from the
installation of newspaper vending machines. Satisfactory evidence of insurance
shall be filed with the director of finance.
   (e)   The city must be notified of the removal of any licensed machine. The
licensee is liable for any damage to the right-of-way or surface caused by the
removal of licensed vending machine. At the time of application, a bond) per
machine shall be filed with the director of finance to cover potential damage
expenses.
(Ord. No. 4684, § 1, 7-5-77; Ord. No. 12108, § 2, 6-18-24)
Sec. 25-58. Under-sidewalk elevators--Where permitted.
Under-sidewalk elevators may be constructed and used by abutting property
owners only in any block in the area bounded as follows: Commencing at the
intersection of Stone Avenue and Toole Avenue, running thence east on Toole
Avenue to South 4th Avenue, thence south along South 4th Avenue to East 13th
Street, thence west along East 13th Street to South Main Avenue, thence north
along South Main Avenue and North Main Avenue to Franklin Street, thence east
along Franklin Street and West Seventh Street to the place of beginning, which
has not alley or open space at the rear of the lots therein from which garbage
and trash can be collected, but only on the terms and under the conditions
hereinafter required and specified; and permission is hereby granted to the
abutting property owners for such purposes when and if compliance with all the
provisions of this section and sections
25-59 and
25-60 of this Code is furnished and maintained by the owners.
(1953 Code, ch. 24, § 12b; Ord. No. 2042, § 2, 3-20-61)
   Cross References: Mechanical code, §
6-160 et seq.
Sec. 25-59. Same--Permit required; application; insurance.
Before any under-sidewalk elevator may be constructed, installed or used, the
abutting property owners shall make application for a permit therefor to the
inspection division of the department of public works. Such application shall
state and warrant that the applicant is the owner of the land abutting the
sidewalk where the elevator is to be installed; such application shall be in
such form and have such content as shall be necessary and shall be required by
the inspection division to carry out the provisions of this section and
sections
25-58 and
25-60 of this Code. The application shall contain an agreement to hold harmless
the city from all claims, demands, loss or damages, accruing to it or any
claimant against it, directly or indirectly by reason of the installation,
design, operation or maintenance of the undersidewalk elevator and that the
applicant will procure and furnish full public liability insurance in a
licensed insurance company in an amount not less than twenty-five thousand
dollars ($25,000.00) for personal injury single claimant, one hundred thousand
dollars ($100,000.00) aggregate for one accident, and five thousand dollars
($5,000.00) for property damage, which shall name the city as coinsured. The
application shall contain an agreement that the applicant will comply at all
times with the terms and conditions of operation, installation and use of the
under-sidewalk elevator as specified by this section and sections
25-58 and
25-60 of this Code.
(1953 Code, ch. 24, § 12c; Ord. No. 2042, § 2, 3-20-61)
Sec. 25-60. Same--Issuance of permit; terms and conditions.
Upon compliance with all the terms, conditions and qualifications provided by
this section and sections
25-58 and
25-59 of this Code, the inspection division of the department of public works
shall issue a proper permit for the installation, use and operation of an
under-sidewalk elevator. No permit shall issue and no such elevator shall be
constructed, installed or used except under the following terms and conditions:
   Sec. 25-60(1). The applicant has furnished and filed with the inspection
division the insurance required in section
25-59 of this Code.
   Sec. 25-60(2). The applicant has filed in the inspection division plans and
specifications for the installation and construction of the undersidewalk
elevator.
   Sec. 25-60(3). No such under-sidewalk elevator shall be used and operated
except during the hours between 9:30 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
   Sec. 25-60(4). The opening for the undersidewalk elevator shall be adjacent
to the curb and as close thereto as is physically possible in order to minimize
interference with the pedestrian traffic.
   Sec. 25-60(5). The opening for the undersidewalk elevator shall be not less
than twenty (20) feet from the corner property line at any street intersection.
   Sec. 25-60(6). The under-sidewalk elevator shall be so designed that it can
be opened only from street level, and that when open, guard rails, barricades,
or other similar devices not less than four (4) feet in height from sidewalk
level shall be provided so as to protect pedestrians.
   Sec. 25-60(7). The under-sidewalk elevator shall be so located that there
shall be in no case less than four (4) feet of clear, unobstructed walkway area
remaining on the sidewalk.
   Sec. 25-60(8). No two (2) under-sidewalk elevator openings shall be placed
within twenty (20) feet of each other, except when the director of public works
shall certify that closer proximity will create no public safety hazard.
   Sec. 25-60(9). That each such elevator opening shall have a cover designed
to carry not less than two hundred fifty (250) pounds per square foot; such
covers must be flush with the surrounding sidewalk surface; such elevator cover
shall be of such design as to be nonskid and prevent the same from becoming
slippery when wet.
   Sec. 25-60(10). The construction, design and installation as shown and
proposed on the plans and specifications shall be such that there shall be no
danger of damage to lateral support of surrounding earth or sidewalk area and
of such materials and design that it will safely bear all strains, stresses and
weight loads reasonably foreseeable.
   Sec. 25-60(11). Whenever the under-sidewalk elevator shall not be necessary
in connection with the business conducted on the abutting property, or shall
remain unused in conjunction therewith, for a period of six (6) months or more,
the city may cause the permit to be thereupon revoked and the elevator removed,
and the opening and under- sidewalk space thereof restored to its former state
at the expense of the applicant or his successor owner, after thirty (30) days'
written notice therefor.
   Sec. 25-60(12). Whenever the under-sidewalk space occupied by any such
elevator is needed by the city for public purposes, the under-sidewalk elevator
shall be removed by the owner at his sole expense upon sixty (60) days' written
notice therefor; and in the event any such owner shall fail, neglect or refuse
to comply with such notice, the city may remove the under-sidewalk elevator at
the sole expense of the owner and the city shall have a cause of action for the
necessary expense against the owner therefor.
   Sec. 25-60(13). Each such permit issued shall clearly specify on the face
thereof that it issued only on the terms and conditions specified in sections
25-58,
25-59 and
25-60 of this Code.
   Sec. 25-60(14). The under-sidewalk elevator and structure shall comply in
construction and design with all provisions of the city building code [see
section
6-34].
(1953 Code, ch. 24, § 12d; Ord. No. 2042, § 2, 3-20-61)
Sec. 25-61. Sale of abandoned streets, alleys; cost of moving nonconforming
improvements; installing conforming improvements.
   Sec. 25-61(1). All purchasers of abandoned alleys, streets and other roads
are hereby required to pay to the city, as part of the purchase price of the
property, all costs estimated to be incurred by the city in removing curb
returns, pavement and all other improvements of a similar nature that do not
conform to the contiguous property on each side of the alley, street or road
and, in addition to pay all estimated costs of installing regular curbs,
sidewalks, drains, conduits and other construction necessary to be placed
across the abandoned alley, street or road, as estimated in minor section
25-61(3), in order that the abandoned property improvements will conform to
those improvements existing on contiguous property on either side thereof.
   Sec. 25-61(2). The provisions of this section shall not automatically apply
to a purchaser who files an affidavit with the director of public works stating
that all or a portion of the existing improvement will be used by the purchaser
and what the use will be. This exception shall then apply to such portion of
existing improvements as the director of public works decides the purchaser
will reasonably use, but the other portion of the improvement, if there be any,
shall be removed and made to conform as near as possible. 
   Sec. 25-61(3). The department of public works of the city is hereby directed
to estimate the cost of the removal of nonconforming improvements and the
installation of conforming improvements, as hereinbefore provided, and is
further directed to convey such information to the mayor and council in order
that the costs may be added to and included in the final sale price of the
property.
   Sec. 25-61(4). Immediately after the sale of such abandoned property, the
department of public works of the city is hereby authorized and directed to
remove the nonconforming improvements and to construct conforming improvements
as hereinbefore provided in minor section
25-61(1) of this section.
(1953 Code, ch. 24, § 25)
Sec. 25-62. Changes in street names.*
__________
*   Editors Note: This section appeared for the first time in the original
codification of this Code. This format has been employed by the editors to
simplify the amendment process when street names are changed. In the
codification of Ord. No. 2657 (see footnotes, articles I, II and III), this
section was redesignated as §
25-62 by the editor. It had been previously numbered §
25-31. The addition of this extra section to article II accounts for the
difference in numbering of article III appearing in this Code and that which
was called for by Ord. No. 2657.
__________
Names of streets will be changed from time to time by ordinance. Three (3)
copies of the current ordinances designating street name changes will be kept
on file by the city clerk.
   Editors Note: Street names have been changed or effected by the following
ordinances:
   1953 Code, ch. 24, § 37, as supplemented in 1957 and as amended by:
   Ord. No. 1804, § 2, 1-20-58
   Ord. No. 1806, § 2, 2-3-58
   Ord. No. 1810, § 2, 3-3-58
   Ord. No. 1811, § 2, 3-17-58
   Ord. No. 1823, § 2, 5-5-58
   Ord. No. 1977, § 1, 11-2-59
   Ord. No. 2013, § 1, 3-7-60
   Ord. No. 2084, § 1, 9-6-60
   Ord. No. 2101, § 1, 10-17-60
   Ord. No. 2108, § 1, 11-21-60
   Ord. No. 2120, § 1, 1-3-61
   Ord. No. 2620, § 2, 6-15-64
   Ord. No. 2696, § 1, 11-23-64
   Ord. No. 2703, § 1, 11-23-64
   1953 Code, ch. 24. § 37b as added in the 1957 supplement and as amended by:
   Ord. No. 1840, § 2, 7-7-58
   Ord. No. 1858, § 2, 9-2-58
   Ord. No. 1998, §§ 2, 3, 1-18-60
   Ord. No. 2237, §§ 1--7, 11-20-61
   1953 Code, ch. 24, § 37c as added by Ord. No. 2239, § 1, 12-4-61
   1953 Code, ch. 24, § 37d as added by Ord. No. 2273, § 2, 3-5-62
   1953 Code, ch. 24, § 37e as added by Ord. No. 2282, § 2, 4-2-62
   1953 Code, ch. 24, § 37f as added by Ord. No. 2289, § 1, 4-6-62
   1953 Code, ch. 24, § 37g as added by Ord. No. 2294, § 1, 5-7-62
   1953 Code, ch. 24. § 37h as added by Ord. No. 2442, § 1, 4-1-63
   1953 Code, ch. 24, § 37i as added by Ord. No. 2453, § 1, 4-22-63
   1953 Code, ch. 24, § 37j as added by Ord. No. 2543, § 2, 11-12-63
   1953 Code, ch. 24. § 37k as added by Ord. No. 2555, § 1, 12-19-63
   1953 Code, ch. 24, § 37l as added by Ord. No. 2656, § 1, 9-8-64
   1953 Code, ch 24, § 37m as added by Ord. No. 2672, § 2, 10-5-64 and as
amended by:
   Ord. No. 2679, § 1, 10-19-64
   1953 Code, ch. 24, § 37n as added by Ord. No. 2664, § 1, 9-21-64
   1953 Code, ch. 24, § 37o as added by Ord. No. 2664, § 1, 9-21-64
   1953 Code, ch 24, § 38 as added by Ord. No. 1998, § 4, 1-18-60 amended by:
   Ord No. 2101, § 2, 10-17-60
   Section 25-62 amended by:
   Ord. No. 2744, § 2, 3-15-65
   Ord. No. 2831, § 1, 12-20-65
   Ord. No. 2881, § 2, 6-13-65
   Ord. No. 2941, § 1, 12-12-66
   Ord. No. 2990, § 1, 3-27-67
   Ord. No. 3016, § 1, 6-12-67
   Ord. No. 3226, § 1, 3-3-69
   Ord. No. 3939, § 1, 11-6-72
   Ord. No. 4018, § 1, 5-7-73
   Ord. No. 4019, § 1, 5-7-73
   Ord. No. 4127, § 1, 1-21-74
   Ord. No. 4128, § 1, 1-21-74
   Ord. No. 4129, § 1, 1-21-74
   Ord. No. 4186. § 1, 6-3-74
   Ord. No. 4286, § 1, 11-25-74
   Ord. No. 4308, § 1, 1-13-75
   Ord. No. 4576, § 1, 9-27-76
   Ord. No. 4633, § 1, 4-4-77
   Ord. No. 4634, § 1, 4-4-77
   Ord. No. 4663, § 1, 6-6-77
   Ord. No. 4746, § 1, 1-23-78
   Ord. No. 5117, § 1, 3-10-80
   Ord. No. 5150, § 1, 5-12-80
   Ord. No. 5201, § 1, 8-4-80
   Ord. No. 5202, § 1, 8-4-80
   Ord. No. 5254, §§ 1--3, 11-17-80
   Ord. No. 5281, § 1, 12-22-80
   Ord. No. 5767, § 1, 5-16-83
   Ord. No. 5867, § 1, 11-12-83
   Ord. No. 5939, § 1, 1-9-84
   Ord. No. 5940, § 1, 1-9-84
   Ord. No. 5941, § 1, 1-9-84
   Ord. No. 6109, § 1, 10-22-84
   Ord. No. 6110, § 1, 10-22-84
   Ord. No. 6111, § 1, 10-22-84
   Ord. No. 6112, § 1, 10-22-84
   Ord. No. 6170, § 1, 2-11-85
   Ord. No. 6171, § 1, 2-11-85
   Ord. No. 6172, § 1, 2-11-85
   Ord. No. 6173, § 1, 2-11-85
   Ord. No. 6174, § 1, 2-11-85
   Ord. No. 6188, § 1, 2-25-85
   Ord. No. 6189, § 1, 2-25-85
   Ord. No. 6190, § 1, 2-25-85
   Ord. No. 6191, § 1, 2-25-85
   Ord. No. 6192, § 1, 2-25-85
   Ord. No. 6268, § 1, 8-5-85
   Ord. No. 6269, § 1, 8-5-85
   Ord. No. 6270, § 1, 8-5-85
   Ord. No. 6271, § 1, 8-5-85
   Ord. No. 6275, § 1, 7-1-85
   Ord. No. 6276, § 1, 8-5-85
   Ord. No. 6277, §§ 1, 2, 8-5-85
   Ord. No. 6374, §§ 1, 2, 1-27-86
   Ord. No. 6375, § 1, 1-27-56
   Ord. No. 6376, § 1, 1-27-86
   Ord. No. 6377, § 1, 1-27-86
   Ord. No. 6378, § 1, 1-27-86
   Ord. No. 6379, § 1, 1-27-86
   Ord. No. 6492, § 1, 8-4-86
   Ord. No. 6494, § 1, 8-4-86
   Ord. No. 6555, § 1, 10-27-86
   Ord. No. 6556, § 1, 10-27-86
   Ord. No. 6557, § 1, 10-27-86
   Ord. No. 6553, § 1, 10-27-86
   Ord. No. 6603, § 1, 2-2-87
   Ord. No. 6715, § 1, 6-1-87
   Ord. No. 6745, § 1, 7-6-87
   Ord. No. 6785, § 1, 9-14-87
   Ord. No. 6810, § 1, 10-12-87
   Ord. No. 6815, § 1, 10-19-87
   Ord. No. 6816, § 1, 10-19-87
   Ord. No. 6823, § 1, 11-9-87
   Ord. No. 6824, § 1, 11-9-87
   Ord. No. 6869, §§ 1--3, 1-11-88
   Ord. No. 6911, § 1, 3-28-88
   Ord. No. 6912, § 1, 3-28-88
   Ord. No. 6942, § 1, 5-2-88
   Ord. No. 7384, § 1, 3-26-90
   Ord. No. 7385, § 1, 3-26-90
   Ord. No. 7475, § 1, 9-10-90
   Ord. No. 7476, § 1, 9-10-90
   Ord. No. 7477, § 1, 9-10-90
   Ord. No. 7478, § 1, 9-10-90
   Ord. No. 7479, § 1, 9-10-90
   Ord. No. 7480, § 1, 9-10-90
   Ord. No. 7481, § 1, 9-10-90
   Ord. No. 7515, § 1, 11-19-90
   Ord. No. 7516, § 1, 11-19-90
   Ord. No. 7707, § 1, 11-4-91
   Ord. No. 7798, §§ 1, 2, 4-20-92
   Ord. No. 7799, §§ 1--3, 4-20-92
   Ord. No. 7837, §§ 1, 2, 6-15-92
   Ord. No. 7838, §§ 1, 2, 6-15-92
   Ord. No. 7876, § 1, 8-3-92
   Ord. No. 7904, §§ 1, 2, 9-14-92
   Ord. No. 7927, §§ 1, 2, 10-26-92
   Ord. No. 7928, §§ 1, 2, 10-26-92
   Ord. No. 7974, §§ 1, 2, 2-1-93
   Ord. No. 7975, §§ 1, 2, 2-1-93
   Ord. No. 7994, § 1, 2-22-93
   Ord. No. 8094, §§ 1, 2, 8-2-93
   Ord. No. 8095, §§ 1, 2, 8-2-93
   Ord. No. 8096, §§ 1, 2, 8-2-93
   Ord. No. 8108, §§ 1, 2, 8-2-93
   Ord. No. 8142, § 1, 10-18-93
   Ord. No. 8143, § 1, 10-18-93
   Ord. No. 8162, § 1, 11-22-93
   Ord. No. 8163, § 1, 11-22-93
   Ord. No. 8240, § 1, 4-4-94
   Ord. No. 8241, § 1, 4-4-94
   Ord. No. 8263, § 1, 5-2-94
   Ord. No. 8325, § 1, 7-5-94
   Ord. No. 8330, § 1, 7-5-94
   Ord. No. 8355, § 1, 9-12-94
   Ord. No. 8403, § 1, 11-21-94
   Ord. No. 8512, § 1, 6-5-95
   Ord. No. 8859, § 1, 4-14-97
   Ord. No. 8860, § 1, 4-14-97
   Ord. No. 9056, § 1, 5-18-98
   Ord. No. 9247, § 1, 7-6-99
   Ord. No. 9355, § 1, 2-28-00
   Ord. No. 9412, § 1, 6-26-00
ARTICLE III.
ADDRESS NUMBERING*
__________
*   Editors Note: See the editor's footnote to art. I of this chapter. Ord. No.
2657, § 3, transferred all sections appearing in art. II of this chapter and
ch. 24, §§ 26--35, of the 1953 Code, as amended by Ord. No. 4869, §§ 1, 2,
adopted Sept. 5, 1978, to art. III, entitled "House Numbering," and renumbered
such sections as 62-72. They are numbered as §§
25-63--
25-73 of this Code. See the editor's note following §
25-62 for explanation of the difference of numbering by one number.
   Subsequently, § 2 of Ord. No. 6134, adopted Dec. 3, 1984, added a new art.
III, entitled "Address Numbering," §§
25-63--2572.
__________
Sec. 25-63. System established; compliance required.
There is hereby established a uniform system of address numbering in the city.
All buildings shall display the numbers assigned in accordance with the
provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 6134, § 2, 12-3-84)
Sec. 25-64. East-west base line.
Broadway Boulevard easterly from the mainline Southern Pacific Railroad tracks
and the easterly prolongation of that alignment, Congress Street westerly from
the mainline Southern Pacific Railroad tracks and the prolongation of that
alignment to the western boundary of Panorama Estates "B," a subdivision, and
the alignment of West Broadway Boulevard westerly from the northwest corner of
said subdivision and the westerly prolongation of that alignment form the east-
west base line for numbering along all public and private ways running
northerly and southerly.
(Ord. No. 6134, § 2, 12-3-84; Ord. No. 6477, § 1, 7-7-86)
Sec. 25-65. North-south base line.
Stone Avenue from Eighteenth Street northerly to Sixth Street and north
therefrom to Roger Road, Sixth Avenue from Eighteenth Street south to Irvington
Road, and the prolongation of the respective alignments thereof, form the
north-south base line for numbering along all public and private ways running
easterly and westerly.
(Ord. No. 6134, § 2, 12-3-84; Ord. No. 6477, § 2, 7-7-86)
Sec. 25-66. Assignment of numbers--Generally.
   Sec. 25-66(1). All buildings and lots on the right-hand side of each public
or private way ascending from the base line shall bear even numbers. All
buildings and lots on the left-hand side of each public or private way
ascending from the base line shall bear odd numbers.
   Sec. 25-66(2). Each hundred block, as delineated on the official addressing
maps or plats and the hundred block base map or plat, shall be divided into a
number line of one hundred (100) equal increments (numbers). Respective odd and
even address numbers shall be assigned from this number line according to the
building location, property entrance location, or mean property frontage as
shall be determined by the building safety administrator or his authorized
representative.
   Sec. 25-66(3). Where any building has more than one (1) occupancy, a
separate number shall be assigned to each front entrance serving a separate
occupancy provided the building occupies a lot, parcel or tract having a
frontage equal to at least ten (10) feet for each such entrance. Where a
building is not located on a lot, parcel or tract having such frontage, or
where such frontage cannot be imputed to two (2) or more buildings on a lot,
parcel or tract, the building safety administrator shall cause to be assigned a
numerical occupancy designation unique to each occupancy in the buildings as
part of the address number. All such designations shall be consistent generally
with the system established by this article.
   Sec. 25-66(4). A building on a lot or parcel abutting two (2) or more public
or private ways shall have a number assigned only to the front entrance, unless
other entrances serve different occupancies.
   Sec. 25-66(5). The building safety administrator or his authorized
representative, when assigning a series of address numbers, shall determine
whether to lead with an odd or an even number. Whenever possible, the first
address number in a given series shall be even.
   Sec. 25-66(6). Address numbers will be assigned to properties on both sides
of a public or private way in a stepped, alternating sequence, except in the
case of ways having curved alignments. Building locations, property entrances,
and mean property frontages which are physically lower than those on the
opposite side of the public or private way, relative to the ascending number
sequence, will be assigned and addressed numbers of lower numerical value.
   Sec. 25-66(7). Lots, parcels or tracts fronting on a curved public or
private way shall be numbered as though the way were actually straight so that
lots, parcels or tracts directly across from one another shall be assigned
address numbers of similar numerical value although the way is not in a
perpendicular relationship with the hundred block grid lines.
(Ord. No. 6134, § 2, 12-3-84)
Sec. 25-67. Same--Ways not extendIng through to base line.
All buildings and lots, parcels and tracts facing public or private ways not
extending through to the base line shall be assigned the same numbers as would
be assigned if the way extended to the base line.
(Ord. No. 6134, § 2, 12-3-84)
Sec. 25-68. Display of numbers; size, material.
The numbers required by this article to be displayed shall be conspicuously
placed immediately above, on or within five (5) feet of either side of the
front entrance door of each occupancy, or otherwise as approved by the building
safety administrator or his authorized representative to prevent undue
hardship, so that the numbers can be clearly discerned from the public or
private way. Additional display of address shall be allowed. If an occupancy
has no entrance through the side of the occupancy fronting on a public or
private way, the numbers required by this article shall be displayed in a
location on the front side of the occupancy prescribed by the building official
or his authorized representative. Whenever any building is situated more than
fifty (50) feet from the near right-of-way line of the public or private way on
which it fronts, or when the address number would not be visible from the way,
the number shall be conspicuously displayed at the near right-of-way line, near
the walk or driveway leading to the entrance to such building upon the curb, a
gate post, wall, fence, tree, post or other appropriate place or thing so as to
be easily discernible from the way. Address numbers displayed shall be not less
than three (3) inches in height, shall be made of a durable and clearly visible
material and shall provide good contrast against the immediate background.
(Ord. No. 6134, § 2, 12-3-84)
Sec. 25-69. Plat book required; public inspection; assignment of numbers.
The building safety administrator shall cause to be prepared complete plats of
uniform address numbering as required by this article for all property within
the city, including property annexed from time to time. Promptly thereafter
there shall be assigned to each building and unimproved lot, parcel or tract
within the city the respective number or numbers under the uniform system
required by this article.
For the purpose of facilitating a correct numbering, a map or plat book of all
public and private ways within the city, showing the assigned numbers of all
buildings and unimproved properties, shall be kept on file in the office of the
building safety administrator and shall be open for public inspection during
the office hours of the building safety administrator.
(Ord. No. 6134, § 2, 12-3-84)
Sec. 25-70. Numbers to be furnished upon application; determination of proper
number in case of conflict; appeal.
It shall be the duty of the building safety administrator to inform any party
applying therefor of the number or numbers belonging to or embraced within the
limits of any lot, parcel or tract, as provided in this article. In the case of
conflict as to the correct number to be assigned to and displayed by any
existing or future building, or as to correct location of display, the building
safety administrator or his authorized representative shall determine the
number of such building after an informal administrative bearing has been
conducted by such official upon adequate notice and opportunity to be heard
having been afforded any challenging party who has a legal or equitable
interest in the property concerned. Such party may thereafter appeal to the
board of appeals established and structured in article II, chapter
6 of this Code in accordance with section
6-17 thereof and the rules and regulations of the board of appeals.
(Ord. No. 6134 § 2, 12-3-84)
Sec. 25-71. Duty to procure and display numbers; violation; withholding of
permit or approval.
It shall be a civil infraction for the owner of each building now existing or
which shall be erected or shall become located within the city to fail to
display the correct number or numbers caused to be assigned by the building
safety administrator in accordance with this article. No permit required by any
provision of chapter
6 of this Code shall be issued for any building or use of land until the owner
has procured from the building safety administrator the designation of the
proper number or numbers assigned to the premises concerned. Final approval of
any building relocated, erected, repaired, altered or modified within the city
shall be withheld by the building safety administrator until the number or
numbers assigned to the premises have been displayed pursuant to the provisions
of this article.
(Ord. No. 6134, § 2, 12-3-84)
Sec. 25-72. Address numbering code.
This article may be referred to as the Address Numbering Code.
(Ord. No. 6134, § 2, 12-3-84)
Secs. 25-73--25-79. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV.
UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS
Sec. 25-80. Establishment of districts.
The mayor and council may by ordinance establish underground utility districts
according to provisions set forth in this article.
(Ord. No. 5841, § 1, 8-1-83)
Sec. 25-81. Definitions.
In this article, unless the context otherwise requires:
   (1)   Affected utility means a utility subject to a tariff approved by the
commission which provides under certain conditions for the undergrounding of
overhead distribution facilities at the utility's expense.
   (2)   Commission means the Arizona Corporation Commission.
   (3)   Underground utility districts or districts means the area in the city
within which overhead distribution facilities shall be replaced with
underground distribution facilities and in which new overhead distribution
facilities are prohibited in public ways within the underground utility
district.
   (4)   Overhead distribution facilities means distribution lines of standard
existing voltages, poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs,
platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches,
communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located above
ground appertaining to such distribution lines and used or useful in supplying
electric, communication or similar or associated service.
   (5)   Utility means all persons or entities supplying electric,
communication or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials
or devices.
(Ord. No. 5841, § 1, 8-1-83)
Sec. 25-82. Procedure to establish district.
When the mayor and council believe that the public interest so requires, it may
set forth by ordinance an area designated as an underground utility district.
After consultation with and approval by any affected utility, one (1) or more
public hearings or the proposed district shall be held by the governing body.
All persons shall be given an opportunity to be heard. After the hearing is
closed, the decision of the mayor and council shall be final and conclusive.
(Ord. No. 5841, § 1, 8-1-83)
Sec. 25-83. Notice.
Written notice of public hearings, except those continued to a time certain,
shall be given by publication once in the official newspaper of the city, and
by giving property owners or those in possession of property any part of which
is in the proposed district or whose property is served from the overhead lines
in the proposed district, and any utility having overhead distribution
facilities in the proposed district mail notice not less than ten (10) days,
nor more than sixty (60) days, prior to the hearing date.
The names of such persons shall be obtained from the current assessment rolls
of the county assessor and from a list supplied by the affected utilities of
all their current customers in the district.
The failure to give written notice by mail to those affected shall not
invalidate an ordinance establishing a district provided such failure was not
intentional.
(Ord. No. 5841, § 1, 8-1-83)
Sec. 25-84. Findings required.
After the public hearing is closed, a district will be established only if the
governing body shall find:
   (1)   The establishment of the proposed district is in furtherance of either
the development of public recreation areas, or urban redevelopment projects
undertaken pursuant to state statute, and is in the general public interest for
one (1) or more of the following reasons:
   (a)   Such undergrounding will avoid or eliminate an unusually heavy
concentration of overhead distribution facilities;
   (b)   Any or all of the streets, roads, alleys or rights-of-way in the area
are extensively used by the general public and carry a heavy volume of
pedestrian or vehicular traffic;
   (c)   Any or all of the streets, roads, alleys or rights-of-way adjoin or
pass through a civic area or a public recreation area or an area of unusual
scenic interest to the general public.
   (2)   The affected utilities agree that the proposed district is in
furtherance of the development of a public recreation area, or an urban
redevelopment project undertaken pursuant to state statute, is in the general
public interest, is feasible, and the necessary easements to provide
underground service may be obtained without cost or condemnation by the
affected utility.
(Ord. No. 5841, § 1, 8-1-83)
Sec. 25-85. Provisions of ordinance.
The ordinance establishing the district shall:
   (1)   Order the removal of existing overhead communications and electric
distribution facilities and the replacement thereof by underground facilities
within a specified time.
   (2)   Order each property owner or one in possession of property within the
district served from existing overhead distribution facilities to provide in
accordance with the rules and regulations and tariffs of the utility company
and applicable rules and regulations of the commission for underground service,
all electrical facility changes on his property needed to receive service from
the underground facilities of the utility as soon as such are available.
   (3)   Authorize discontinuance of overhead service by the utilities having
overhead distribution facilities in the district.
   (4)   Authorize that the sums paid by the utility to remove the overhead
service and replace same with underground service shall be deducted from the
two (2) percent fund set aside by the utility for replacing overhead with
underground distribution facilities as a valid expenditure in doing such work.
Prohibit a utility having overhead distribution facilities in the district from
erecting after the effective date of the ordinance new overhead distribution
facilities in the district, subject to such exceptions as may be applicable.
(Ord. No. 5841, § 1, 8-1-83)
Sec. 25-86. Exceptions.
   (a)   The provisions of this article shall not apply to the following type
of facilities unless otherwise provided in the ordinance establishing the
district:
   (1)   Overhead facilities installed and maintained for a period not to
exceed ten (10) days for emergency services upon notification to the city;
   (2)   Municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and
the satisfaction of the city;
   (3)   Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting;
   (4)   Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any
portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or
connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires
originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead
structures are not prohibited;
   (5)   Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the
transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of twenty-five
thousand (25,000) volts;
   (6)   Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means
of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building
to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without
crossing any public streets;
   (7)   Antennae, associated equipment and supporting structures, used by a
utility or person for furnishing communication services;
   (8)   Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface-
mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and
concealed ducts;
   (9)   Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures
used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects; and
   (10)   Overhead wires and fixtures form a structure or pole to other
structures or poles on the same premises by owners of or persons in possession
of the premises.
   (b)   Extensions of time may be granted for work which cannot be performed
within the time provided on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by
public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience, or any
other circumstances beyond the control of the person required to do the work.
(Ord. No. 5841, § 1, 8-1-83)
Sec. 25-87. Publicly owned equipment.
All equipment owned by the city, the county or other governmental agency shall
be removed and replaced underground by the affected utilities from the overhead
transmission facilities by the utilities owning said facilities at the sale
cost and expense of said utilities, which cost may be deducted from the two (2)
percent fund set aside by the utility for replacing overhead with underground
distribution facilities as a valid expenditure in doing such work. Such changes
shall be made in accordance with directions of the city, the county or other
governmental agency.
(Ord. No. 5841, § 1, 8-1-83)
ARTICLE V.
TEMPORARY WORK ZONE TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT*
__________
*   Editors Note: Ord. No. 10140 shall become effective May 15, 2005.
__________
Sec. 25-88. Temporary work zone traffic management program established.
There is hereby established a temporary work zone traffic management program to
improve work zone safety and to manage temporary roadway restrictions in order
to minimize delays and frustrations for the traveling public. The temporary
work zone traffic management program is intended to enhance the planning,
application, and oversight of traffic control management in temporary work
areas in roadways, sidewalks, and transit zones.
(Ord. No. 10140, § 2, 4-12-05)
Sec. 25-89. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated
below:
   (1)   Major holiday shall mean any holiday enumerated in A.R.S. § 1-301.
   (2)   MUTCD shall mean the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices as
amended by the State of Arizona and including additions by the city.
   (3)   NCHRP 350 Guidelines shall mean National Cooperative Highway Research
Program Report 350, three (3) copies of which shall be kept on file in the
office of the city clerk and are made public records and shall be available for
public use and inspection during regular office hours.
   (4)   Peak travel time shall mean 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 6:
00 p.m. Monday through Friday, excluding major holidays.
   (5)   Transit zone shall mean those portions of public rights-of-way
reserved for stopping and standing of public transit vehicles or for passenger
waiting, alighting or boarding of public transit vehicles.
   (6)   Active work shall mean the presence of workers engaged in maintenance
of, or construction upon public rights-of-way, and shall include related
activities necessary for full completion of the work, such as material drying
or curing times when workers may not be physically present. As long as workers
engaged in the maintenance of, or construction upon the public rights-of-way
are present in the temporary work zone, the term active work shall also include
those periods of time when they may be idle due to material, equipment,
inspection or similar scheduling requirements.
(Ord. No. 10140, § 2, 4-12-05)
Sec. 25-90. Temporary work zone traffic management.
In addition to the barricading and permitting requirements contained in section
25-24 and elsewhere in this chapter, all temporary work zone barricading within
City of Tucson rights-of- way shall substantially comply with the latest
edition of MUTCD, as amended by the state and including the additions by the
city, and with NCHRP 350 Guidelines. No temporary roadway restrictions shall
occur during peak travel times, or on major holidays unless specifically
approved by the director of transportation or in case of actual emergency. The
director of transportation may allow temporary roadway restrictions in the off-
peak direction during peak travel times in the director's sole discretion.
Under no circumstances shall roadways, sidewalks, or transit zones be
restricted with barricades when no active work is being performed or is to be
performed within two (2) hours of the completion of the installation of the
barricades, unless an approved detour is in place.
(Ord. No. 10140, § 2, 4-12-05)
Sec. 25-91. Fee schedule.
   (a)   A permit fee for every thirty (30) days of estimated project
completion time shall be collected for each right of way permit. The city may
request a permit holder to report the project's completion status every thirty
(30) days. Projects with an estimated completion time beyond a multiple of
thirty (30) days shall be rounded to the next highest multiple of thirty (30)
days for permitting purposes.
   (b)   In cases where a traffic control plan is required by the MUTCD, a
traffic control plan review fee shall be collected in addition to the permit
fee provided in subsection (a) above.
   (c)   Public utilities may apply for and receive an annual permit for short-
term multiple location work for a one time annual payment per year.
(Ord. No. 10140, § 2, 4-12-05; Ord. No. 12108, § 2, 6-18-24)
Sec. 25-92. Violations and civil sanctions.
The following schedule of civil sanctions shall be imposed for each of the
following violations of this chapter:
   (1)   Presenting an imminent risk of death or injury to the public within
public right-of- way, one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00).
   (2)   Restricting roadway without proper certification or without a
barricading permit for more than thirty (30) minutes, one thousand dollars
($1,000.00).
   (3)   Restricting traffic during peak hours without permission from the
director of transportation, one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
   (4)   Failing to correct or cure violations within the time period stated in
a warning notice, one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
   (5)   Restricting traffic at signalized intersections without active work
occurring within thirty (30) minutes of the restriction, one thousand dollars
($1,000.00).
   (6)   Violating restriction limits or times and/or locations as contained in
the barricading temporary use permit, five hundred dollars ($500.00).
   (7)   Leaving advance warning signs facing traffic more than forty-five (45)
minutes after the restriction has been removed, two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00).
   (8)   Leaving traffic control devices in the right-of-way for twenty-four
(24) hours after temporary barricading permit expires, two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00).
   (9)   Failure to comply with the use of MUTCD and/or NCHRP 350 compliance
devices, two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
The civil sanctions provided above shall be tripled in the event that a valid
permit has not been obtained for the work that constitutes the infraction.
(Ord. No. 10140, § 2, 4-12-05)
Chapter 26
FLOODPLAIN, STORMWATER, AND EROSION HAZARD MANAGEMENT*
__________
*   Editors Note: Ord. No. 5777, § 1, adopted May 23, 1983, repealed ch. 26,
pertaining to swimming pools, bath houses and bathing places, in its entirety.
Former ch. 26 was derived from Ord. No. 3002, § 2, adopted June 26, 1967, as
amended by Ord. No. 5722, §§ 1, 3, adopted Feb. 28, 1983. Ord. No. 5802, § 1,
adopted July 5, 1983, specifically repealed Ord. No. 5722, §§ 1, 3, from which
§§ 26-70 and 26-72 had been derived. For a complete sectional disposition, see
the Code Comparative Table at the back of this volume.
Subsequently, Ord. No. 7407, § 5, adopted June 25, 1990, added a new ch.
26.
   Note: Ord. No. 10209, § 1, adopted Oct. 18, 2005, amended the title of ch.
26  to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, ch.
26  was entitled, "Floodplain and Erosion Hazard Management."
   Cross References: Spa/pool code, §
6-181 et seq.
__________
Art. I.   In General, §§ 26-1--26-19
   Div. 1. Floodplain and Erosion Hazard Area Regulations, §§ 26-1--26-19
Art. II.   Stormwater Management, §§ 26-20--26-48
   Div. 1. Purpose and Definitions, §§ 26-20--26-29
   Div. 2. Powers and Duties, §§ 26-30--26-39
   Div. 3. Prohibitions, Non-Prohibited Discharges, and Requirements, §§ 26-40-
-26-46
   Div. 4. Enforcement, §§ 26-47, 26-48
Article I. In General
Division 1. Floodplain and Erosion Hazard Area Regulations
Sec.
26-1.   Purpose.
Sec.
26-1.1.   Authority.
Sec.
26-1.2.   Applicability.
Sec.
26-1.3.   Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
Sec.
26-1.4.   Methods of reducing flood losses.
Sec.
26-2.   Definitions.
Sec.
26-3.   Floodplain boundaries, elevations.
Sec.
26-3.1.   Floodplain boundary and flood elevation revisions.
Sec.
26-4.   Statutory exceptions.
Sec.
26-4.1.   Nonconforming development.
Sec.
26-5.   Floodplain and erosion hazard area development.
Sec.
26-5.1.   Floodway development.
Sec.
26-5.2.   Floodway fringe development.
Sec.
26-5.3.   Special flood hazard areas.
Sec.
26-6.   Extraction of sand, gravel and other earth products; permit required.
Sec.
26-6.1.   Stockpiling.
Sec.
26-6.2.   Standards for construction of utility systems.
Sec.
26-7.   Erosion hazard areas and setbacks from watercourses.
Sec.
26-7.1.   Setbacks on regional watercourses.
Sec.
26-7.2.   Setbacks on all other watercourses.
Sec.
26-8.   Subdivision and development project requirements.
Sec.
26-9.   Standards for manufactured homes and manufactured home parks and
subdivisions.
Sec.
26-10.   Detention/retention systems.
Sec.
26-11.   Floodplain use permit requirements and regulations.
Sec.
26-11.1.   City engineer review of floodplain and erosion hazard area
development.
Sec.
26-11.2.   Floodplain use permit procedure.
Sec.
26-11.3.   Penalties, violations, unlawful acts, classifications.
Sec.
26-11.4.   Declaration of public nuisance; abatement.
Sec.
26-12.   Appeals and variances.
Sec.
26-13.   Amendments.
Sec.
26-14.   Enforcement.
Sec.
26-15.   Disclaimer of liability.
Sec.
26-16.   Severability.
Sec.
26-17.   Coordination with other agencies.
Sec.
26-18.   Public hearing.
Sec.
26-19.   Reserved.
Article II. Stormwater Management
Division 1. Purpose and Definitions
Sec.
26-20.   Purpose.
Sec.
26-21.   Consistency.
Sec.
26-22.   Severability.
Sec.
26-23.   Definitions.
Secs.
26-24--26-29.   Reserved.
Division 2. Powers and Duties
Sec.
26-30.   Authorized representative.
Sec.
26-31.   General.
Sec.
26-32.   Authority to enter.
Sec.
26-33.   Warrants, restraining orders, and injunctive relief.
Sec.
26-34.   Authority to inspect.
Sec.
26-35.   Authority to monitor.
Sec.
26-36.   Authority to abate.
Secs.
26-37--26-39.   Reserved.
Division 3. Prohibitions, Non-Prohibited Discharges, and Requirements
Sec.
26-40.   Prohibited discharges.
Sec.
26-41.   Non-prohibited discharges.
Sec.
26-42.   Requirements.
Secs.
26-43--26-46.   Reserved.
Division 4. Enforcement
Sec.
26-47.   Violation notices.
Sec.
26-48.   Penalties and corrective actions.
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL
DIVISION 1.
FLOODPLAIN AND EROSION HAZARD AREA REGULATIONS
Sec. 26-1. Purpose.
These floodplain and erosion hazard area regulations are intended to protect
human life and health, and promote and protect the public peace, safety,
comfort, convenience, and general welfare; to meet state and federal
requirements, thereby allowing residents of the city to purchase flood
insurance; receive disaster relief should the need arise, and obtain
residential and commercial real estate loans; to manage uses of the
floodplains, recognizing that the highest and best use of the regulatory
floodplains in the city is for the maintenance of hydrologic and hydraulic
processes, with consideration for aesthetics, natural open space, recreation
areas and wildlife habitat; to minimize flood and erosion damage; to protect
and preserve groundwater recharge; to minimize costs to the city; to minimize
the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally
undertaken at the expense of the general public; to encourage the most
effective expenditures of public money for drainage projects; to minimize
prolonged business interruptions; minimize damage to public facilities and
utilities such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and
streets and bridges located in special flood hazard areas; to help maintain a
stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of special flood
hazard areas so as to minimize blight areas caused by flooding; to notify
potential buyers when a property is in a Special Flood Hazard Area; participate
in and maintain eligibility for flood insurance and disaster relief; to
accommodate anticipated runoff; to preserve the natural areas, streams, washes,
arroyos, rivers, and drainage courses in their natural riverine condition
whenever possible and that any land use proposal which utilizes this approach
be considered superior to all others; to recognize that southwestern
watercourses are unstable and that their physical characteristics may change;
and to ensure that those who occupy the areas within a regulatory floodplain or
erosion hazard area assume the responsibility for their actions.
(Ord. No. 7407, § 5, 6-25-90; Ord. No. 11396, § 1, 8-9-16)
Sec. 26-1.1. Authority.
The mayor and council, pursuant to the powers and jurisdiction vested by A.R.S.
title 9, chapter 4, article 6.1, section 9-462.01(A)(8), (9), and title 48,
chapter 21, article 1, section 48-3610, et seq., and other applicable laws,
statutes, orders and regulations of the city, do hereby exercise the power and
authority to adopt floodplain and erosion hazard area regulations for the city.
The mayor and council, within city limits, shall delineate through this chapter
for areas where development is ongoing or imminent or becomes imminent, the
criteria for development within floodplains in a manner that is consistent with
the criteria developed by FEMA and the Director of the Arizona Department of
Water Resources.
(Ord. No. 7407, § 5, 6-25-90; Ord. No. 10311, § 1, 8-8-06; Ord. No. 11396, § 1,
8-9-16)
Sec. 26-1.2. Applicability.
These floodplain and erosion hazard area regulations shall be applicable and
enforceable in all incorporated areas of the city for all developments located
within the floodplains, as defined herein, including public lands and to
erosion-prone areas (as described in section
26-11.1) located within the corporate limits of the city. This ordinance is not
intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or
deed restrictions. However, where this ordinance and another ordinance,
easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes
the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(Ord. No. 7407, § 5, 6-25-90; Ord. No. 11396, § 1, 8-9-16)
Sec. 26-1.3. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
The special flood hazard areas identified by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) in a scientific and engineering report entitled "The Flood
Insurance Study (FIS) for Pima County, Arizona, and Incorporated Areas" dated
September 28, 2012, with any accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) and
all subsequent amendments and/or revisions thereto are hereby adopted by
reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. The FIS is on file with
the floodplain section of the Engineering Division at the Planning and
Development Services Department. The FIS and FIRM are the minimum areas and
standards of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies
for other flood hazard areas which allow implementation of this chapter and
which are approved by the city engineer, and may be recommended to the
floodplain board and FEMA. All river and basin management plans, or other land
use plans approved by the mayor and council, are hereby incorporated into this
chapter and made a part thereof by reference. Engineering drainage design
standards, approved by the city engineer as revised on an ongoing basis to
include the most current practices and methodologies, will be used in creating
river and basin management plans.
(Ord. No. 7407, § 5, 6-25-90; Ord. No. 10311, § 1, 8-8-06; Ord. No. 11396, § 1,
8-9-16)
Sec. 26-1.4. Methods of reducing flood losses.
   In order to accomplish its purposes, this ordinance includes methods and
provisions to:
   (a)   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and
property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases
in erosion, flood heights or velocities;
   (b)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (c)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters;
   (d)   Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may
increase flood damage; and
   (e)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other
areas.
(Ord. No. 11396, § 1, 8-9-16)
Sec. 26-2. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to words and phrases used in this
division:
   Accessory structure means a structure that is on the same parcel of property
as a principal structure, the use of which is incidental to the use of the
principal structure.
   Appeal means a request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator's
interpretation of any provision of this ordinance or a request for a variance.
   Area of shallow flooding means a designated Zone AO or AH on a community's
FIRM with a one (1) percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average
depth of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not
exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may
be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
   Arizona Department of Water Resources (ADWR) is the state agency assigned
with oversight of floodplain management/flood control as provided in Title 48,
Chapter 21 of the Arizona Revised Statutes (A.R.S.).
   Balanced basin means a drainage basin which contains floodwater channels,
natural or manmade, and/or flood control structures that are adequate to
contain existing runoff from the regulatory storm produced by the basin, but in
which additional runoff cannot be safety contained by said channels or
structures.
   Base flood means the flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year.
   Base flood elevation (BFE) means the calculated water-surface elevation of
the base flood. For a special flood hazard area, the BFE means the elevation
shown on or calculated from the FIS or FIRM, including Zones A, AE, AO1, AO2,
and AH, where the FIS or FIRM indicates the water surface elevation resulting
from a base flood. FIS Profile shall be used when available. Other elevations
shall be determined by an engineering study.
   Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
   Basin management plan means a site-specific plan for a watershed or balanced
or critical basin which has been prepared for and approved by the city
engineer, and which provides a conceptual plan for orderly development of flood
control measures within the basin.
   Breakaway wall means a wall that is not part of the structural support of
the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
   Building: See "Structure."
   Community means any state, area or political subdivision thereof, or any
Indian tribe or authorized tribal organization, or authorized native
organization, which has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management
regulations for the areas within its jurisdiction.
   Critical basin means a drainage basin which contains floodwater channels,
natural or manmade, and/or flood control structures that cannot contain
existing runoff produced by the regulatory flood within the basin, and which
has a documented history of severe flooding hazards.
   Critical facility means any new and substantially improved public or private
facility, or any addition to an existing public or private facility, that is
used for public emergency management or provides services and functions
essential to the community. Critical facilities should be designed and
constructed to be located outside of FEMA SFHA and other one hundred (100) year
regulatory and five hundred (500) year floodplains. If a new development or
substantially improved facility is proposed in a five hundred (500) year
floodplain then the minimum building pad elevation shall be set at or above the
five hundred (500) year water surface elevation, and the minimum lowest floor
elevation shall be set at or above the five hundred (500) year water surface
elevation plus one (1) foot, and provide all weather access for the five
hundred (500) year flood condition. Critical facilities include: critical
airport facilities (air traffic control towers, electrical vaults, emergency
generators, police station, fire station, and fueling stations), emergency
incident command centers, other emergency facilities including fire stations,
police departments; utility facilities; nursing homes or elderly care
facilities; hospitals; storage facilities that have hazardous materials; and
schools or day care facilities. Other critical facilities may be designated as
determined by city administration (department directors with city manager or
designee's concurrence).
   Cumulative improvement means the tracking of the market value of all
improvements to a structure over a ten (10) year period for the purpose of
determining substantial damage or improvement.
   Detention system means a type of flood control system which delays the
downstream progress of floodwaters in a controlled manner, generally through
the combined use of a temporary storage area and a metered outlet device which
causes a lengthening of the duration of flow and thereby reduces downstream
flood peaks. Reduction of runoff shall be provided per current City of Tucson
standards.
   Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, landscaping, paving, excavation, drilling operations, or
storage of equipment or materials.
   Drainage basin means any watershed or stormwater catchment land area, above
a point on a watercourse which traverses the basin and to which the waters
drain and collect.
   Dry well means a device that is used to dispose of floodwaters through a
process of passive infiltration of floodwaters into the vadose zone, below the
ground surface. Unless specifically used for water re-charge, dry wells are
restricted to post-construction drainage solutions where all drainage
requirements are met.
   Dwelling unit means a place of residence which may be located in a single-
or multiple- dwelling building or a manufactured home.
   Encroachment means the advancement or infringement of land uses, fill or
structures, or development, into the floodplain that impedes, alters, or
reduces the flow capacity of the channel and regulatory floodplain of a
watercourse.
   Erosion means the process, either rapid or gradual, of the wearing away of
land masses by water flow forces. This peril is not, per se, covered under the
National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).
   Erosion hazard area means the land area adjoining a watercourse regulated by
this chapter which is deemed by the city engineer to be subject to FEMA or
local flood-related erosion losses.
   Exhibit 1. See exhibit 1 at end of this section.
   Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home
park for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lot on which
the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, either final site grading or the pouring of concrete
pads, and the construction of streets) is completed on or before March 22,
1982.
   Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, either final site grading or pouring of concrete
pads, or the construction of streets).
   FEMA means the Federal Emergency Management Agency or designate successor
agency that is responsible for the administration of the National Flood
Insurance Program (NFIP) to provide flood insurance and to establish flood
prone areas and development regulations.
   Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from (1) the overflow of
floodwaters; (2) the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source; and/or (3) the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore
of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused
by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly
caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied
by a severe storm or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood
or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable
event which results in flooding as defined in this definition.
   Flood hazard map(s) (FHM) means an official map(s) of a community, issued by
the city engineer, where the boundaries of the flood and/or related erosion
hazard areas have been designated as local floodplain and/or erosion hazard
zones.
   Flood insurance rate map(s) (FIRM) means the official map(s) on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazards (SFHA) and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
These maps, which are approved by the city engineer and adopted by the
floodplain board, provide information regarding floodplains of the city.
   Flood insurance study (FIS) means the official report provided by FEMA that
includes flood profiles, FIRM and the water surface elevation of the base flood
as set forth in the FIS.
   Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to being
inundated by water from any source (see definition of "flood").
   Floodplain administrator means the city engineer, or designee, who is the
community official designated by title to administer and enforce the floodplain
management regulations.
   Floodplain board means the mayor and council at such times as they are
engaged in the enforcement of this ordinance.
   Floodplain and erosion hazard area management regulations means this
ordinance and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes,
health regulations, housing codes, setback requirements, open space area
regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance,
grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of
police power which control development in floodprone areas. The term describes
such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide
standards for preventing and reducing both erosion damage and flood loss and
damage.
   Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and
enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but
not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain
management regulations, and open space plans.
   Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood
damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
   Floodplain use permit means an official document which authorizes specific
activity within a regulatory floodplain or erosion hazard area.
   Flood-related erosion means the collapse or subsidence of land along the
shore of a lake, watercourse, or other body of water as a result of undermining
caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or
suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water,
accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as
a flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and
unforeseeable event which results in flooding.
   Floodway or regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to
discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation more than a designated height. See exhibit 1.
   Floodway encroachment lines mean the lines marking the limits of floodways
on federal, state and local flood plain maps.
   Floodway fringe means the land outside the floodway lying at or below the
base flood elevation along a watercourse, and includes that area of the
floodplain on either side of the regulatory floodway where encroachment may be
permitted. See exhibit 1.
   Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood
level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate
for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater
than the height calculated for a selected size of flood and floodway
conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect
of urbanization of the watershed.
   Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended
purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The
term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for
the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship
repair facilities, and does not include long-term storage or related
manufacturing facilities.
   Governing body means the local governing municipality that is empowered to
adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public health, safety and
general welfare of its citizenry.
   Hardship means, as related to section 26-12 of this ordinance, the
exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested
variance. The City of Tucson mayor and council requires that the variance be
exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or
financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic
considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of
one's neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship.
All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a
variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property
owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally
intended.
   Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   Historic structure means any structure that is:
    (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the department of the interior) or preliminarily
determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing in the National Register.
   (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as
a registered historic district.
   (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary
of the interior.
   (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either
of the following:
   a.   By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the
interior.
    b.   Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved
programs.
   Levee means a man-made structure designed and constructed in accordance with
sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so
as to reduce risk from temporary flooding. Classic levee includes concrete-
encased earthen berms or soil cement structures with regulatory scour
protection. A classic levee may also be a road/railroad prism meeting all FEMA
levee requirements including compaction. A floodwall levee is a water-tight
wall structure with regulatory scour protection meeting all FEMA levee
requirements. Channel system levee is a structure constructed within a channel
that meets FEMA levee requirements.
   Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirements of section 26-5.2 or 26-5.3 of this
chapter. See definition of “Basement.”
   Major wash or major watercourse means any watercourse which drains a
contributing drainage basin of less than thirty (30) square miles and generates
a base flood peak discharge of twenty-five hundred (2,500) cubic feet per
second (cfs), or greater. Examples of major washes include but are not
necessarily limited to: Alamo Wash, Cholla Wash, at and downstream from Mission
Road, Pima Wash, Rodeo Wash, Silvercroft Wash, Tucson Arroyo, and West Branch
of the Santa Cruz River Washes.
   Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one (1) or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or
without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For
floodplain management purposes, the term "manufactured home" does not include a
"recreational vehicle."
   Manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision means a parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots
for rent or sale.
   Market value is determined by estimating the cost to replace the structure
in new condition and adjusting that cost figure by the amount of depreciation
that has accrued since the structure was constructed. The cost of replacement
of the structure shall be based on a square foot cost factor determined by
reference to a building cost estimating guide recognized by the building
construction industry. The amount of depreciation shall be determined by taking
into account the age and physical deterioration of the structure and functional
obsolescence as approved by the floodplain administrator, but shall not include
economic or other forms of external obsolescence. Use of replacement costs or
accrued depreciation factors different from those contained in recognized
building cost estimating guides may be considered only if such factors are
included in a report prepared by an independent professional appraiser and
supported by a written explanation of the differences.
   Mean sea level means, for purposes of the NFIP, the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or
other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's FIRM's are
referenced.
   Minor watercourse or minor wash means a watercourse which conveys or
collects a 100-year (base flood) peak discharge of less than twenty-five
hundred (2,500) cubic feet per second (cfs), but more than one hundred (100)
cfs.
   New construction means, for purposes of determining insurance rates,
structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the
effective date of August 2, 1982, when the FIRM became effective, and includes
any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management
purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of
construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain
management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
   New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of March 22, 1982, when floodplain management regulations were adopted by
the city.
   Obstruction means any matter, including but not limited to a dam, wall,
wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, projection, excavation, channel
rectification, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel,
vegetation, refuse, fill, or structure in, along, across or projecting into any
channel, watercourse, stream, lake or regulatory flood hazard area which may
impede, alter, retard or change the direction of the flow of water, either in
itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such water, or that is
placed where the flow of water might carry the same downstream to the damage of
life or property.
   One-hundred-year flood or 100-year flood is a common name for the flood
having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
See definition of "Base flood."
   Person means any individual or his agent, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, or agent of the aforementioned groups, or the state, or any agency
or political subdivision thereof.
   Reach is a hydraulic engineering term to describe longitudinal segments of a
watercourse.
   Reclamation plan means a plan for sand and gravel operations which defined
hydrological and hydraulic constraints; outlines methods of extraction,
operation and site development; and provides for backfilling procedures and
final site reclamation.
   Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is:
    (1)   Built on a single chassis;
    (2)   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
    (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck; and
    (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
   Regional watercourse means a large watercourse, which may have intermittent
flow, draining a contributing drainage basin of thirty (30) square miles or
greater. Examples of regional watercourses include but are not necessarily
limited to the Santa Cruz River, Rillito Creek, Pantano Wash, Tanque Verde
Wash, and Canada Del Oro Wash.
   Regulatory flood includes the base flood and drainage areas where the Q100
is equal to or greater than one hundred (100) cubic feet per second for the one
(1) percent flood event.
   Regulatory flood elevation means the elevation which is one (1) foot higher
than the calculated water surface elevation of the base flood. In an AO Zone
the RFE shall be one (1) foot higher than the depth number specified on the
FIRM, or two (2) feet if no depth number is specified.
   Regulatory floodplain means that portion of the natural floodplain that
would be inundated by the regulatory flood. It includes that area where
drainage is or may be restricted by manmade structures or those areas which are
subject to sheet flooding, or those areas mapped as being floodprone on
existing recorded subdivision plats and also includes areas where the Q100 is
equal to or greater than one hundred (100) cubic feet per second for the one
(1) percent flood event. Also see exhibit 1.
   Regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and
the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height.
   Repetitive loss property means any insurable building for which two (2) or
more claims of more than one thousand dollars ($1,000) were paid by the
National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) within any rolling ten (10) year
period, since 1978. At least two (2) of the claims must be more than ten (10)
days apart but within ten (10) years of each other. A repetitive loss property
may or may not be currently insured by the NFIP.
   Retention system means a type of flood control facility which stores surface
runoff and stops the downstream progress of surface water runoff or flood
waters by employing methods of total containment such that the stored water
infiltrates into the subsurface ground layers. No flow is discharged directly
into a downstream watercourse from a retention system or basin, except for
bleed pipes used for maintenance purposes only. Infiltration rates shall
include a safety factor of two (2).
   Setback means the minimum horizontal distance between a structure and a
watercourse. On each side of a watercourse, the setback is measured from the
top edge of the highest channel bank or edge of the base flood water surface
elevation, whichever is closer to the channel center line.
   Sheet flooding means those areas which are subject to flooding with depths
of one-half ( 1/2) foot or greater during the base flood where a clearly
defined channel does not exist and the path of the flooding is often
unpredictable and indeterminate.
   Special flood hazard area (SFHA) means an area of floodplain subject to a
one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. SFHA are shown
on a FIRM as Zones A, AO(1), AO2, AE, or AH.
   Start of construction includes substantial improvement and other proposed
new development, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided
the actual start of construction, repair, rehabilitation, addition, placement
or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit
date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings,
the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the
stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading, and filling below existing ground surface; nor does it include the
installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a
basement, footings, piers, or foundations, or the erection of temporary forms.
For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   Structure means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and/or roofed
building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above
ground, as well as a manufactured home. "Structure" for insurance coverage
purposes, means a walled and roofed building, other than a gas or liquid
storage tank, that is principally above ground and affixed to a permanent site,
as well as a manufactured home on a permanent foundation. For the latter
purpose, the term includes a building while in the course of construction,
alteration or repair, but does not include building materials or supplies
intended for use in such construction, alteration or repair unless such
materials or supplies are within an enclosed building on the premises.
   Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred.
   Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, repair, rehabilitation,
addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or
exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the
"start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred "substantial damage" regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term includes cost of improvements cumulatively added, in
percentage, for a period of ten (10) years. The term does not, however, include
either:
    (1)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
   (2)   Any alteration of an "historic structure" provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic
structure."
   Variance means a grant of relief by the floodplain board from the
requirements of this chapter which permits development in a manner that would
otherwise be prohibited by the terms of this chapter.
   Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to fully
comply with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or
other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or
other evidence of compliance required in this ordinance is presumed to be in
violation until such time as that documentation is provided to the city for
review and acceptance.
   Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of
1988, or other datum, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the
floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
   Watercourse means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or
other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur.
   Watercourse master plan means a comprehensive plan adopted by the floodplain
board that provides uniform, but separate, rules for watercourses where a
higher level of protection is warranted for public safety or to preserve
integrity of the watercourse, as provided by ARS Section 48-3609.01. These
include the river and/or basin management plans, such as Tucson Stormwater
Management Study (TSMS).
   Watershed means "drainage basin." See definition of "drainage basin."
   Zone A means no BFE's determined.
   Zone AE means BFE's determined.
   Zone AH means flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet (usually areas of
ponding); BFE's determined.
   Zone AO means flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet (usually sheet flow
on sloping terrain); average depths determined. For areas of alluvial fan
flooding, velocities also determined.
   Zone X (unshaded) means areas determined to be outside the two-tenths (0.2)
percent annual chance floodplain.
   Zone X (shaded) means areas of two-tenths (0.2) percent annual chance flood;
areas of one (1) percent annual chance flood with average depths of less than
one (1) foot or with drainage areas less than one (1) square mile; and areas
protected by levees from one (1) percent annual chance flood.
(Ord. No. 7407, § 5, 6-25-90; Ord. No. 10311, § 1, 8-8-06; Ord. No. 11396, § 1,
8-9-16; Ord. No. 11801, § 1, 12-8-20)
   Cross References: Definitions and rules of construction, §
1-2.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f00abf37e22d989857e0938b330fa0d4f098472d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-66.jpg]
 
Sec. 26-3. Floodplain boundaries, elevations.
   (a)    Boundaries: The boundaries of the regulatory floodplains and
floodways shall be shown on maps maintained by the city engineer using the best
available hydrologic and hydraulic data, such as the flood hazard maps (FHM)
and flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) provided by the FEMA. The approximate
boundaries of the regulatory floodplains shall also be shown on the city's
building zone maps, which serve as the city's flood hazard maps.
   For those watercourses where regulatory floodplains are not delineated on
the maps maintained by the city engineer, the regulatory floodplains shall be
determined by engineering studies. An engineering study shall mean the
requirements of these regulations and shall include hydrologic and hydraulic
analyses prepared by a state registered professional civil engineer and
approved by the city engineer.
   (b)    Elevations: Where elevations of the base flood have been determined
for the regulatory floodplain and floodway delineated on maps maintained by the
city engineer (such as the elevations shown on the FEMA flood insurance rate
maps, however, FIS profiles shall be used to determine BFE when available),
those elevations are hereby made a part of these regulations.
   For those watercourses which are delineated on the FIRM as unnumbered A
zones or where the base flood elevations have not been previously determined,
the base flood elevations shall be determined by an engineering study. The
study shall meet the requirements of these regulations and shall include
hydrologic and hydraulic analyses prepared by a state-registered professional
civil engineer and approved by the city engineer. The study shall further
demonstrate that the determination of the base flood elevation and study
methodology comply with any applicable criteria established by ADWR and FEMA.
   (c)    Interpretation of boundaries: Where uncertainty exists, the boundary
of any regulatory floodplain or floodway shall be determined by the city
engineer. The base flood elevation for the point in question shall be the
governing factor in locating the floodplain area boundary on the land. A person
contesting a boundary location shall be given a reasonable opportunity to
substantiate an alternative location based on technical evidence.
(Ord. No. 7407, § 5, 6-25-90; Ord. No. 10311, § 1, 8-8-06; Ord. No. 11396, § 1,
8-9-16)
Sec. 26-3.1. Floodplain boundary and flood elevation revisions.
   (a)    Whenever additional data becomes available and warrants floodplain
elevation or boundary revisions, such revisions may be made by the city
engineer at the request of property owners or developers upon submission of the
necessary engineering calculations and maps prepared by a state-registered
professional civil engineer in conformance with the requirements of this
chapter, the ADWR, and FEMA. When BFEs increase or decrease, as soon as
practicable but not later than six (6) months after the date the information
becomes available, FEMA shall be notified by submitting technical or scientific
data in accordance with 44 CFR 65.3. The city shall also notify ADWR. Within
one hundred twenty (120) days of completion of flood control protective works
that change rate of flow or boundaries of the floodplain, all jurisdictions
affected by the project are required to be notified.
   (b)    Whenever a watercourse is to be altered or relocated:
    (1)   Require that the flood-carrying capacity of the altered or relocated
portion of the watercourse is maintained.
    (2)   Where appropriate, obtain a permit from the corps of engineers in
accordance with section 404 of the Clean Water Act.
   (3)   A development permit is required to be submitted for base flood
elevation data for any subdivision proposal or other development greater than
fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is the lesser.
   (c)    The city engineer or his designated representative shall have the
authority and responsibility to revise the regulatory floodplain and floodway
boundaries and base flood elevations on the flood hazard maps (FHM) for the
watercourses that are not included on the FIRM.
    (1)   The city engineer shall notify, within thirty (30) days after his
ruling, the owner of each property for which floodplain boundaries and/or base
flood elevations have been revised and those owners of adjoining property
immediately upstream and downstream. Such specific notice shall not be required
when such revisions have been made following a noticed public hearing on the
property involved. In addition, the city engineer shall notify ADWR and FEMA.
   (d)   BFE's may increase or decrease resulting from physical changes
affecting flooding conditions. Within one hundred twenty (120) days after
completion of construction of any flood control protective works, the revised
regulatory floodplain and/or floodway and the revised base flood elevations, in
the areas affected by such work, shall be redefined, and shall be provided to
the governing bodies of all jurisdictions affected. As soon as is practicable,
but not later than six (6) months after the date such information becomes
available, the Floodplain Administrator shall notify FEMA of the changes by
submitting technical or scientific data in accordance with Volume 44 Code of
Federal Regulations (CFR) Section 65.3. This submission is necessary so that
upon confirmation of those physical changes affecting flooding conditions, risk
premium rates and floodplain management requirements will be based upon current
data.
   (e)    An appeal may be taken to the floodplain board by any person
aggrieved by such revisions in accordance with section
26-12 of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 7407, § 5, 6-25-90; Ord. No. 11396, § 1, 8-9-16)
Sec. 26-4. Statutory exceptions.
   (a)   As specified in A.R.S. sections 48-3609 and 48-3613, these regulations
shall not:
    (1)   Affect or apply to facilities constructed or installed pursuant to a
certificate of environmental compatibility issued under the authority of A.R.S.
title 40, chapter 2, article 6.2.
    (2)   Affect existing legal uses of property or the right to continuation
of such legal use. However, if a nonconforming use of land, building, or
structure is discontinued for twelve (12) months or destroyed to the extent of
fifty (50) percent of its value, as determined by a competent appraiser, any
further use shall comply with this article and these regulations.
    (3)   Affect reasonable repair or alteration of property for purposes for
which the property was legally used on August 3, 1984, or the date on which any
regulations affecting such property took effect; except that any alteration,
addition or repair to a nonconforming building or structure which would result
in increasing its flood damage potential by fifty (50) percent or more shall be
either floodproofed (nonresidential structures only) or elevated to or above
the regulatory flood elevation. All floodproofing (nonresidential structures
only) shall be certified by a state-registered professional civil engineer. A
record of such floodproofing shall be maintained on file with the city, which
includes a certificate of floor elevation. See section
26-11.2(h).
    (4)   Affect the construction of streams, waterways, lakes and other
auxiliary facilities in conjunction with development of public parks and
recreation facilities by a public agency or political subdivision. Any such
alteration must maintain the carrying capacity of the watercourse.
    (5)   Prohibit the construction of bridges, culverts, dikes and other
structures necessary for the construction of public highways, roads, and
streets intersecting or crossing a watercourse.
    (6)   Prohibit the construction of storage dams for watering livestock or
wildlife, structures on banks of a creek, stream, river, wash, arroyo, or other
watercourse to prevent erosion of or damage to adjoining land or dams for the
conservation of floodwaters permitted by A.R.S. title 45, chapter 6, section
45-1201 et seq., and chapter 10, section 45-1701 et seq.
    (7)   Prohibit construction of tailing dams and waste disposal areas for
use in connection with mining and metallurgical operations. This does not
exempt those sand and gravel operations which will divert, retard or obstruct
the flow of waters in any watercourse from complying with and acquiring
authorization from the city engineer pursuant to regulations adopted by the
floodplain board under this chapter.
    (8)   Prohibit the construction and erection of poles, towers, foundations,
guy wires, and other facilities related to power transmission as constructed by
any utility whether a public service corporation or a political subdivision.
    (9)   Prohibit any flood control district, county, city, town or other
political subdivision to exercise powers granted to it under A.R.S. section 48-
3601 et seq.
   (b)   These exceptions do not preclude any person from liability if that
person's actions increase flood hazards to any other person or property. Before
any construction authorized by this section may begin, plans for such
construction must be submitted to the city engineer for review and comment,
and/or issuance of a floodplain use permit. A drainage statement or report also
may be required.
(Ord. No. 7407, § 5, 6-25-90; Ord. No. 11396, § 1, 8-9-16)
Sec. 26-4.1. Nonconforming development.
   (a)    Improvements to, or Reconstruction of, Existing Nonconforming
Development:
    (1)   Any structure which is substantially improved at a cost equal to or
exceeding fifty (50) percent of the full cash value of the structure as shown
on the latest assessment rolls of the county assessor either (a) before the
improvement or repair is started, or (b) if the structure has been damaged and
is being restored, before the damage occurred, shall conform to these
regulations. At the time of improving or reconstructing the existing structure
or development, floodproofing (nonresidential structures only) may be
considered as one of the means of bringing it in compliance with this chapter.
   For the purpose of determining the value of any such construction, repair or
alteration, the normal retail value of the materials and the reasonable value
of labor performed shall be used.
    (2)   Floodplain administrator or designee shall review all improvements to
a structure and track all changes over a cumulative ten (10) year period for
compliance.
   (3)   For the purpose of this chapter, "substantial improvement" is also
considered to occur, but is not limited to, when the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the
structure.
    (4)   No person shall repair or alter property in any manner so as to avoid
the provisions of this section.
   (b)    Discontinuance of Nonconforming Development: In the event that the
use of a nonconforming development is discontinued for a period of twelve (12)
consecutive months, any further use thereof shall be in conformity with the
provisions of these regulations.
   (c)    Condominium Conversions: These regulations shall not apply to an
existing legally constructed building which is subdivided for the purpose of
conversion to condominium ownership as long as "substantial improvement"
guidelines stated in subsections (a)1--3 of this section are met.
(Ord. No. 7407, § 5, 6-25-90; Ord. No. 11396, § 1, 8-9-16)
Sec. 26-5. Floodplain and erosion hazard area development.
Areas designated as floodways have a high potential for flooding. Land in the
floodway should be set aside for the conveyance of floodwaters as a first
priority. Floodways are also areas of major groundwater recharge, a
characteristic which should be preserved and enhanced where possible. Floodways
are areas of land that belong to the watercourse, while floodway fringe areas
can be shared by people and the watercourse, provided the arrangement does not
result in damage to either the people or the watercourse.
The requirements outlined in sections
26-5.1 and
26-5.2 below also apply to all land areas designated as AO zones on city FIRM.
(Ord. No. 7407, § 5, 6-25-90)
Sec. 26-5.1. Floodway development.
   Development in the floodway shall:
    (1)   Conform to adopted city land use plans for the design of public and
private development in the floodplain.
    (2)   Not result in damage to public facilities as a result of erosion or
flooding events.
    (3)   Not generate adverse impacts (including but not limited to erosion)
upstream or downstream.
    (4)   Not unnecessarily alter riparian habitats of watercourses and
adjacent bank areas.
    (5)   Not increase the base flood elevations. Certification by a registered
professional civil engineer shall be provided that demonstrates that the
encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge.
    (6)   Not result in higher floodwater velocities which significantly
increase the potential for flood or erosion damage.
    (7)   Not significantly increase channel or bank erosion.
    (8)   Not decrease groundwater recharge.
    (9)   Not contain a waste disposal system wholly or partially.
    (10)   Not result in the placement of any structure or material that may
divert, retard or obstruct the flow of floodwaters.
    (11)   Not result in creating a danger or hazard to life or property.
    (12)   Not utilize structures except hydraulic structures and those
structures exempted under section 26-4(4)--(8) of this ordinance, which are
designed and constructed to protect life or property from dangers or hazards of
floodwaters.
    (13)   Not contribute to debris accumulation upstream and/or downstream.
    (14)   Not create a water pollution problem in the floodway due to soluble,
insoluble, or solid materials, at the time of flooding.
(Ord. No. 7407, § 5, 6-25-90; Ord. No. 11396, § 1, 8-9-16)
Sec. 26-5.2. Floodway fringe development.
No development, storage of materials or equipment, or other uses shall be
permitted which, acting alone or in combination with existing or future uses,
create a danger or hazard to life or property. Development in the floodway
fringe shall:
    (1)   Conform to adopted city land use plans for the design of public and
private development in the floodplain.
    (2)   Not result in damage to public facilities as a result of erosion or
flooding events.
    (3)   Not generate adverse impacts, including but not limited to erosion,
upstream or downstream.
    (4)   Not unnecessarily alter riparian habitats of watercourse and adjacent
bank areas.
    (5)   Not increase the base flood elevation more than one-tenth of a foot,
as measured from the property boundary.
    (6)   Not result in higher floodwater velocities which significantly
increase the potential for flood or erosion damage.
    (7)   Not significantly increase channel or bank erosion.
    (8)   Use, where appropriate, native and/or adaptive landscaping to enhance
the open space character of the floodway fringe.
    (9)   Place the lowest (including basement) floor one (1) foot above the
base flood elevation. In an AO Zone, residential construction, new or
substantial damage repairs or improvements, shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, elevated to or above the regulatory flood elevation. Prior
to the pouring of the first slab or lowest floor installation and prior to any
framing, the applicant shall submit to the city engineer certification by
state-registered land surveyor or a state-registered professional civil
engineer that the elevation of the lowest floor framework is in compliance with
that approved by the city engineer's office in the form prepared by FEMA
(Elevation Certificate) for preslab (Building Under Construction) and final
(Finished Construction).
    (10)   Anchor all structures, material or equipment firmly to prevent their
flotation.
    (11)   Place service equipment and mechanical items, including but not
limited to water heaters, heating/cooling equipment, ductwork, electrical
service panels and/or other facilities, as deemed necessary by the floodplain
administrator or designee, at or above the regulatory flood elevation.
    (12)   ) Be constructed so as to protect placed fill from erosion which
could be caused by waters, or otherwise. Such fill shall be permitted only when
demonstrated by the owner/developer that it will have some beneficial purpose,
as determined by the city engineer, and the amount of proposed fill is not in
excess of what is necessary to achieve that purpose. The fill shall be
protected from erosion which could be accomplished by placing riprap,
vegetative cover, bulk heading, or any other floodplain administrator approved
methods. Certification of compaction shall be provided as determined by the
floodplain administrator.
    (13)   Prohibit storage and/or processing of materials that are buoyant,
flammable, explosive or that could be injurious to human, animal or plant life
at the time of flooding.
    (14)   Locate on-site sanitary waste disposal systems to avoid impairment
to them or contamination from them during flooding.
    (15)   Locate water supply, water treatment and sewage collection and
disposal systems to eliminate or minimize infiltration of floodwaters into
these systems and discharge of materials from these systems into floodwaters.
(Ord. No. 7407, § 5, 6-25-90; Ord. No. 10311, § 1, 8-8-06; Ord. No. 11396, § 1,
8-9-16; Ord. No. 11801, § 1, 12-8-20)
Sec. 26-5.3. Special flood hazard areas.
In areas of special flood hazards, the minimum criteria for approval of any
development shall require compliance with all applicable regulations adopted by
these regulations, the ADWR and FEMA, whichever is more restrictive.
(Ord. No. 10311, § 1, 8-8-06)
Sec. 26-6. Extraction of sand, gravel and other earth products; permit
required.
A floodplain use permit shall be required for extraction of sand, gravel and
other earth products within a floodway or floodplain (which includes the
floodway fringe areas) or erosion hazard areas. An engineering study outlining
effects on stream mechanics prepared by a state- registered professional civil
engineer shall be required with an application for a floodplain use permit for
major extraction operations, for operations in locations that appear to be
hazardous because of their relative proximity to structures or banks of
watercourses, and for any other operations considered by the city engineer to
be potentially hazardous. The operations plan and any engineering study
required shall meet the approval of the city engineer. For other operations, a
study may be required, at the discretion of the city engineer, depending upon
the nature of the proposed operation.
The engineering study is for the purpose of evaluating the possible flood- and
erosion- related hazards and must include considerations of effects of the
excavation on water velocities, direction of flows, volume of flows, channel
geometry (shape and size), type of channel banks, depth of flow, and other
items that may be pertinent to stream mechanics, which includes an analysis
indicating a balanced sediment flow system or channel aggradation, and
resultant effects on structures (including but not limited to roads, bridges,
culverts and utilities), banks of watercourses, adjoining lands, and
groundwater recharge for the respective alluvial watercourse.
Floodplain use permits for sand and gravel mining operations shall be issued
for a time limit of one (1) year only. All such permits are subject to review
by the city engineer prior to issuance. No mining operation shall be commenced
without an approved permit.
In granting the permit, the city engineer may impose restrictions/conditions
regarding the location and boundaries of the area where excavations/stockpiles
are allowed, the quantity of excavations/stockpiles, and time period and
methods of operation.
After July 25, 1990, the effective date of this section, any extraction of sand
and gravel or related materials in the floodway, floodway fringe or erosion
hazard areas shall be allowed only if a reclamation plan is also provided for
the extraction operation. The reclamation plan shall show that all adverse
effects of extraction are mitigated. The plan shall also contain a timetable
and financial assurances for accomplishing reclamation.
The city engineer may require bonds or other financial assurances appropriate
for the sand and gravel extraction operation.
(Ord. No. 7407, § 5, 6-25-90)
Sec. 26-6.1. Stockpiling.
   (a)   There shall be no stockpiling within the floodway of materials or
tailings that may obstruct, divert or retard the flow of floodwaters, except as
may be approved by the city engineer pursuant to an application for a
floodplain use permit.
   (b)   The storage or processing of materials that are in time of flooding
buoyant, flammable, explosive, or that could be injurious to human, animal or
plant life is prohibited. Storage of other materials or equipment may be
allowed if it is not subject to major damage by floods, and is firmly anchored
to prevent flotation, or is readily removable from the area within the very
short time available after a flood warning.
(Ord. No. 7407, § 5, 6-25-90)
Sec. 26-6.2. Standards for construction of utility systems.
All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system
and discharge from systems into floodwaters.
On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during flooding.
Waste disposal systems shall not be installed wholly or partially in a
floodway.
(Ord. No. 7407, § 5, 6-25-90)
Sec. 26-7. Erosion hazard areas and setbacks from watercourses.
The banks of watercourses constitute an erosion hazard zone which is subject to
channel widening and/or meandering. Setback distances are best determined by a
detailed engineering study performed by a state-registered professional civil
engineer. Guidelines for such studies and for determining setbacks are found in
the Standards Manual for Drainage Design and Floodplain Management in Tucson,
Arizona (Standards Manual). 
Setbacks from unstabilized banks may be determined by use of methodology found
in the Standards Manual. 
Reduced setbacks may be considered at the discretion of the city engineer only
upon submitting to the city a detailed engineering study performed by a state-
registered professional civil engineer for review and approval.
(Ord. No. 7407, § 5, 6-25-90)
Sec. 26-7.1. Setbacks on regional watercourses.
Unless a more restrictive setback has been determined, the minimum setback to
structures, for the corresponding regional watercourses, shall be as indicated
in Table I.
Table I
 
Watercourse      Minimum Setback in Straight Minimum setback in Curved Section
                 Section (Feet)              (Feet)
Pantano Wash     360                         900     
Rillito Creek    360                         900     
Santa Cruz River 490                         1,230     
 
Curved sections are any sections of the watercourse that do not meet the
criteria of equation 7.7a of the Standards Manual.
When banks are protected to the regulatory design requirements the setback to
structures shall be fifty (50) feet.
Setbacks for other regional watercourses may be determined from guidelines in
the Standards Manual. 
(Ord. No. 7407, § 5, 6-25-90; Ord. No. 11801, § 1, 12-8-20)
Sec. 26-7.2. Setbacks on all other watercourses.
When the banks are stabilized to the level of the base flood (plus an
appropriate freeboard) the setback to structures shall be a minimum of twenty
(20) feet for access and maintenance. When access and maintenance easements are
not required by the city engineer, the minimum setback may be reduced to ten
(10) feet at the discretion of the city engineer. When banks are not
stabilized, the setback to structures shall be as calculated from guidelines in
the Standards Manual. 
(Ord. No. 7407, § 5, 6-25-90)
Sec. 26-8. Subdivision and development project requirements.
The requirements outlined in subsections (a) through (i) below apply to all
improved or unimproved land areas or lands divided for the purpose of
financing, sale or lease, whether immediate or future, the boundaries of which
have been fixed by or proposed to be fixed by a recorded plat and which are
located in flood hazard areas. These regulations shall also apply in instances
where development plans are required by chapter 23B, Tucson Unified Development
Code.
   (a)    Suitability of Land:
    (1)   Land physically unsuitable for subdivision or development because of
severe flooding, drainage or erosion problems endangering life or property
shall not be subdivided or developed unless it can be developed in such a way
so as to alleviate those problems.
    (2)   Additionally, if a subdivision proposal or other proposed new
development is in a floodprone area, any such proposals shall be reviewed,
designed and constructed to assure that:
    a.   All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood and
erosion damage within the floodprone area;
    b.   All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood and
erosion damage. Septic systems, whether public or privately owned, shall not be
located in such a way as to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them
during flooding. Unprotected excavations shall not be permitted so close to any
floodplain crossings, utility structures or facilities as to cause or have the
potential to cause an adverse effect on such crossings, utilities or similar
facilities.
    c.   Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood and erosion
hazards.
    (3)   When planning and designing developments adjacent to, surrounding or
affected by watercourses, the owner/developer should conform to policies set
forth in the adopted general plan of the city, existing basin management plans,
and this chapter. For all basin management areas, the first consideration in
approaching alternative drainage design concepts shall be to maintain natural
configurations or existing drainage patterns to reduce exposure to flood and
erosion hazards as well as promote groundwater recharge. Where natural washes
cannot be maintained, a mitigation plan shall be established with emphasis
being placed on earthen or naturally appearing channels with landscaping and
texture/color added to bank protection materials. The design of earthen
channels will be encouraged in order to allow for a more permeable surface
which permits reintroduction of the water into the groundwater system, allowing
for the reintroduction of native plant species which promotes a natural,
partially soil-stabilized system.
   (b)    Delineation of Areas Subject to Flooding on Plats and Development
Plans:
    (1)   All tentative plats and development plans submitted shall show the
location, by survey or photographic methods, of streams, watercourses, canals,
irrigation laterals, private ditches, culverts, lakes and other water features,
including those areas subject to flooding and/or erosion. The location shall
also include the direction and magnitude of any flow, water surface elevations,
and the limits of inundation from the base flood.
    (2)   Identify on the final plans the elevation(s) of the proposed
structure(s) and pads. If the site is filled above the BFE, the final lowest
floor and grade elevations shall be certified by a registered professional
engineer or surveyor and provided to the floodplain administrator.
   (3)   All tentative plats and development projects in floodprone areas shall
be accompanied by conceptual grading plans and conceptual drainage improvement
plans included in a drainage statement or a drainage report prepared by a
state-registered professional civil engineer, for approval by the city
engineer, unless exempted by the city engineer. These reports or statements
should include the following:
    a.   The methods for mitigation of increased urban peak and/or volumetric
flood-water runoff or discharge created by the development on-site and to
upstream and downstream properties, up to a reasonable location as determined
by the approved hydrologic and hydraulic study.
    b.   The demonstration that the improvements are compatible with the
existing upstream and downstream drainage conditions and that any proposed
grading and/or grade change will not have an adverse impact on adjacent
property.
    c.   The methods for adequate erosion and sediment control, as approved by
the city engineer.
    d.   The proposed floodplain management methods for floodproofing (existing
nonresidential structure only) drainage control, detention, retention, and/or
delineating and setting aside floodprone areas which result in mitigating a
flood or erosion hazard on the proposed finished pads (elevations determined)
and drainage slopes constructed to protect building foundations from runoff
waters.
    (4)   All tentative plats and development plans in floodprone areas shall
show proposed grading and improvement for areas which are subject to flooding
or erosion or which have poor drainage. Also included will be a description and
location of all facilities proposed to be used to alleviate flooding, erosion
or other drainage problems, both in the proposed subdivision or development,
and downstream and upstream of any watercourse affected by the subdivision or
development, whether they are within or outside the project boundaries.
Prior to commencement of any site improvements or grading, a grading plan shall
be submitted to the city engineer for review and approval. Detailed improvement
plans of storm drains or channel improvements shall also be submitted to the
city engineer for review and approval.
   (5)   All final plats and development plans in floodprone areas shall show
limits of the regulatory floodplains, erosion hazard boundaries, and the
floodways and floodplains delineated in a surveyable manner and certified by a
state-registered land surveyor.
   (6)   All tentative plats and development plans in floodprone areas of all
developments, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, submitted
shall include base flood elevation data. Also included as a general note shall
be the drainage area(s) and their respective base flood peak discharges.
   (c)    Street Design Criteria: Streets required for permanent access shall
be designed and paved/constructed so that the flow depths over them do not
exceed one (1) foot in depth except at drainage crossings during the base flood
peak discharge. At least one (1) paved permanent access shall be provided to
each lot over terrain which can be traversed by conventional motor vehicles in
times of flooding. Where the streets are also used for flow of stormwater
additional safety features may be required by the city engineer. Fill may be
used for streets in areas subject to flooding provided such fill does not
unduly increase flood heights. Developers may be required to provide profiles
and elevation of streets in areas subject to flooding.
   (d)    Building Sites: Land which contains area within a floodplain shall
not be divided or platted for residential occupancy or building sites unless
each lot contains a building site, either natural or manmade, which is not
subject to flood-related erosion or to flooding by the base flood, provides all
weather access to the building pad, and is certified for compaction of fill for
pad by an engineer.
    (1)   In areas subject to flooding where no fill is proposed to be used,
the building line shall be located no closer to the floodplain than the edge of
the area subject to flooding by the base flood.
    (2)   In areas where fill is to be used to raise the elevation of the
building site, the building line shall be located not less than twenty-five
(25) feet landward from any edge of the fill, unless a study prepared by a
state-registered professional civil engineer and approved by the city engineer
shows that a lesser distance is acceptable.
   (3)   No fill shall be placed in any floodway; nor shall any fill be placed
where it diverts, retards or obstructs the flow of water to such an extent that
it creates a danger or hazard to life or property in the area.
   (e)    Setbacks From Channels: Setbacks shall be established in accordance
with the Drainage Standards Manual or city engineer approved studies prepared
by a state-registered professional civil engineer. Also see section
26-7 of this chapter.
   (f)    Rights-of-way for Drainage; Easement Dedication: Whenever a
subdivision plat or development plan contains a watercourse which is regulated
by this chapter, all right-of-way associated with the watercourses shall be
provided and designated "drainageway" or "drainage easement" as determined by
the city engineer.
At the discretion of the city engineer, structural solutions to drainage
problems will be required.
When structural solutions are necessary, preference shall be given to
landscaped natural appearing channels. While improvements to watercouses should
be responsive to the environment, existing conditions may prevent or inhibit
the desired approach. Examples of such existing conditions include insufficient
right-of-way, insufficient runoff carrying capacity in the channel, large
erosion potential, existing residences or businesses exposed to flooding during
runoff events, and inadequate street conveyance capacity.
The additional land area required for the purpose of widening, deepening,
aligning, improving, stabilizing, constructing and allowing for natural
meanders so the watercourse will safety convey the base flood peak discharge
shall also be included in the drainageway or drainage easement.
    (1)   If the watercourse is an improved regional watercourse, the
drainageway shall include the channel, the channel improvements, and a fifty-
foot-wide area measured outward from the front face of the top of the bank
protection, for the city or for county flood control district uses.
    (2)   If the watercourse is an improved major or minor watercourse, the
drainageway or the easement shall include the channel, the channel
improvements, and necessary maintenance access.
    (3)   If the watercourse is to remain natural, the drainageway shall
contain the boundaries of the regulatory floodplain and necessary maintenance
access.
    (4)   Along regional watercourses and major watercourses where the peak
discharge during the base flood is ten thousand (10,000) cubic feet per second
or greater, the drainageway shall be dedicated in fee simple to the city.
    (5)   Along other watercourses, the city engineer shall determine whether
it is necessary for the city to have control of the drainageway. If the city
engineer determines that public control is necessary, the owner shall dedicate
the drainageway in a fee simple or grant an easement.
   (g)    Detention/Retention Systems: (See section
26-10 of this chapter.)
   (h)    Utilities: All public and private utilities are to be constructed so
as to minimize or eliminate flood damage and shall comply with the provisions
of section
26-6.2.
   (i)    Arizona Revised Statutes (A.R.S.) Section 48-3610 Compliance: The
city engineer upon receipt of an application for any development in a
floodplain shall advise the Pima County Regional Flood Control District
("district") in writing and provide a copy of the application and any
development plan, tentative plat, or a floodplain use permit application within
one (1) mile of the corporate limits of the city. The district shall also
provide similar development applications to the city which are located within
one (1) mile outside of the city. Written notice and a copy of the development
plan and/or tentative plat shall be sent to the district no later than three
(3) working days after the receipt by the city engineer.
   (j)    Construction Conformance: All construction including the detention/
retention systems (see section 26-10) shall conform to the city engineer
approved plans and specifications. Any deviation shall occur only upon prior
approval by the city engineer.
(Ord. No. 7407, § 5, 6-25-90; Ord. No. 11396, § 1, 8-9-16; Ord. No. 11801, § 1,
12-8-20)
Sec. 26-9. Standards for manufactured homes and manufactured home parks and
subdivisions.
All new and replacement manufactured homes, additions to existing manufactured
homes or additions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, and
recreational vehicles which are left on a site for longer than one hundred
eighty (180) days and are not licensed and ready for highway use shall be
securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include but
are not to be limited to use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors.
The provisions of this paragraph and subsection (a)(1) do not apply to
recreational vehicles which are on a site for fewer than one hundred eighty
(180) days and which are fully licensed and ready for highway use. A
recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking
system and is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and
security devices and has no permanently attached additions.
   (a)    General Provisions:
    (1)   All newly placed, repaired or replacement manufactured homes,
additions to existing manufactured homes and recreational vehicles, where
applicable, shall be placed and elevated so that the bottom of the structural
frame or the lowest point of any attached appliances, whichever is lower, is at
or above the regulatory flood elevation.
    (2)   A manufactured home which has incurred substantial damage by a flood
may be repaired or may be replaced by another manufactured home. If the damage
is less than fifty (50) percent of its value before the flood, it may be
repaired or may be replaced by another manufactured home.
    (3)   All public and private utilities shall be located and constructed so
as to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
    (4)   A plan for evacuating residents of all manufactured home parks or
subdivisions located within floodprone areas shall be developed and filed with
and approved by the county department of emergency services, disaster planning
and preparedness. A copy of the approved plan shall be submitted to the city
engineer's office for record.
   (b)    Certification: Certification by a state-registered professional civil
engineer that the installation of a manufactured home meets all of the
requirements of this section is required. Such certification shall be provided
by the person installing the manufactured home, the owner, the developer of the
manufactured home park or subdivision, or an agency regulating manufactured
home placement, whichever is deemed appropriate by the city engineer.
Certification of elevations listed on the floodplain use permit shall be
prepared by a state-registered land surveyor and provided to the city engineer
prior to habitation of the structure in the form of an Elevation Certificate
prepared by FEMA for Building Under Construction stage or at Final
Construction.
(Ord. No. 7407, § 5, 6-25-90; Ord. No. 11396, § 1, 8-9-16)
Sec. 26-10. Detention/retention systems.
   (a)    When deemed necessary by the city engineer, flood detention/retention
systems shall be employed in lieu of or in combination with structural flood
control measures to reduce flooding potential or restrict it to a level no
greater than pre-platting and/or pre-development conditions. The amount of
reduction is stipulated within the Stormwater Detention/Retention Manual, and
subsequent amendments, which was approved for use by the city engineer as
development standard in the Technical Standards Manual section 4-03.0.
All proposed residential net densities of three (3) or more units per acre and
all proposed commercial and industrial developments greater than one (1) acre
in size shall provide some method of peak and volumetric runoff reduction. The
amount of reduction is stipulated within the Stormwater Detention/Retention
Manual, and subsequent amendments, which was approved for use by the city
engineer as development standard in the Technical Standards Manual section 4-
03.0.
   (b)    Basins which have been identified by the city engineer as unsuitable
for additional development because of the high probability of increased
flooding, or flooding of existing improvements or properties not previously
studied, may be developed further only upon the incorporation of adequate
detention/retention systems as reviewed and approved by the city engineer. The
following criteria shall be considered:
    (1)   If a drainage basin is determined to be a balanced basin, detention
or retention systems shall be employed. These systems shall maintain the
existing balance within the basin by limiting the flood peak discharges from
the site to values no greater than pre-developed conditions.
    (2)   If a drainage basin is determined to be a critical basin where
potential flood problems currently exist, detention or retention systems shall
be employed. The purpose of such systems in a critical basin shall be to reduce
the potential flood hazard through the detention or retention of storm runoff
in fair and equitably apportioned increments.
   (c)    The design of a detention or retention system, as reviewed and
approved by the city engineer, shall include consideration of the degree of
existing development within the basin and the capacity of the downstream
drainage facilities. The systems will be designed with strict conformance to
the public's health, safety and welfare. The effects of recharging storm runoff
and possible pollution of the groundwater shall be evaluated for all systems
employing infiltration systems, such as dry wells, in order to prevent
contamination of the groundwater aquifer.
   (d)    Structural flood control measures may be utilized in conjunction with
or in place of a detention/retention system if it can be clearly demonstrated
that such measures shall accomplish, with an equal or greater degree of
success, the function of such system, which includes preservation of the water
and sediment equilibrium in the affected watercourse and mitigation of the
environmental impacts. Appropriate structural flood control measures, such as
channelization to a logical conclusion downstream of the proposed development
and/or improvements to existing off- site flood control systems within the
affected drainage or stream reach, shall be completed in accordance with plans
reviewed and approved by the city engineer.
   (e)    A fee may be utilized in place of a detention/retention system, at
the request of affected persons, when it can be clearly demonstrated that
detention at the site does not provide off- site flood relief due to the parcel
size, location within the drainage basin, or other factors. The fees collected
will be used to construct public flood control improvements which will be
designed to mitigate the potential damage of floodwaters associated with the
property from which the fees are contributed. In balanced and critical basins,
and where development is less than three (3) units to the acre, use of a fee
system may be considered appropriate in lieu of a detention system in order to
preserve the natural drainage patterns. The amount of the fee shall be
proportional to the cost of the otherwise required detention/retention system.
   (f)    The city engineer shall prepare and retain for public inspection and
use an official map designating critical and balanced basins within the city.
   (g)    All repairs and maintenance of detention/retention systems shall
conform to the city engineer approved design drawings and specifications. Any
deviation shall occur only if approved by the city engineer.
(Ord. No. 7407, § 5, 6-25-90; Ord. No. 11396, § 1, 8-9-16; Ord. No. 11801, § 1,
12-8-20)
Sec. 26-11. Floodplain use permit requirements and regulations.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in these regulations, it shall be
unlawful for any person to establish, erect, alter or relocate a use or
structure in the regulatory floodplain or an erosion-prone area as described in
section
26-11.1(2) without first obtaining a floodplain use permit from the city
engineer.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to perform any grading operation
in or alteration of any watercourse in violation of this chapter. Without
written authorization from the city engineer, any such act, including
excavation of any kind, is a public nuisance per se and may be abated,
prevented or restrained by action of the city.
   (c)   No license, permit or other similar approval for any development which
would be in conflict with the provisions of this chapter shall be issued by any
department, official or employee of the city; and any such license, permit or
approval, if issued in conflict with the provisions of this chapter, shall be
considered null and void.
(Ord. No. 7407, § 5, 6-25-90)
Sec. 26-11.1. City engineer review of floodplain and erosion hazard area
development.
The city engineer shall review all of the following applications for compliance
with these regulations:
    (1)   Applications for development within a regulatory floodplain and
erosion hazard areas.
    (2)   Applications for development requiring building permits within an
area five hundred (500) feet on either side of delineated floodway boundaries
in floodplains having watersheds larger than thirty (30) square miles, or two
hundred fifty (250) feet on either side of watercourses having watersheds
between ten (10) and thirty (30) square miles, and one hundred (100) feet on
either side of watercourses having watersheds less than ten (10) square miles
shall be reviewed. If, within twenty (20) working days, the city engineer
determines that the location is subject to flood or erosion hazards, an
application for a floodplain use permit pursuant to section 26-11.2 is
required. Property owners may request a preliminary determination from the city
engineer for property in such areas prior to any application for actual
development.
    (3)   Applications for subdivision plat approval.
(Ord. No. 7407, § 5, 6-25-90; Ord. No. 11396, § 1, 8-9-16)
Sec. 26-11.2. Floodplain use permit procedure.
   (a)    General: Upon receiving an application for a floodplain use permit,
the city engineer shall, within twenty (20) working days, review the
application to ensure that the site is reasonably safe from flooding, declare
the application complete, or:
   (1)   Require the applicant to submit, where applicable, plans in triplicate
drawn to scale, showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevation of the
lot, existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, floodproofing
measures (existing nonresidential structures only), and the relationship of the
above to the location of any watercourse channel, floodway, regulatory
floodplain, erosion hazard area boundaries, and the regulatory flood elevation
of the structures. All elevations or vertical distances must be referenced to
an established datum or base elevation.
   (2)   Require the applicant to furnish as much of the following additional
information as the city engineer deems necessary for the evaluation of effects
of the proposed development upon flood flows and erosion:
   a.   A typical valley cross section showing the channel of the stream,
elevation of land areas adjoining each side of the channel, cross sectional
areas to be occupied by the proposed development, and high water information.
   b.   Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the ground;
structure, fill or storage elevations; size, location and spatial arrangement
of all proposed and existing structures on the site; location and elevations of
streets, water supply lines, sanitary sewers and waste disposal facilities;
photographs showing existing land uses and vegetation upstream and downstream;
soil types; and other pertinent information.
   c.   Profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel or flow line of
the stream or watercourse.
   d.   Specifications for building construction and materials, filling,
dredging, grading, channel improvement, storage of materials, water, and sewage
facilities.
   e.   An engineering study prepared by a state-registered professional civil
engineer outlining the effects the development will have on the flow of water
through the area being developed and the surrounding areas. This study will be
for the purpose of evaluating possible flood hazards and shall, where
necessary, include consideration of the effects of the development on flood
heights, water velocities, direction of flow, sedimentation and/or erosion,
volume of flows, channel shape and size, type of channel banks and other items
that may be pertinent, and the resultant effects or structures, land, banks,
etc., for the adjacent regulatory floodplain and the surrounding area.
   f.   A soils investigation study prepared by a state-registered professional
civil engineer, outlining the determination of the erosive properties of areas
or lands to be graded or disturbed which may create sediment deposition or
erosion in any watercourse or watershed regulated by this chapter.
   (3)   Require applicants to submit an additional copy of the development
plan and/or subdivision plat, including the pertinent reports of the studies
performed for forwarding to the county flood control district ("district"), if
the proposed development in the floodplain is located within one (1) mile of
the boundary between the city and the district's area of jurisdiction. The city
shall also advise any city or town in writing and provide a copy of any
development plan of any major development proposed within a regulatory
floodplain, floodway or erosion hazard area which could affect regulatory
floodplains, floodways, erosion hazard areas or watercourses within the
district's area of jurisdiction. Written notice as required above and a copy of
the plan of development shall be sent to any adjacent jurisdiction no later
than three (3) working days after having been received by the city.
   (4)   Require the applicant to obtain all necessary permits from those
governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law,
including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendment of
1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334.
   (b)   Conditions: Any floodplain use permit may be subject to conditions or
restrictions designed to reduce or mitigate the potential damage or hazard to
life or property resulting from development within the regulatory floodplain,
floodway or erosion hazard areas.
Any grading or alteration (including excavation) of any watercourse regulated
by this chapter shall be controlled to minimize the loss of soil through
erosion from rainfall or stormwater flowage. Methods to control erosion and
sedimentation must be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city engineer
prior to the granting of a floodplain use permit for any work in any
floodplain. Both temporary and permanent measures for sediment and erosion
control must be clearly delineated on plans or other written documents prior to
receiving a floodplain use permit.
Examples of conditions that may be imposed include, but are not limited to, the
following:
   (1)   Modification of sanitary sewer, waste disposal, and water supply
facilities.
   (2)   Limitations on periods of use and hours of operation.
   (3)   Imposition of operational controls, sureties related to temporary
uses, and deed restrictions.
   (4)   Requirements for construction of channel modifications, dikes, levees
and other protective measures.
   (5)   All new construction and substantial improvements (including the
placement of prefabricated buildings and manufactured homes) shall:
   a.   Be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse or lateral movement of the structure;
   b.   Be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
and erosion damage; and
   c.   Be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood and erosion
damage.
   (6)   Indemnification agreements whereby the applicant agrees to hold the
city and its officials, employees and agents, harmless and defend them from any
and all claims for damages now and in the future relating to the use of the
property sought to be developed by reason of flooding, flowage, erosion or
damage caused by water, whether surface, flood or rainfall.
   (7)   Dry floodproofing measures for existing nonresidential structures,
which shall be designed to be consistent with the regulatory flood elevation
for the particular area, flood velocities, durations, rate of rise, hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic forces, and other factors associated with the base flood. The
city engineer may require that the applicant submit a plan or document
certified by a state-registered professional civil engineer that the
floodproofing measures are consistent with the regulatory flood elevation and
associated flood factors for the particular area. Examples of floodproofing
measures may be obtained from the city engineer approved drainage design
standards. Floodproofing for nonresidential structure construction or new or
substantial damage repairs or improvements shall either be elevated to conform
to regulations, or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities:
   a.    Be floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water; and
   b.   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
   c.   If structure is elevated, be certified by a registered professional
surveyor as certified by an accepted dry floodproofing elevation certificate;
   d.   If structure is floodproofed by other means than elevating, be
certified by a civil engineer.
   (8)   Wet floodproofing requires flood vent certification. All new
construction and substantial damage repairs or improvements with fully enclosed
areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which are subject to
flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces
on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater.
Designs for meeting this requirement must meet or exceed the following
criteria:
   a.   Have a minimum of two (2) openings, on different sides of each enclosed
area, having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every
square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. The bottom of all openings
shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with
screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they
permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater; or
   b.   Alternatively, a registered civil engineer may design and wet-
floodproof-certify the openings.
   (c)   Revocation of Permit: Any person who fails to comply with the terms of
the floodplain use permit or has created situations that can be a danger to
life and property as determined by the city engineer shall be subject to
revocation of the floodplain use permit by the city engineer upon written
notice by registered mail to the applicant citing the reasons for revocation.
The person holding the floodplain use permit or any affected party may appeal
the decision of the city engineer by requesting in writing a hearing before the
floodplain board in accordance with section
26-12.
   (d)   Removal of violation: Upon written notice, the city engineer may cause
any structure, encroachment or work constructed without a floodplain use
permit, or which is in violation with the terms of a permit, to be removed
immediately at the expense of the person who caused the structure, encroachment
or work if the structure, encroachment or work will cause an immediate danger
to life and property.
   (e)   Recovery of costs: The city shall be entitled to recover all costs,
administrative, engineering and legal, as well as actual costs to remove or
modify the structure, encroachment and/or any other work in violation of this
chapter.
   (f)   Factors upon which a decision of the city engineer shall be based: In
reviewing floodplain use permit applications, the city engineer shall consider,
in addition to relevant factors specified in other sections of these
regulations, any other provision of law relating to such development. In making
such a determination, the city engineer may consider the following factors:
   (1)   The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights,
velocities or altered direction of flow caused by the development.
   (2)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or downstream
to cause injury to others.
   (3)   The proposed water supply, sanitary sewer systems and waste disposal
systems of any development and the ability of these systems to prevent disease,
contamination and unsanitary conditions due to flooding and/or erosion.
   (4)   The susceptibility of the proposed development and/or its contents to
flood and erosion damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
   (5)   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use on the
same property which are not subject to flooding or erosion.
   (6)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing regulatory
floodplain uses and with floodplain management programs anticipated in the
foreseeable future.
   (7)   The relationship of the proposed use to any comprehensive plan, basin
management plan, neighborhood plan, and floodplain management program for the
area.
   (8)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
conventional and emergency vehicles.
   (9)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment
transport of the floodwaters expected at the site under both existing and
proposed conditions.
   (10)   The enhancement and preservation of groundwater recharge and the
potential pollution of the groundwater supply.
   (11)   Such other factors, including but not limited to cost to the city,
which are relevant to the purposes of these regulations.
   (12)   Documentation that all necessary permits have been obtained from
state and federal agencies.
   (g)    Decision: The city engineer shall, within twenty (20) working days of
the application's being declared complete, render a decision on the floodplain
use permit. A floodplain use permit shall be denied if the proposed development
constitutes a danger or hazard to life and/or property.
   (h)   Certificate of flood elevation: Prior to the issuance of final
occupancy permits for development undertaken pursuant to a floodplain permit,
the applicant shall submit, on a form provided by the city, certification that
the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floors (including
basement) of all new or substantially improved, or substantially damage
repaired, structures is at or above the regulatory flood elevation. The
certificate shall also disclose the method used to determine the regulatory
flood elevation and the required erosion hazard setback, if any. The
certification shall be signed by a state-registered professional civil engineer
or land surveyor. Following acceptance of a certificate by the city engineer, a
copy shall also be maintained in the building safety division records of the
development. For elevation certificate for projects in SFHA or other
jurisdictional floodplains, use current FEMA form for both stages for Building
Under Construction and for Finished Construction.
The city engineer shall maintain for public inspection and furnish upon
request, for the determination of applicable flood insurance risk premium rates
within all areas having special flood hazards identified on an FHM or FIRM, any
certifications and information on the elevation (in relation to mean sea level)
of the level of the lowest flood (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures.
   (i)   Floodplain administrator is responsible for record keeping and shall
obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed:
   (1)   Certification required by sections
26-5.2(9),
26-11.2(b)(7), and
26-9(b) (lowest floor elevations, bottom of the structural frame, and
utilities);
   (2)   Certification required by section
26-11.2(b)(7),
26-11.2(b)(8) and
26-11.2(h) (lowest floor elevations or floodproofing of nonresidential
structures and utilities);
   (3)   Certification required by section
26-11.2(b)(8) (flood vents);
   (4)   Certification of elevation and compaction required by section
26-8(b)(2) and
26-5.2(12) (subdivisions and other proposed development standards);
   (5)   Certification required by section
26-5.1(5) (floodway encroachments);
   (6)   Records of all variance actions, including justification for their
issuance;
   (7)   Obtain and maintain improvement and damage calculations required in
section
26-4.1(2);
   (j)    Fees: The following fees are imposed on applications for floodplain
use permits:
      Flood status requests . . . . . $ 15.00
      Floodplain use permit . . . . . 50.00
      Review of engineering studies, including review of first resubmittal . .
. . . 150.00
      Review of subsequent resubmittals . . . . . 300.00
(Ord. No. 7407, § 5, 6-25-90; Ord. No. 11396, § 1, 8-9-16)
Sec. 26-11.3. Penalties, violations, unlawful acts, classifications.
   (a)   Civil infraction: Except as provided in subsection (b) below, it is
unlawful and is hereby declared a civil infraction for any person to:
   (1)   Fail to obtain any floodplain use permit; or
   (2)   Fail to comply with the terms and conditions of any permit required by
this chapter; or
   (3)   Violate any of the provisions of this chapter.
All violations under this section shall be heard under the procedures set forth
in chapter
8 of this Code. Additionally, any person found responsible under this section
shall be punished by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not
more than twenty-five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). The administrative hearing
officer may also order abatement of the violation. Furthermore, where the
provisions of chapter
8 conflict with the provisions of this section, this section shall govern.
   (b)   Class 2 Misdemeanor: Pursuant to A.R.S. section 48-3615, it is
unlawful and is hereby declared a class 2 misdemeanor for any person to engage
in any development or by any acts to cause a diversion, retardation or
obstruction to the flow of waters in a watercourse whenever it creates a hazard
to life or property and without securing the permit required by any provision
of this chapter. Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) or four (4) months' imprisonment, or both. In addition, a person
convicted of a class 2 misdemeanor may be placed on probation for a period not
to exceed twenty-four (24) months.
(Ord. No. 7407, § 5, 6-25-90; Ord. No. 10311, § 1, 8-8-06; Ord. No. 11396, § 1,
8-9-16)
Sec. 26-11.4. Declaration of public nuisance; abatement.
All development located or maintained in a floodplain since August 8, 1973, in
violation of Title 48, Chapter 21, Article 1 of the Arizona Revised Statutes or
of floodplain regulations established by this chapter and without written
authorization from the floodplain board is a public nuisance per se and may be
abated, prevented or restrained by action of the City of Tucson. To abate
violations, the city may:
   (a)   Take any necessary action to effect the abatement of such violation;
or
   (b)   Issue a variance to this ordinance in accordance with the provisions
of section
26-12 herein; or
   (c)   Order the owner of the property upon which the violation exists to
provide whatever additional information may be required for their
determination; or
   (d)   Submit to the Federal Emergency Management Agency a declaration for
denial of insurance, stating that the property is in violation of a cited state
or local law, regulation or ordinance, pursuant to Section 1316 of the National
Flood Insurance Act of 1968 as amended.
(Ord. No. 10311, § 1, 8-8-06; Ord. No. 11396, § 1, 8-9-16)
Sec. 26-12. Appeals and variances.
   (a)   Appeals. Any written decision of the city engineer made in the course
of administering or interpreting this ordinance may, within thirty (30) days of
the decision, be appealed to the floodplain board.
   (b)    Variances. The floodplain board shall hear and decide all requests
for variances from the requirements of this ordinance. Stormwater technical
advisory committee (STAC) or stormwater advisory committee (SAC), as designated
at the time by the floodplain administrator, shall make recommendations to the
director of the department of transportation and mobility to be forwarded to
the mayor and council on technical issues raised by appeals and variance
requests.
   (1)   A variance may be granted only if, based on technical evidence
prepared by an Arizona registered professional engineer, the floodplain board
finds all of the following:
   a.   A showing of good and sufficient cause.
   b.   That the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood
hazard, to afford relief.
   c.   That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship
to the applicant. An exceptional hardship is one that is exceptional, unusual
and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship
alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, personal
preferences or the disapproval of one's neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule,
qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved
through other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is
more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the
parcel to a different use than originally intended.
   d.   That the granting of the variance will not create a danger or hazard to
life or property in the area, or result in increased flood heights; additional
threats to public safety; extraordinary public expense; the creation of a
nuisance; the victimization of or fraud on the public; and that the variance is
not in conflict with other city ordinances or regulations.
   e.   That special circumstances, such as size, shape, topography, location,
or surroundings of the property would cause strict application of the
regulations to deprive the property of privileges enjoyed by similar property
in the floodplain or erosion hazard areas.
   (2)   A variance is subject to conditions to ensure that the variance does
not constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitation
on similar property in the floodplain or erosion hazard areas.
   (3)   If the floodplain board grants a variance from the provisions of this
division, the city engineer shall provide written notice to the grantees of the
variance as required by A.R.S. section 48-3609(J) that the property may be
ineligible for exchange of state land pursuant to the statutory flood
relocation and land exchange program. The city clerk shall record a copy of the
notice in the office of the county recorder so that the notice appears in the
chain of title of the affected parcel of land.
   (4)   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base
flood level may result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to
amounts as high as twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for one hundred dollars
($100.00) of insurance coverage as determined by the insurance carrier.
   (5)   The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all variance
actions, including justification for their issuance and report such variances
issued in its biennial report submitted to FEMA.
   (c)   Application and hearing. The following application and hearing
procedures apply to an appeal of a decision of the city engineer, or a variance
request, or combination thereof:
   (1)   The application shall be in writing and filed with the city engineer.
The application shall include technical evidence prepared by an Arizona
registered professional engineer in support of the appeal or variance request.
   a.   An application for an appeal shall state why the decision of the city
engineer is in error and shall contain a concise explanation of all matters in
dispute and any pertinent maps, drawings, data or other information in support
of the appeal.
   b.   An application for a variance shall state the code section from which
the variance is sought and shall include any pertinent maps, drawings, data or
other information why the variance should be granted.
   (2)   Incomplete applications shall not be accepted.
   a.   Within three (3) working days after the receipt of the application, or
any additional materials or information as provided for below, the city
engineer shall notify the applicant whether or not the application is deemed
complete.
   b.   If the application is determined to be incomplete, the applicant shall
submit additional materials and information as may be reasonably determined
necessary by the city engineer.
   (3)   Within twenty (20) working days after accepting an appeal or variance
request, the city engineer may submit a copy of the appeal or variance request,
together with all available pertinent documents and information to SAC or STAC
as designated at the time by the floodplain administrator. If SAC or STAC
determines that the appeal or variance request raises technical questions or
issues, SAC or STAC may review the request and provide written conclusions and
recommendations to the floodplain board. The conclusions for a variance request
must address the findings required in section
26-12(d) for the granting of a variance by the floodplain board.
   a.   Within twenty (20) working days after the receipt of the application,
or any additional materials or information as provided for below, the city
engineer shall notify the applicant whether or not the application is deemed
complete.
   (d)   In considering such applications, the floodplain board shall consider
all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other
sections of this ordinance, and:
   (1)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury
of others;
   (2)   The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
   (3)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
   (4)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
   (5)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
   (6)   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use, which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
   (7)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
   (8)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area;
   (9)   The safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and
emergency vehicles;
   (10)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment
transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and,
   (11)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, water system and streets and bridges.
   (e)   A variance shall be granted only if, based on technical evidence
prepared by an Arizona registered professional engineer, the floodplain board
finds all of the following:
   (1)   A showing of good and sufficient cause.
   (2)   That the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood
hazard, to afford relief.
   (3)   That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant. An exceptional hardship is one that is exceptional,
unusual and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial
hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations,
personal preferences or the disapproval of one's neighbors likewise cannot, as
a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be
resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the
alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build
elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended.
   (4)   That the granting of the variance will not create a danger or hazard
to life or property in the area, or result in increased flood heights;
additional threats to public safety; extraordinary public expense; the creation
of a nuisance; the victimization of or fraud on the public; and that the
variance is not in conflict with other city ordinances or regulations.
   (5)   That special circumstances, such as size, shape, topography, location,
or surroundings of the property would cause strict application of the
regulations to deprive the property of privileges enjoyed by similar property
in the floodplain or erosion hazard areas.
   (6)   That, for the repair, rehabilitation or restoration of structures
listed in the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of
Historic Places, upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structures' continued designation as a
historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the
historic character and design of the structure.
   (7)   Upon a showing that the use cannot perform its intended purpose unless
it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. This includes only
facilities defined as having “functionally dependent use”.
   (8)   That a reduction in erosion hazard set back is determined based on
current flow rates, channel geometrics, bank soil conditions and follows the
approaches recommended in relevant technical manuals.
   (f)   Variances shall not be issued within any floodway if any increase in
flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
   (g)   A variance is subject to conditions to ensure that the variance does
not constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitation
on similar property in the floodplain or erosion hazard areas.
   (h)   If the floodplain board grants a variance from the provisions of this
division, the city engineer shall provide written notice to the grantees of the
variance that:
   (1)   The property may be ineligible for exchange of state land pursuant to
the statutory flood relocation and land exchange program per A.R.S. 37-610. The
city clerk shall record a copy of the notice in the office of the county
recorder so that the notice appears in the chain of title of the affected
parcel of land;
   (2)   Such construction for a structure to be constructed below RFE
increases risks to life and property; and
   (3)   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the RFE will
result in increased premium rates for flood insurance as determined by the
insurance carrier and NFIP regulations.
    (i)   The floodplain board shall hold a public hearing to consider an
appeal or variance request within sixty (60) days after the city engineer
accepted the application. After the close of the public hearing the mayor and
council may:
    (1)   Uphold, reverse or modify the decision of the city engineer on
appeal.
    (2)   Grant or deny the variance, subject to the findings for a variance
set forth in these regulations.
   (j)    Stormwater technical advisory committee (STAC). The STAC shall make
recommendations to the director of the department of transportation and
mobility to be forwarded to the mayor and council on technical issues raised by
appeals and variance requests.
    (1)   Within three (3) days after accepting an appeal or variance request,
the city engineer shall submit a copy of the appeal or variance request,
together with all available pertinent documents and information to STAC. If
STAC determines that the appeal or variance request raises technical questions
or issues, STAC may review the request and provide written conclusions and
recommendations to the floodplain board. The conclusions for a variance request
must address the findings required in section
26-12(b)(1) for the granting of a variance by the floodplain board.
    (2)   Reserved.
   (k)    Stormwater advisory committee (SAC). The SAC shall review all
proposed amendments to
Chapter 26 of the Tucson Code and shall provide written conclusions and
recommendations to the director of the department of transportation and
mobility to be forwarded to the mayor and council and to the planning
commission, as applicable, prior to a public hearing on the proposed
amendments.
(Ord. No. 7407, § 5, 6-25-90; Ord. No. 8309, § 1, 9-26-94; Ord. No. 9582, §§ 4,
5, 8-6-01; Ord. No. 10311, § 1, 8-8-06; Ord. No. 11396, § 1, 8-9-16; Ord. No.
11801, § 1, 12-8-20)
Sec. 26-13. Amendments.
   (a)   SAC or STAC, as determined at the time by the floodplain
administrator, shall review all proposed amendments to
chapter 26 of the Tucson Code and shall provide written conclusions and
recommendations to the director of the department of transportation and
mobility to be forwarded to the mayor and council prior to a public hearing on
the proposed amendments. Floodplain administrator shall request the directors
of the planning and development services department and department of
transportation and mobility to reconstitute or convene as necessary the SAC or
STAC.
   (b)   Pursuant to A.R.S. Sec. 48-3609.02, prior to the adoption, amendment
or repeal of any provision of this chapter the following shall occur:
   (1)   City department through the floodplain administrator shall provide at
least two weeks' notice of a meeting at which the public may provide comments
on draft language of any proposed rule. Notice shall include the entire text of
the draft proposed rule and it shall be made available to the public. Written
and verbal comments on the draft language shall be accepted by floodplain
administrator.
   (2)   City department through the floodplain administrator shall provide at
least two weeks' notice of a meeting at which the final text of the proposed
rule is considered by the mayor and council. Notice shall include the entire
text of the final version of the proposed rule and it shall be made available
to the public. At least one week before this meeting, floodplain administrator
shall provide the public with the department's written responses to the written
public responses generated as a result of the meeting required under subsection
(1) above, and may provide written responses to the verbal public comments
generated as a result of the meeting required under subsection (1) above.
   (3)   City department through the floodplain administrator shall provide
mayor and council with copies of the public comments and the department's
written responses to those public comments. If as a result of public comments
or internal review, mayor and council determines that the text of a proposed
rule requires substantial change, mayor and council shall issue a supplemental
notice containing the changes to the proposed rule and shall provide for
additional public comment before adoption.
   (4)   City department through the floodplain administrator may provide the
notices required by this section on the department/city's website.
(Ord. No. 11396, § 1, 8-9-16; Ord. No. 11801, § 1, 12-8-20)
Sec. 26-14. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the city engineer and all officers of the city
otherwise charged with the enforcement of the law to enforce these floodplain
or erosion hazard area regulations.
(Ord. No. 7407, § 5, 6-25-90; Ord. No. 11396, § 1, 8-9-16)
Sec. 26-15. Disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood and erosion protection required by these regulations is
considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on engineering and
scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions or the
flood height may be increased by manmade or natural causes, such as bridge
openings restricted by debris. These regulations do not imply that areas
outside the floodplain or erosion hazard area boundaries or land uses permitted
within such area will be free from flooding or flood and erosion damages. These
regulations shall not create liability on the part of the city or any officer
or employee thereof for any flood or erosion damages that may result from
reliance on any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
(Ord. No. 7407, § 5, 6-25-90; Ord. No. 11396, § 1, 8-9-16)
Sec. 26-16. Severability.
   This ordinance and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be
severable. Should any section of this ordinance be declared to be
unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
ordinance as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared
to be unconstitutional or invalid.
(Ord. No. 11396, § 1, 8-9-16)
Sec. 26-17. Coordination with other agencies.
The city engineer shall notify adjacent communities and the Arizona Department
of Water Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a regional or a
major watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal
Insurance Administration.
(Ord. No. 7407, § 5, 6-25-90; Ord. No. 11396, § 1, 8-9-16)
Sec. 26-18. Public hearing.
A public hearing is required for any amendment of these regulations and shall
be held in accordance with the provisions of A.R.S. title 9 and title 48. The
mayor and council acting as the floodplain board shall conduct the public
hearing. The public hearing and notice requirements will be conducted in
accordance with A.R.S. title 9 and title 48-3609(E). In cases where the
provisions of either title are more restrictive, the more restrictive
provisions will prevail.
(Ord. No. 7407, § 5, 6-25-90; Ord. No. 11396, § 1, 8-9-16)
Sec. 26-19. Reserved.
ARTICLE II.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
DIVISION 1.
PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS
Sec. 26-20. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to comply with the City of Tucson's Municipal
Stormwater Permit and applicable federal (40 CFR § 122.26) and state (ARS Title
49, Ch. 2 Article 3.1) regulations for stormwater discharges, to be consistent
with the stormwater quality provisions of the federal Clean Water Act (33
U.S.C. § 1342), and to enable the City of Tucson to comply with all applicable
stormwater quality provisions of federal, state, and local laws and regulations
to ensure the future health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of
Tucson, as well as the protection and preservation of the local environment.
(Ord. No. 10209, § 3, 10-18-05)
Sec. 26-21. Consistency.
This article shall be interpreted to be consistent with the federal Clean Water
Act and applicable state law and all provisions of the City of Tucson's
Municipal Stormwater Permit.
(Ord. No. 10209, § 3, 10-18-05)
Sec. 26-22. Severability.
If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this article is held
invalid, such invalidity will not affect the other provisions or application of
this article. To this end, the provisions of this article are declared to be
severable.
(Ord. No. 10209, § 3, 10-18-05)
Sec. 26-23. Definitions.
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:]
   Authorized representative means a person delegated powers or duties by the
manager pursuant to this article.
   AZPDES means Arizona Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
   BMP means Best Management Practice.
   Certified industrial hygienist means a professional industrial hygienist
certified by the American Board of Industrial Hygiene.
   City means the City of Tucson, a municipal corporation and subdivision of
the State of Arizona.
   Clean Water Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act amendments of
1972, as amended (P.L. 92-500; Stat. 816; 33 United States Code §§ 1251 through
1376).
   Connection means the juncture/location at which discharge may enter the
municipal separate storm sewer system.
   Corrective action plan is a plan required under this article and approved by
an authorized representative that consists of structural and nonstructural Best
Management Practices to prevent stormwater pollution or remediate impacts to
the stormdrain system. Based on site conditions, the authorized representative
will determine whether the corrective action plan will be prepared and
certified by a qualified person registered with the State of Arizona as a
professional engineer, or professional landscape architect; or a qualified
person certified by the American Board of Industrial Hygiene, as a certified
industrial hygienist.
   De Minimus discharge means a discharge that is a low flow and/or low
frequency event of relatively pollutant free water which is discharged with
appropriate BMPs to reduce any pollutants to below the applicable surface water
standard (A.A.C. Title 18, Chapter 11, Article 1).
   Discharge means any generated or naturally occurring runoff or flow into, or
through the city's municipal separate storm sewer system or waters of the
United States.
   Discharger means any person who causes or allows a discharge or who owns
property from which a discharge originates.
   Engineer means a professional civil engineer, registered with the State of
Arizona.
   Environment means navigable waters, any other surface waters, groundwater,
drinking water supply, land surface, subsurface strata, ambient air, biotic
community, or wildlife habitat within or bordering on the city.
   Illicit connection means a connection that causes, or otherwise allows,
illicit discharges.
   Illicit discharge means any discharge that is not composed entirely of
stormwater except: discharges pursuant to and in compliance with an applicable
NPDES or AZPDES permit or other written authorization from the Environmental
Protection Agency or the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality; not
including the city's Municipal Stormwater Permit; and discharges that are
considered to be non-significant sources of stormwater pollution.
   Industrial facility means the site of any industrial activity regulated
under federal NPDES or state AZPDES stormwater permit requirements.
   Land disturbance activity means any activity that is regulated under the
federal NPDES or state AZPDES stormwater permit requirements for construction
sites.
   Landscape architect means a professional landscape architect registered with
the State of Arizona.
   Manager means the City of Tucson Manager or the manager's authorized
representative.
   Municipal separate storm sewer system means a system of conveyances,
consisting of all structures, basins, and natural or manmade channels that can
collect, detain/retain, receive, or convey stormwater or other liquid that is
discharged to a water of the United States from, or through, private property,
public property, common areas, easements or rights-of-way, infrastructure,
including but not limited to swales, watercourses, channels, streets, culverts,
stormdrains, curbs and gutters. For the purposes of this article, the municipal
separate storm sewer system does not include the following waters of the United
States: the Santa Cruz River, Rillito Creek, Pantano Wash, Tanque Verde Creek,
Rincon Creek, Sabino Creek, West Branch Santa Cruz River Diversion Channel, and
Agua Caliente Wash.
   NPDES means National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
   No-exposure certification is a document certifying that federal and/or state
no-exposure requirements have been met.
   Notice of intent (NOI) is a document describing the intent to operate an
industrial facility or land disturbance activity in accordance with a general
stormwater AZPDES/NPDES permit.
   Notice of termination (NOT) is a document certifying one of the following
conditions:
   (1)   A change of ownership or responsible party;
   (2)   Final site stabilization following a land disturbance activity;
   (3)   Discharge has permanently ceased; or
   (4)   Discharges are covered under another AZPDES/NPDES permit.
   Person means an individual, resident, property owner, firm, partnership,
joint venture, association, corporation, estate, trust, receiver, syndicate,
broker, the federal government, State of Arizona, or any political subdivision
or agency of this state.
   Pollutant means any solid, liquid, or gaseous substances that may have an
adverse impact on human health, the environment, or the property of others, or
which otherwise causes or contributes to a violation of any stormwater quality
provision of federal, state, or local laws.
   Qualified person means a person who is knowledgeable and possesses the
skills to assess conditions at the site that could impact stormwater quality
and the effectiveness of the BMPs selected to control the quality of stormwater
discharges. Based on site conditions, the manager will determine whether the
qualified person must also be registered with the State of Arizona as a
professional civil engineer, or professional landscape architect; or whether
the qualified person must be certified by the American Board of Industrial
Hygiene, as a certified industrial hygienist.
   Stormwater means precipitation runoff, to which no pollutant has been added
by human activity.
   Stormwater pollution prevention plan is a document required under AZPDES/
NPDES regulations or imposed pursuant to this article describing the stormwater
quality controls in place at a site.
   Waters of the United States or waters of the U.S. means a water body that is
claimed under the jurisdiction of the U.S. government, including rivers and
streams (intermittent, ephemeral), dry washes, acequias, arroyos, natural ponds
and wetlands.
(Ord. No. 10209, § 3, 10-18-05)
Secs. 26-24--26-29. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
POWERS AND DUTIES
Sec. 26-30. Authorized representative.
The manager may delegate any or all of the powers and duties set out in this
article to any persons as the manager deems necessary. Any person who has been
delegated any power or duty described under this article is an authorized
representative.
(Ord. No. 10209, § 3, 10-18-05)
Sec. 26-31. General.
The manager may adopt and enforce such rules, regulations, standards, processes
and forms as the manager deems necessary for the efficient administration and
enforcement of this article. The manager may interpret and enforce this
article. Upon request of the manager any other department of the city has the
authority to assist in the exercise of powers and performance of duties under
this article.
(Ord. No. 10209, § 3, 10-18-05)
Sec. 26-32. Authority to enter.
For the purposes of determining compliance with, and enforcement of, the
provisions of this article, authorized representatives shall, at reasonable
times, be admitted to any property from which a discharge is known, or is
suspected. When security measures requiring identification and clearance before
entry are in place on such property, the owner or agent of the owner, or a
lawful occupant of the property shall make all necessary arrangements to allow
authorized representatives, upon presentation of official identification, to
enter the property without delay. If such entry is refused or cannot be
obtained, the manager shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to
secure lawful entry and take necessary action.
If authorized representatives have reason to believe that discharge conditions
on, or emanating from, the property require immediate action to safeguard the
public health or safety, they shall have the right to immediately enter,
inspect the property and take such action, after making reasonable efforts to
locate and obtain permission from the owner or an agent of the owner, or a
lawful occupant of the property.
(Ord. No. 10209, § 3, 10-18-05)
Sec. 26-33. Warrants, restraining orders, and injunctive relief.
The manager is, for purposes of enforcing this article, empowered to seek
restraining orders, other injunctive relief, or search warrants as necessary to
enforce this article.
(Ord. No. 10209, § 3, 10-18-05)
Sec. 26-34. Authority to inspect.
Authorized representatives may inspect properties that discharge or are
suspected of discharging. Inspections may include reviewing records, reports
and test results, conducting site surveys, and examining any wastes, chemicals,
storage areas, storage containers, waste generating processes, treatment
facilities, and discharge locations. Inspection methods may include
photographing, videotaping, or collecting samples for analytical analysis, from
any part of the site or from any materials present on the site.
(Ord. No. 10209, § 3, 10-18-05)
Sec. 26-35. Authority to monitor.
Authorized representatives may conduct all monitoring and sampling necessary to
ensure compliance with this article and may establish such devices as are
necessary to conduct such sampling or monitoring. Such devices shall be
installed and operated so as to minimize impact to the owner and occupant of
the property.
(Ord. No. 10209, § 3, 10-18-05)
Sec. 26-36. Authority to abate.
If a person in violation of this article fails to comply with an order to abate
or a notice of violation with a requirement to immediately abate, the city may
abate the problem itself or by private contractor, and assess the responsible
party for the cost of such abatement including expenditure of city resources.
(Ord. No. 10209, § 3, 10-18-05)
Secs. 26-37--26-39. Reserved.
DIVISION 3.
PROHIBITIONS, NON-PROHIBITED DISCHARGES, AND REQUIREMENTS
Sec. 26-40. Prohibited discharges.
The following are prohibited:
   (1)   Any discharge that is a source of pollutants;
   (2)   Allowing or causing any discharge that contributes a pollutant to
stormwater;
   (3)   Any discharge that contributes to a violation of the city's Municipal
Stormwater Permit, regardless of whether that discharge is covered under, and
is in compliance with, an AZPDES/NPDES permit;
   (4)   Establishing, using, and/or maintaining any connection that allows a
discharge that contributes a pollutant to stormwater;
   (5)   Depositing, dumping or storing any materials in a manner that may
contribute a pollutant to, or obstruct the flow of, stormwater;
   (6)   Failing to comply with any applicable AZPDES/NPDES Permit, including
any permit requirements to develop, implement, or comply with a Stormwater
Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP);
   (7)   Failing to provide required information to the city including:
   a.   Copies of the notice of intent, notice of termination, and/or no
exposure certification as appropriate;
   b.   Upon request, copies of the SWPPP, water quality monitoring results
and/or hydrologic reports certifying compliance with discharge or retention
requirements;
   (8)   Failing to develop, implement, or comply with a Stormwater Pollution
Prevention Plan or a Corrective Action Plan utilizing Best Management Practices
that is either required under an AZPDES/NPDES permit or imposed by the city
pursuant to this article, including requirements to implement good
housekeeping, spill control and response, employee training, record keeping,
proper material and waste management, practices for nonstormwater flows, and
structural stormwater controls;
   (9)   Misrepresentation in any document pertaining to an approved plan,
permit, or certification relating to a discharge activity; and
   (10)   Disabling or rendering inaccurate any sampling or monitoring device
required under this article.
(Ord. No. 10209, § 3, 10-18-05)
Sec. 26-41. Non-prohibited discharges.
The following types of discharges are not prohibited under this article unless
they are found to be a source of pollutants:
   (1)   Discharges in compliance with an AZPDES/NPDES permit;
   (2)   Discharges in compliance with an approved Corrective Action Plan
utilizing Best Management Practices.
   (3)   Discharges of the following types of naturally occurring water are not
prohibited:
   a.   Stormwater;
   b.   Rising groundwater;
   c.   Springs and ponds;
   d.   Diverted stream flow;
   e.   Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands; and
   f.   Pumped unpolluted groundwater.
   (4)   Discharges that qualify for the AZPDES De Minimus General Permit are
not prohibited as long as these discharges are in compliance with the permit.
Qualifying discharges include:
   a.   Discharges from installation and maintenance of potable water supply
systems;
   b.   Discharges from subterranean dewatering;
   c.   Discharges from well development and maintenance and/or aquifer
testing;
   d.   Discharges of groundwater, surface water or potable water from
hydrostatic testing;
   e.   Discharges of groundwater, surface water or potable water associated
with installation and maintenance of reclaimed water system transport
discharges;
   f.   Discharges from residential non-contact cooling water (including
overflow from air conditioning condensate and evaporative coolers);
   g.   Discharges from charitable noncommercial car washes when only the
exterior of vehicles are being washed with water only or when biodegradable
soap is used;
   h.   Discharges from building or street washing where only water or
biodegradable soaps are used;
   i.   Discharges of dechlorinated pool water; and
   j.   Other de minimus discharges as specifically approved by ADEQ.
   (5)   Additional types of discharges, which do not contribute to a violation
of the city's Municipal Stormwater Permit may be allowed upon submittal of a
copy of the discharger's written authorization from the Arizona Department of
Environmental Quality or the Environmental Protection Agency. Such
authorization shall be submitted to the city prior to the time of discharge,
and must be retained for at least three (3) years after the last discharge made
pursuant to the authorization.
(Ord. No. 10209, § 3, 10-18-05)
Sec. 26-42. Requirements.
   (a)   Any person who is determined by the manager to have the potential to
be a discharger of pollutants can be required to develop and implement a
Corrective Action Plan utilizing Best Management Practices (BMPs) to prevent
stormwater pollution. Based on site conditions, the manager will determine
whether the Corrective Action Plan must be prepared and certified by a
qualified person registered with the State of Arizona as a professional
engineer, or professional landscape architect; or a qualified person certified
by the American Board of Industrial Hygiene, as a certified industrial
hygienist.
   (b)   For land disturbing activities that fall under the jurisdiction of
this article, a Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan must be prepared and
certified by an engineer, or a landscape architect and submitted along with
application for a grading permit to the City of Tucson Development Services
Department.
   (c)   Proof of all applicable city, state, and federal permits including
supporting documents such as the Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan, the
notice of intent, the notice of termination, and the no-exposure certification
shall be maintained on site for inspection by authorized representatives.
   (d)   Any industrial facility or land disturbing activity seeking exemption
from AZPDES/NPDES permitting requirements by retaining stormwater discharges on
site must submit a hydrologic report certifying adequate containment in a 100
year storm event.
   (e)   Any person that is required to have a Stormwater Pollution Prevention
Plan or a Corrective Action Plan utilizing Best Management Practices must post
notices to employees containing information about whom to contact and what
procedures to follow in the event of an accidental discharge or spill.
Dischargers shall have a trained employee or staff member who will be
responsible for oversight of any necessary clean up or remediation.
   (f)   In the event of a spill or release, the owner, operator, or the person
who has control of the source or location of any spill or release, which may
result in a discharge that is not in compliance with this article, shall
immediately take all reasonable safety precautions including, if appropriate,
calling 911 and completing the following steps:
   (1)   Proceed with containment and clean up in accordance with:
   a.   The orders of an involved health and safety agency, or if no such
orders have been issued:
   b.   The orders of an authorized representative, or if no such orders have
been issued;
   c.   The Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan or approved corrective action
plan utilizing Best Management Practices for the involved facility.
   (2)   Report any violations of the Tucson Fire Code or other such applicable
safety or health codes in the manner required by such code;
   (3)   Notify the Tucson Department of Transportation and Mobility,
Stormwater Management Section and the Arizona Department of Environmental
Quality of the release by telephone before noon of the next working day;
    (4)   Provide written notification, within five (5) working days, to the
Tucson Department of Transportation and Mobility, Stormwater Management Section
of the type, volume, cause of the discharge, corrective actions taken, and
measures to be taken to prevent future occurrences.
   (g)    Compliance with these requirements shall not relieve the discharger
of any fines, penalties, or liability incurred, or that may be imposed by this
article or other applicable laws as a result of the discharge. In addition,
compliance with these requirements shall not relieve the discharger from the
reporting requirements of 40 CFR 110, 40 CFR 117 and 40 CFR 302.
(Ord. No. 10209, § 3, 10-18-05; Ord. No. 11801, § 1, 12-8-20)
Secs. 26-43--26-46. Reserved.
DIVISION 4.
ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 26-47. Violation notices.
   (a)   Upon discovery of a violation of this article, authorized
representatives may issue to the violator a written notice stating the nature
of the violation, the corrective action required, the time frame for corrective
action, and the penalties for continued non-compliance. The notice shall be
served either by personal service or certified mail, upon the owner, the
owner's agent, the occupant, or the lessee. The notice may also require the
violator to:
   (1)   Submit a Corrective Action Plan utilizing Best Management Practices to
an authorized representative indicating the cause of the violation, corrective
actions to prevent recurrence, and a proposed compliance schedule;
   (2)   Allow installation and operation of sampling and monitoring devices
and pay all costs of installation, as well as costs for laboratory sample
analysis, and submit results to the authorized representative;
   (3)   Clean up any material that has left the property or has the potential
to impact stormwater runoff, ensure that the clean up has been completed, and
make changes in operations to prevent future violations;
   (4)   Obtain and pay for the services of a qualified person to provide
oversight and certify that corrective actions needed to resolve the violation
have been completed;
   (5)   Prepare and implement a Corrective Action Plan utilizing Best
Management Practices to prevent stormwater pollution, regardless of AZPDES/
NPDES requirements. Depending on site conditions, the manager may require that
the corrective action plan be prepared by a qualified person or prepared and
certified by an engineer;
   (6)   Stop work on clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, storing,
transporting, and/or filling of land, new construction, improvements,
alterations, or additions;
   (7)   Stop any activity that is in violation of this article;
   (8)   Abate, within the time specified in the notice, any condition that is
in violation of this article; and
   (9)   Abate immediately any condition in violation of this article, if the
manager determines that such condition presents an immediate threat to public
health, safety, or the environment.
   (b)   Authorized representatives may approve the compliance schedule or
Corrective Action Plan utilizing Best Management Practices submitted by the
violator, or may require an alternative compliance schedule or Corrective
Action Plan utilizing Best Management Practices. This shall be done within the
period specified in the notice.
   (c)   If the manager discovers a condition that the manager determines is
likely to cause or is causing a discharge that is in violation of the city's
Municipal Stormwater Permit or that threatens public health, safety or the
environment, the manager may require an immediate cessation of activity and
abatement.
(Ord. No. 10209, § 3, 10-18-05)
Sec. 26-48. Penalties and corrective actions.
   (a)   The remedies provided in this section are cumulative and the city may
seek one or more such remedies.
   (1)   It is a civil infraction for any person to violate this article or
fail to comply with a notice of violation issued under this article.
   (2)   It is a misdemeanor for any person to violate this article or fail to
comply with a notice of violation issued under this article.
   (3)   Any person violating this article shall be liable to the city for all
damages, costs, fines and penalties incurred by the city as a result, and shall
defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the city against any resulting claims,
liabilities or damages.
   (b)   Upon a finding that any person has violated this article, the court
shall issue an order or, in the case of a criminal conviction, terms of
probation, requiring the violator to do any or all of the following as
appropriate:
   (1)   Submit a plan to an authorized representative indicating the cause of
the violation, corrective actions to prevent recurrence, and a proposed
compliance schedule;
   (2)   Allow installation and operation of sampling and monitoring devices
and pay all costs of installation and laboratory sample analysis, and submit
results to the authorized representative;
   (3)   Clean up any material that has left the property, or has the potential
to impact stormwater runoff, ensure that the clean up has been completed, and
make changes in operations to prevent future violations;
   (4)   obtain and pay for the services of a qualified person to provide
oversight and certify that corrective actions needed to resolve the violation
have been completed;
   (5)   Prepare and implement a Corrective Action Plan utilizing Best
Management Practices to prevent stormwater pollution, regardless of AZPDES/
NPDES requirements. Based on site conditions, the manager will determine
whether the Corrective Action Plan must be prepared and certified by a
qualified person registered with the State of Arizona as a professional
engineer, or professional landscape architect; or a qualified person certified
by the American Board of Industrial Hygiene, as a certified industrial
hygienist.
   (6)   Stop work on clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, storing,
transporting, and/or filling of land, new construction, improvements,
alterations, or additions;
   (7)   Stop any activity that is in violation of this article;
   (8)   Abate, within the time specified, any condition that is in violation
of this article; and
   (9)   Abate immediately any condition in violation of this article, if the
condition presents an immediate threat to public health, safety, or the
environment.
   (c)   The City Court of the City of Tucson shall have jurisdiction to issue
to any person violating this article the orders specified in this section, and
any other orders necessary to insure compliance with this article. The City
Court of the City of Tucson shall have jurisdiction to impose upon any person
violating this article the terms of probation specified in this section, or any
other terms of probation necessary to insure compliance with this article.
   (d)   If more than one person is identified as the owner of record, such
persons shall be presumed to be jointly and severally in lawful possession and
control of the activity or property. The transfer of ownership, possession, or
control of real property to another person does not relieve the transferor of
the responsibility for violations of this article that occurred before the
transfer.
(Ord. No. 10209, § 3, 10-18-05)
Chapter 27
WATER*
__________
*   Cross References: Plumbing code, §
6-121 et seq.; sewerage and sewage disposal, ch.
24.
__________
Art. I.   In General, §§ 27-1--27-27
Art. II.   Rates and Charges, §§ 27-28--27-59
Art. III.   Citizens' Water Advisory Committee, §§ 27-60--27-65
Art. IV.   Groundwater Consultant Board, §§ 27-66--27-69
Art. V.   Backflow Prevention and Cross-Connection Control, §§ 27-70--27-89
Art. VI.   Emergency Water Conservation Response, §§ 27-90--27-99
Art VII.    Water Consumer Protection Act, §§ 27-100--27-109
Art VIII.    Drought Preparedness and Response Plan, §§ 27-110--27-119
Article I. In General
Sec.
27-1.   The superintendent of water also known as director of the water
department to oversee city water services.
Sec.
27-2.   Duty of superintendent to inspect, make repairs.
Sec.
27-3.   Superintendent to report violations; prosecution by city manager.
Sec.
27-4.   Superintendent to control water supply; notice of shutting off
pipelines.
Sec.
27-5.   Superintendent subject to city manager and mayor and council.
Sec.
27-6.   Supervision of charges and collections.
Sec.
27-7.   Receipts to be deposited in water utility fund.
Sec.
27-8.   Taps, connections to be by department; exception.
Sec.
27-9.   Application for service required; payment of charges prerequisite to
service; deposits; amount; refund, utility service bond.
Sec.
27-10.   "Premises" defined, separate connections required; appeal.
Sec.
27-11.   Installations, repairs by individual prohibited.
Sec.
27-12.   City not liable for damages; stopcock required.
Sec.
27-13.   Turning on water without authority.
Sec.
27-14.   Authority to withhold water for violations.
Sec.
27-15.   Waste or unreasonable use of water; violation declared a civil
infraction.
Sec.
27-16.   Interfering with, tampering with water facilities; removing water;
violation declared a civil infraction.
Sec.
27-16.1.   Turning on water without authority; interfering with, tampering with
water facilities; removing water; minimum penalty; subsequent conviction.
Sec.
27-16.2.   Permit for construction water.
Sec.
27-17.   Damaging, defacing water facilities.
Sec.
27-18.   Use of device to bypass metering of water prohibited; civil
infraction; minimum penalty; persons liable.
Sec.
27-19.   Installation of ultra-low-flush water closets in low income owner-
occupied housing.
Sec.
27-20-   Large quantity water users.
Sec.
27-21.   Additional remedies.
Secs.
27-22 – 27-27. Reserved.
Article II. Rates and Charges
Sec.
27-28.   Established by mayor and council.
Sec.
27-29.   Liability of customer of record or property owner for charges.
Sec.
27-30.   Service charge.
Sec.
27-31.   Definitions.
Sec.
27-32.   Charges for water service.
Sec.
27-32.1.   Monthly reclaimed water service charges.
Sec.
27-33.   Monthly potable water service charges.
Sec.
27-34.   Charges for fire protection service.
Sec.
27-35.   Charges for installation of water service connections.
Sec.
27-36.   System equity, Central Arizona Project, and areas-specific fees.
Sec.
27-37.   Agreements for construction of water facilities authorized.
Sec.
27-38.   Provisions for refund of cost of water mains or water facilities
installed by private contract under certain conditions authorized.
Sec.
27-38.1.   Provisions for refund of cost of water mains or facilities funded
and installed by the city under certain conditions authorized.
Sec.
27-39.   Reserved.
Sec.
27-40.   Sales taxes and in-lieu-of franchise taxes.
Sec.
27-41.   Accommodation and standby water service.
Sec.
27-42.   Temporary services authorized; conditions; rates.
Sec.
27-43.   Charge when meter not registering properly.
Sec.
27-44.   Charge when meter removed.
Sec.
27-45.   Charge for water used for public works or improvements.
Sec.
27-46.   Charge for water used in flooding excavations.
Sec.
27-47.   Water charges when not otherwise provided.
Sec.
27-48.   Liability for charges where one service pipe serves multiple premises.
Sec.
27-49.   When and where bills due and payable.
Sec.
27-50.   Discontinuing service for non-payment of water bill; customer right to
dispute account balance.
Sec.
27-51.   Resuming service after discontinued for nonpayment or violations.
Sec.
27-52.   Customer service relief and courtesy adjustments.
Sec.
27-53.   Pre-annexation and development agreement fees.
Sec.
27-54.   Returned checks.
Sec.
27-55.   Monthly green stormwater infrastructure fee.
Secs. 27-56--27-59.   Reserved.
Article III. Citizens' Water Advisory Committee
Sec.
27-60.   Creation.
Sec.
27-61.   Functions and purposes.
Sec.
27-62.   Membership composition, terms and qualifications.
Sec.
27-63.   Committee organization.
Sec.
27-64.   Committee reports.
Sec.
27-65.   Limitation of powers.
Article IV. Groundwater Consultant Board
Sec.
27-66.   Creation.
Sec.
27-67.   Functions and purposes.
Sec.
27-68.   Selection and compensation of consultants.
Sec.
27-69.   Limitation of powers.
Article V. Backflow Prevention and Cross-connection Control
Sec.
27-70.   Definitions.
Sec.
27-71.   Purpose and application.
Sec.
27-72.   Backflow prevention required.
Sec.
27-73.   Hazard potential.
Sec.
27-74.   Backflow prevention methods; list.
Sec.
27-75.   Backflow prevention methods required.
Sec.
27-76.   Backflow assembly installation requirements.
Sec.
27-77.   Installation of backflow prevention assemblies for fire systems.
Sec.
27-78.   Inspections.
Sec.
27-79.   Permit.
Sec.
27-80.   Test, inspection, notification, maintenance, records.
Sec.
27-81.   Determination, modification or waiver of backflow prevention
requirements.
Sec.
27-82.   Discontinuance of water service.
Sec.
27-83.   Administrative appeal.
Sec.
27-84.   Violation a civil infraction.
Sec.
27-85.   Reserved.
Sec.
27-86.   Fees.
Secs.
27-87--27-89.   Reserved.
Article VI. Emergency Water Conservation Response
Sec.
27-90.   Purpose.
Sec.
27-91.   Declaration of policy.
Sec.
27-92.   Application.
Sec.
27-93.   Declaration of water emergency authorized.
Sec.
27-94.   Implementation, termination.
Sec.
27-95.   Mandatory emergency water conservation measures.
Sec.
27-96.   Variances.
Sec.
27-97.   Violation.
Sec.
27-98.   Enforcement.
Sec.
27-99.   Definitions.
Article VII. Water Consumer Protection Act
Sec.
27-100.   Method.
Sec.
27-101.   Exception.
Sec.
27-102.   Recharge.
Sec.
27-103.   Definitions.
Secs.
27-104--27-109.   Reserved.
Article VIII. Drought Preparedness and Response Plan
Sec.
27-110.   Purpose.
Sec.
27-111.   Declaration of policy.
Sec.
27-112.   Application.
Sec.
27-113.   Declaration of drought response stages, implementation, termination.
Sec.
27-114.   Triggers for each drought response stage.
Sec.
27-115.   Response actions for each drought response stage.
Sec.
27-116.   Variances.
Sec.
27-117.   Violation.
Sec.
27-118.   Enforcement.
Sec.
27-119.   Definitions.
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL
Sec. 27-1. The superintendent of water also known as director of the water
department to oversee city water services.
   (a)   The Charter appointive position known as the superintendent of water
also known as director of the water department shall have the responsibility
for overseeing city water services.
   (b)   Reserved.
(1953 Code, ch. 25, § 1; Ord. No. 10099, § 4, 12-13-04; Ord. No. 10348, § 7,
11-28-06)
   Cross References: Office hours for water department, §
2-1.
Sec. 27-2. Duty of superintendent to inspect, make repairs.
The superintendent of the water department shall make frequent trips of
inspection over all pipelines and all other property used in or connected with
the water department, and shall make all repairs deemed necessary consistent
with his duties.
(1953 Code, ch. 25, § 2)
Sec. 27-3. Superintendent to report violations; prosecution by city manager.
The superintendent of the water department shall report all violations of this
chapter to the city manager, and the city manager shall forthwith proceed to
prosecute offenders as set forth in this Code.
(1953 Code, ch. 25, § 3)
Sec. 27-4. Superintendent to control water supply; notice of shutting off
pipelines.
The superintendent of the water department shall attend to and control the
water supply and at all times see to the sufficiency thereof. He shall notify
the community, unless emergency requires otherwise, of the necessity of
shutting off any pipeline for the purpose of making repairs, extensions and
connections, should he have cause to expect or know beforehand the necessity to
so shut off the water from any line of the system.
(1953 Code, ch. 25, § 4)
Sec. 27-5. Superintendent subject to city manager and mayor and council.
In the performance of his duties as required by this article, the
superintendent of the water department shall be subject at all times to the
action of the city manager and such regulations, directions and restrictions as
the mayor and council may from time to time prescribe.
(1953 Code, ch. 25, § 5)
Sec. 27-6. Supervision of charges and collections.
The superintendent of the water department shall have general supervision over
all charges and collections of water rents, pipe tapping, building costs and
over any and all amounts due or collected in the water department. All moneys
collected by him shall be turned over to the director of finance daily and
receipt taken therefor.
(1953 Code, ch. 25, § 6)
Sec. 27-7. Receipts to be deposited in water utility fund.
All moneys paid to the director of finance under the provisions of this chapter
shall be kept by him in a separate fund to be known as the water utility fund,
into which the director of finance shall turn all moneys received by him
properly belonging to such fund.
(1953 Code, ch. 25, § 7)
Sec. 27-8. Taps, connections to be by department; exception.
The water superintendent, or other employees of the water department under his
supervision, shall make all water taps or service connections; however, in any
street paving improvement district such water taps or service connections may
be included in the contract for such street paving improvements, and such water
taps or service connections may then be made by the contractor under the
direction of the water superintendent.
(1953 Code, ch. 25, § 10)
Sec. 27-9. Application for service required; payment of charges prerequisite to
service; deposits; amount; refund, utility service bond.
   (a)   Water utility service may be requested by phone, mail, or in person.
The department, as a condition precedent to approving an application for water
service to any premises, shall collect all installation and other charges
required by this chapter. Title to all pipes, fittings and other water
facilities shall be and remain in the city. The person, corporation, or
association in whose name the water utility service is requested, or any other
person, other corporation, or other association who is receiving the benefit of
the water utility service will be responsible for compliance with the terms of
this chapter, and will be responsible for the payments and charges required by
this chapter.
   (b)   As a condition of providing water service, the director may require a
deposit from an applicant for services as follows:
   (1)   For residential water service, the deposit amount shall be two hundred
dollars ($200.00). For water service to other customer classes, the deposit
amount shall be two (2) times the estimated monthly bill.
   (2)   The individual in whose name the deposit is made shall be responsible
for the payment of all bills incurred in connection with the service furnished.
   (3)   The director may require a separate deposit for each meter installed.
   (4)   The deposit, with interest, will be refunded or forfeited as follows:
   (i)   Residential deposits shall be refundable after one (1) year of
continuous service, providing the account is not delinquent and has been kept
in good standing. If the account is open for less than one (1) year, the
residential deposit shall be refunded after the final bill is satisfied.
   (ii)   Deposits on commercial, multi-family or industrial applicants may be
held until the account is closed.
   (iii)   If water service to an account is discontinued for nonpayment of
bills, the deposit with interest will be applied by the city toward settlement
of the account. Upon reactivation of the account, another deposit may be
charged.
   (iv)   The accrued interest on the deposit amount, to be refunded the
applicant or applied toward settlement of an unpaid account, will be computed
using the average market rate earned by the City of Tucson's Investment Pool
during the past twelve (12) months.
   (c)   The director may, at his option, require a utility service bond in
lieu of a cash deposit for large commercial, multi-family, and industrial
applicants for service. Such utility service bonds shall be on a form approved
by the city attorney, and the director shall have the power to execute such
bond on behalf of the city. The provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this
section shall apply to utility service bonds.
   (d)   The director may require a deposit from existing customers who become
delinquent and do not keep their account in good standing or have had their
service discontinued for nonpayment of bills. Deposit will be calculated per
subsection (b).
(1953 Code, ch. 25, § 11; Ord. No. 4489, § 1, 5-24-76; Ord. No. 4626, § 2, 3-3-
77; Ord. No. 4763, § 1, 2-27-78; Ord. No. 9977, § 1, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 10897, §
1, 5-24-11, eff. 7-5-11; Ord. No. 11269, § 1, 5-19-15, eff. 7-6-15)
Sec. 27-10. "Premises" defined, separate connections required; appeal.
The word "premises" is hereby defined to be each separate residence, house,
store or building so situated upon any lot or lots within or without the city
that the same might be, or, in the opinion of the superintendent of the water
department, could be sold separately from any other residence, house, store or
building upon the same lot or lots, irrespective of the number of residences,
houses, stores or buildings upon the lot or lots, and even though two (2) or
more of the residences, houses, stores or buildings are held or owned by the
same person. The determination of the superintendent of the water department as
to whether any house, residence, store or building comes within the meaning of
this section so as to require a separate water service connection shall be
final; however, the owner of the premises shall have the right to appeal such
decision to the mayor and council at their next meeting. In the event of any
such appeal being taken, the determination of the mayor and council shall be
final.
(1953 Code, ch. 25, § 11a)
Sec. 27-11. Installations, repairs by individual prohibited.
All water services shall be installed by the water department as provided in
this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any person to install any such service
or any part of such service, or to repair any service now existing or any part
thereof, from the water main to and including the meter, or disturb any street
or alley in any manner for the purpose of locating trouble or any other reason
whatsoever.
(1953 Code, ch. 25, § 12)
Sec. 27-12. City not liable for damages; stopcock required.
The city shall not be held liable for any damage that may result from the
shutting off or turning on of any supply pipe or main for any purpose whatever,
even should no notice have been given, nor for damages caused by any break or
leak on any water pipe inside of the curb, etc. All supply pipes to buildings
should be properly supplied with a suitable stopcock inside the property line,
to ensure against the danger of frost or bursts which may cause any damage.
Such cock should be kept in good order and under control of the consumer. The
stopcock and box on the curb shall be in charge of the water department only.
(1953 Code, ch. 25, § 13)
Sec. 27-13. Turning on water without authority.
If any person shall, by false key or otherwise, cause such premises to be
supplied with water without the authorization of the director of the water
department, such person, and his aiders and abettors, shall be guilty of a
civil infraction and subject to the penalties as outlined in section
27-16.1 of the Tucson Code.
(1953 Code, ch. 25, § 15; Ord. No. 7547, § 1, 1-7-91; Ord. No. 9015, § 1, 2-9-
98)
Sec. 27-14. Authority to withhold water for violations.
The supply of water may be withheld from all premises when the provisions of
this chapter or the rules and regulations adopted by the mayor and council have
in any manner been violated, and the supply not again turned on except upon a
rectification of the cause of withholding the same and satisfactory assurance
given that no further cause of complaint shall arise.
(1953 Code, ch. 25, § 17)
Sec. 27-15. Waste or unreasonable use of water; violation declared a civil
infraction.
It is declared that, because safe, high quality potable water and reclaimed
water are a precious resource, the general welfare requires that the water
resources available to the city be put to maximum beneficial use, and that the
waste or unreasonable use, or unreasonable method of use, of water be
prevented. For the purposes of this section, the person, corporation, or
association in whose name the water utility of the city is or was last billed
or who is receiving the benefit of the water supply on the premises, as defined
under section
27-10, is presumed to have knowingly made, caused, used, or permitted the use
of water received from the city for in a manner contrary to any provision of
this section, if the water has been used in a manner contrary to any provision
of this section.
   (a)   The following uses are a waste or unreasonable use or method of use of
water and are prohibited:
   (1)   Allowing water to escape from any premises onto public property, such
as alleys or streets, or upon any other person's property.
   (2)   Allowing water to pond in any street or parking lot to a depth greater
than one-quarter ( 1/4) inch or to permit water to pond over a cumulative
surface area greater than one hundred fifty (150) square feet on any street or
parking lot.
   (3)   Washing driveways, sidewalks, parking areas, or other impervious
surface areas with an open hose, or with a spray nozzle attached to an open
hose, or under regular or system pressure, except when required to eliminate
conditions that threaten the public health, safety, or welfare. This
restriction does not apply to residential customers.
   (4)   Operating a misting system in unoccupied non-residential areas.
   (5)   Operating a permanently installed irrigation system with a broken head
or emitter, or with a head that is spraying more than ten (10) percent of the
spray on a street, parking lot, or sidewalk; this prohibition does not apply
unless the head or emitter was designed to deliver more than one (1) gallon of
water per hour during normal use.
   (6)   Failing to repair a controllable leak, including a broken sprinkler
head, a leaking valve, or a leaking faucet.
   (7)   Failure to meet the fifty (50) percent rainwater harvesting
requirement for landscape irrigation set forth in Chapter
6, Article VIII of the Tucson Code.
   (b)   Any person who violates any portion of this section is guilty of a
civil infraction, and shall be fined upon the first offense, a minimum of two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00); and upon the second offense within a period of
three (3) years and upon each subsequent conviction within such period, a
minimum of five hundred dollars ($500.00). The imposition of civil liability
shall not preclude the city from taking any other enforcement actions permitted
under section
27-14 or section
27-97 of this chapter.
(1953 Code, ch. 25, § 16; Ord. No. 6096, § 1, 10-1-84; Ord. No. 7547, § 2, 1-7-
91; Ord. No. 9407, § 1, 6-19-00; Ord. No. 10597, § 2, 10-14-08)
Sec. 27-16. Interfering with, tampering with water facilities; removing water;
violation declared a civil infraction.
   No person shall install any connection to any fire hydrant or shall open or
close any fire hydrant or stop-cock connected with the water department of the
city, or lift or remove the covers of any gate valves or shut-offs, or tap into
city water mains which may result in the delivery of water, without a permit
from the director of the water department, or in violation of conditions of a
permit, except in case of fire, and then under the direction of officers of the
fire department. Any person identified through a water department field
investigation as having water turned on without authority and/or found to have
tampered with the water meter or removed water without authority will be
charged a fee of one hundred one dollars and forty-eight cents ($101.48).
Further, it shall be a civil infraction for any person, firm, or corporation to
violate the provisions of this section.
(1953 Code, ch. 25, § 8; Ord. No. 5023, § 1, 8-6-79; Ord. No. 6096, § 2, 10-1-
84; Ord. No. 9015, § 2, 2-9-98; Ord. No. 10897, § 1, 5-24-11, eff. 7-5-11; Ord.
No. 11072, § 1, 5-21-13, eff. 7-1-13)
Sec. 27-16.1. Turning on water without authority; interfering with, tampering
with water facilities; removing water; minimum penalty; subsequent conviction.
   A person convicted for the first time of the offense prohibited by section
27-13 or
27-16 shall be punished by a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00). A person convicted of a second offense prohibited by section
27-13 or
27-16 shall be punished by a fine of not less than five hundred dollars
($500.00). A person convicted of a third or subsequent offense prohibited by
section
27-13 or
27-16 shall be punished by a fine of not less than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00). No hearing officer may suspend the imposition of the fine
prescribed herein upon a person convicted of the offense prohibited by section
27-13 or
27-16.
(Ord. No. 5023, § 2, 8-6-79; Ord. No. 6096, § 3, 10-1-84; Ord. No. 7547, § 3,
1-7-91; Ord. No. 10897, § 1, 5-24-11, eff. 7-5-11)
Sec. 27-16.2. Permit for construction water.
   Sec. 27-16.2(1). Procedure for obtaining a permit. Applicants for a permit
required by section
27-16 shall apply in person at the new services area. The completed form
request shall be processed by the utility and shall be approved if the
applicant has furnished all requested information and has met all the
applicable requirements of this article and of the rules and regulations of the
utility. Once a permit has been approved, the water utility shall establish an
account in the applicant's name.
Construction water may not be used to replace water that would otherwise be
available from a metered private plumbing or irrigation system, and may not be
used to fill swimming pools or landscape features. Construction water may not
be resold to any third party.
   Sec. 27-16.2(2). Permit conditions for construction water.
   (a)   The permit may require that the permittee obtain water only at (a)
specified location(s) and at such times as are deemed by the superintendent to
be in the best interests of the water utility.
   (b)   All water provided from fire hydrants, blowoffs and drain valve
assemblies for construction purposes must be metered. If the stock of available
fire hydrant meters is depleted, a waiting list will be created and utilized as
hydrant meters become available.
   (c)   If the applicant for a fire hydrant permit requests a meter be placed
on the hydrant, the water utility shall install the meter on the hydrant after
the applicant remits a deposit of one thousand seven hundred sixty-two dollars
($1,762.00). The deposition shall be used, in whole or in part, to reimburse
the utility for damage to the meter or related appurtenance, such as a backflow
prevention device. Any unused portion of the deposit shall be refunded to the
applicant upon return of the meter and any related appurtenance to the utility.
In addition, the applicant shall pay a non-refundable fee of ninety-six dollars
and sixty-nine cents ($96.69) to cover the costs of installing the meter on the
fire hydrant. The applicant shall pay this fee for the initial installation of
a meter on a fire hydrant and also each time the meter is moved.
   (d)   An applicant for a fire hydrant permit may install his or her
privately owned meter on the carrying vehicle or may use it as a portable meter
at the applicant's expense as long as the permit is current and there is a
permitted backflow device at the point of connection. The meters must be read
by the applicant and readings faxed to the billing office by the 20th of each
calendar month. The superintendent or designee may at any time require an
applicant to deliver the carrying vehicle and the water meter to a designated
location for testing and reading of the meter. Failure of the applicant to
appear at the designated time and location shall be cause for revocation of the
fire hydrant permit for a period of one (1) year from the date of the failure
to appear. Revocation is subject to minor sections
27-16.2(3) and
27-16.2(4) of this article.
   (e)   Privately owned meters used for construction water are required to be
tested annually for accuracy by Tucson Water. The customer shall pay a fee of
sixty-five dollars and twenty-one cents ($65.21).
   (f)   Permits shall expire twelve (12) months (one (1) year) after issuance
and may be renewed provided all requirements of this article and of the rules
and regulations of the water department have been met. Applicant may cancel
permit before the expiration date if the hydrant meter is no longer required.
   (g)   Permits must be readily available at the water source when in use, or
on file at the corporation business address.
   (h)   The rules and regulations of the department are a condition of the
permit.
   Sec. 27-16.2(3). Revocation of permit.
   (a)   The superintendent may revoke a permit issued under this article upon
a finding that the permittee has violated any provisions of this article, the
rules and regulations of the department or conditions of the permit.
   (b)   No revocation of permit shall be ordered until a hearing on the
question has been held by the superintendent or his designate. At this hearing
the permittee may appeal personally or through counsel, cross-examine witnesses
and present evidence in his own behalf. Notice of the hearing shall be given to
the permittee at least five (5) days prior to the date of hearing.
   (c)   Notice may be served by depositing in the mail a true copy of the
notice enclosed in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid and addressed to the
permittee at his last-known address. The notice shall include:
   1.   A statement of the time, place and nature of the hearing;
   2.   A short and plain statement of the grounds for revocation or denial.
Notice shall be deemed to have been given at the time of deposit, postage
prepaid, in a facility regularly serviced by the United States Postal Service.
   (d)   The determination of the hearing officer shall be final.
   Sec. 27-16.2(4). Denial of permit or renewal of permit.
   (a)   An applicant for a permit or for the renewal of a permit whose
application is denied shall be notified in writing of the reasons for the
denial. The notice shall further state that the applicant has ten (10) days to
contact the water utility to challenge the grounds for denial.
   (b)   Within ten (10) days of a written application by the applicant the
superintendent or his designate shall hold a hearing on the question. The
applicant shall be given notice pursuant to minor section
27-16.2(3).
   (c)   The determination of the hearing officer shall be final.
(Ord. No. 5023, § 3, 8-6-79; Ord. No. 5756, § 1, 5-2-83; Ord. No. 6208, § 1, 4-
1-85; Ord. No. 9043, § 1, 4-13-98; Ord. No. 9238, § 1, 6-14-99; Ord. No. 9388,
§ 1, 5-22-00; Ord. No. 9977, § 2, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 10359, § 1, 12-12-06, eff.
1-16-07; Ord. No. 10510, § 1, 3-18-08, eff. 7-1-08; Ord. No. 10897, § 1, 5-24-
11, eff. 7-5-11; Ord. No. 11072, § 1, 5-21-13, eff. 7-1-13)
Sec. 27-17. Damaging, defacing water facilities.
If any person shall destroy, deface, impair, injure or wantonly force open any
gate or door, or in any way whatever destroy, injure or deface any part of any
enginehouse, reservoir, standpipe, building or appurtenances, fences, trees,
crops or fixtures or property appertaining to the water department of the city,
such person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(1953 Code, ch. 25, § 9)
Sec. 27-18. Use of device to bypass metering of water prohibited; civil
infraction; minimum penalty; persons liable.
   (a)   No person shall utilize any device or method of connection to the
municipal water system, including without limitation, any spacer or straight
line pipe connection, which may result in delivery of any water to any person
or property without passage of the water through a municipal water meter.
   (b)   It shall be a civil infraction for any person to violate this section.
Any person, firm or corporation found liable for a violation of this section
shall be assessed a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
Any person, firm or corporation found liable for a second violation of this
section shall be assessed a fine of not less than five hundred dollars
($500.00). Any person, firm or corporation found liable for a third or
subsequent violation of this section shall be assessed a fine of not less than
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). No hearing officer may suspend the imposition
of any fine prescribed herein.
   (c)   Whenever a device or method of connection is in violation of this
section, the owner or owners of the private property upon which any part of the
violation occurs and the person who installed the device or method shall be
jointly and severally liable for the violation and for the civil fine
prescribed as punishment therefor.
(Ord. No. 7283, § 1, 9-18-89; Ord. No. 9015, § 3, 2-9-98; Ord. No. 10897, § 1,
5-24-11, eff. 7-5-11)
   Editors Note: Ord. No. 4656, § 1, adopted May 23, 1977, specifically amended
the Code by repealing §
27-18. The former section pertained to outdoor water usage limitation, and had
been derived from Ord. No. 4490, § 1, adopted May 24, 1976. Subsequently, § 1
of Ord. No. 7283, adopted Sept. 18, 1989, added a new §
27-18.
Sec. 27-19. Installation of ultra-low-flush water closets in low income owner-
occupied housing.
The director shall establish and administer a program to provide for the
purchase and installation of ultra-low-flush water closets in pre-qualified
low-income, owner-occupied customer dwellings and for the purchase of ultra-
low-flush water closets in city-owned low income housing units. The director
shall develop an application form to be utilized by low- income customers who
meet standard poverty-level income threshold guidelines as a function of family
size to apply for the assistance pursuant to this program.
(Ord. No. 8598, § 1, 11-13-95)
   Editors Note: Ordinance No. 8458, § 1, adopted March 6, 1995, repealed
section
27-19. Formerly such section pertained to incentives for the installation of
ultra-low-flow water closets and derived from Ord. No. 7314, § 1, 11-20-89 and
Ord. No. 7366, § 1, 3-12-90.
Sec. 27-20.   Large quantity water users.
   (a)   A large quantity water user may not connect to the city public water
system or use city water except as provided by this section.
   (b)   Application to become a large quantity water user.
   (1)   An applicant must submit to the director a sustainable water service
application, which must include a water conservation plan, if any of the
following apply:
      a.   An applicant will be a new customer, and the applicant's projection
of the applicant's water use, as reviewed by the director, equals or exceeds
ten thousand (10,000) centum cubic feet ("ccf" with each “ccf” being seven
hundred forty-eight (748) gallons) per month average annual use.
      b.   An applicant is an existing customer and requests water-meter
upsizing that will allow for water use that equals or exceeds ten thousand
(10,000) ccf per month average annual use at a premises or location.
      c.   An applicant is an existing customer whose water use equals or
exceeds ten thousand (10,000) ccf per month average annual use and requests
water-meter upsizing.
   (2)   For undeveloped property, a sustainable water service application must
be submitted at the time the applicant submits for any development
entitlements. An applicant who will become or is a large quantity water user on
previously developed property must submit a sustainable water service
application at the time the applicant requests water-meter upsizing.
   (3)   The sustainable water service application must identify the phasing of
construction or development, the approximate number and size of the structures
to be served, a reasonable description of the nature and type of water use
proposed on the property, and a reasonable estimate of the projected annual,
monthly, and daily water demand.
   (4)   The water conservation plan must include techniques and technologies
that will reduce the consumption of water, reduce the loss or waste of water,
improve the efficiency in the use of water, or establish use of reclaimed water
by the large quantity water user. The techniques and technologies identified in
the plan need to have direct benefit to the hydrologic system within the Tucson
Basin.
   (5)   If the location is within one mile of the Tucson Water Reclaimed Water
Distribution System, the water conservation plan shall include information
about the cost of a connection to the reclaimed water distribution system and
about the suitability of reclaimed water for use at the facility.
   (6)   The water service application and water conservation plan are public
records, subject to disclosure under the Arizona Public Records Law, A.R.S.
Section 39-121, et seq.
   (c)   City review of sustainable water service applications and water
conservation plans.
   (1)   The director will review properly completed sustainable water service
applications and water conservation plans. The director may require additional
information to be submitted as the director deems necessary, and the applicant
must submit any additional information requested within sixty (60) days of
receiving the request.
   (2)   The director will schedule the water service application and water
conservation plan for consideration by the City of Tucson Mayor and Council as
a numbered item on a mayor and council regular session within two months after
reviewing the following elements of the water service application and water
conservation plan and determining that these elements have been completely and
correctly addressed by the applicant:
      a.   That the sustainable water service application and water
conservation plan demonstrate that the large quantity water user will undertake
to use water as efficiently as is practicable and to ensure that water is not
wasted. In determining whether water will be used as efficiently as is
practicable, the director will consider if the applicant's facility is existing
and the practicability of retrofitting the existing facility with water
conserving technologies and practices.
      b.   That the proposed water use is consistent with the city's available
water resources.
      c.   That the applicant's water use would be of sufficient economic
benefit to warrant the large quantity use of water. In reviewing this element,
the Director must determine whether the applicant's water use would be
consistent with the strategies outlined in the City's Climate Action Plan
("Tucson Resilient Together") and the One Water 2100 Plan.
      d.   That the applicant has agreed to use reclaimed water to offset at
least thirty percent (30%) of its water use or such other percentage as the
director determines is the maximum use of reclaimed water that is warranted for
the applicant's facility, given the facility's proximity to the reclaimed water
system.
      e.   That the proposed water use will support a key industry consistent
with the city's economic development and education strategic plan.
      f.   That the impact of the water use is consistent with the city's
designation of assured water supply under A.R.S. Section 45-476.
      g.   That the applicant has proposed extraordinary conservation
techniques and technologies in the water conservation plan.
      h.   Whether the applicant will convey or assign to the city all legal
rights to a physical water supply that will fully offset the applicant's
projected water use, which water supply, when assigned to the city, will meet
all requirements of A.R.S. Section 45-476, and the regulations adopted by the
Arizona Department of Water Resources (DWR) to implement that section.
      i.   The applicant's technical, financial, and managerial competence to
implement the elements of an application and conservation plan.
      j.   Any other information the director deems relevant.
   (d)   Mayor and Council Approval of Water Service Application and Water
Conservation Plans.
   (1)   The mayor and council shall consider whether a water service
application and water conservation plan meet the criteria established above in
subsection 27-20(c)(2). The mayor and council may approve, deny, or return a
water service application and water conservation plan for submission of
additional information to the director. A mayor and council-approved water
service application and water conservation plan will be signed and executed by
the applicant and the city and will be a binding water service contract.
   (e)   A large quantity water user who becomes a customer of the city is
subject to all terms and conditions of service as specified by this section. As
a term and condition of continued water service for a large quantity water
user, both of the following must occur:
   (1)   A large quantity water user must submit an updated water conservation
plan to the director every five (5) years.
   (2)   The director determines, after consultation with the City's Chief
Relience Officer, that the updated water conservation plan demonstrates that
the large quantity water user will use water as efficiently as is practicable
and ensure that water is not wasted.
   (f)   Terms and conditions of service for large quantity water users.
   (1)   In addition to the other terms and conditions of water service as
specified by this chapter, the following are terms and conditions of service of
a large quantity water user:
      a.   The large quantity water user may not in any year use water in
excess of one hundred twenty percent (120%) of the amount set out in the
applicant's water service application and water conservation plan, as approved
and adopted by the mayor and council.
      b.   The large quantity water user must implement, operate, and maintain
all use of reclaimed water, techniques, and technologies consistent with the
large quantity water user's most recently approved water conservation plan.
   (2)   In addition to any other sanction available under this chapter, the
director may suspend water service to a large quantity water user who violates
this subsection. The director will provide notice of any discontinuation of
water service, which may be reviewed under Section
27-50 of the Tucson City Code. If water service is suspended under this
subsection, the water service will not be restored until the large quantity
water user has come into compliance with the requirements of this subsection.
(Ord. No. 12188, § 3, 8-19-25)
Sec. 27-21.   Additional remedies.
   (a)   A large quantity water user who violates any provision of Section
27-20, in addition to any other sanction authorized by this chapter, is subject
to a civil sanction of not more than the following amounts:
   (1)   Two hundred percent (200%) of the monthly charges for water used, or
estimated to have been used, in violation of Section
27-20, if the violation is the large quantity water user's first violation and
the violation continued for less than one year.
   (2)   Five hundred percent (500%) of the monthly charges for water used, or
estimated to have been used, in violation of Section
27-20, if the violation is the large quantity water user's second violation or
if the violation continued for more than one year but less than two years.
   (3)   One thousand percent (1,000%) of the monthly charges for water used,
or estimated to have been used, in violation of Section
27-20, if the violation is the large quantity water user's third violation or
if the violation continued for more than two (2) years but less than three (3)
years.
   (4)   Two thousand percent (2,000%) of the monthly charges for water used,
or estimated to have been used, in violation of Section
27-20, if the violation is the large quantity water user's fourth or more
violation or if the violation continued for more than three years.
   (5)   After any violation of Section
27-20 above that is a user's second or greater violation, Tucson Water may
install, at the user's expense, a water restricting device to restrict flow
rates to those parameters established in the approved water user agreement and
water conservation plan. The applicant will pay for Tucson Water's cost to
install the device, whether by Tucson Water staff or through a City of Tucson
Job On-Call ("JOC") Contractor.
   (b)   If, as a result of a large quantity water user's violation of Section
27-20 or state law, the city is assessed a civil penalty or is ordered to take
remedial action by DWR, the large quantity water user must pay to the city the
amount of the civil penalty, along with all costs and expenses incurred by the
city due to the large water user's violation.
(Ord. No. 12188, § 3, 8-19-25)
Secs. 27-22 – 27-27. Reserved.
ARTICLE II.
RATES AND CHARGES
Sec. 27-28. Established by mayor and council.
The rates for the use of water for consumers shall be established by the mayor
and council, subject to change, revision and modification in their discretion.
(1953 Code, ch. 25, § 19)
Sec. 27-29. Liability of customer of record or property owner for charges.
The customer of record, as indicated in the utility's records, is responsible
for paying all charges for the provision of water service to a property or
premises, regardless of whether the customer of record or another party has
actually used the water delivered to the property. The utility may elect to
pursue collection of any outstanding charges from the owner of the property if
the customer of record does not pay for any outstanding charges. In such a
case, ownership of the property or premises shall be determined by reference to
public records maintained by the Pima County Recorder's Office. The property
owner shall have the right to appeal the water charges pursuant to section
27-50(2).
If there is no customer of record, and a monthly meter reading indicates usage
of water at the property or premises, the owner of the property shall be
responsible for paying the water charges due. The property owner shall have the
right to appeal the water charges pursuant to section
27-50(2).
(1953 Code, ch. 25, § 18; Ord. No. 9763, § 1, 9-9-02)
Sec. 27-30. Service charge.
Any person wishing to discontinue the use of water supplied from the department
of water of the city must give notice thereof at the office, or the charge for
water will be entered until such notice has been given. The charge for
reactivation of water service or the transfer of water service from one
customer to another will be twenty-two dollars and sixty-nine cents ($22.69).
The charge for a customer to activate the fire protection (sprinkler service)
or transfer of fire protection (sprinkler service) from one customer to another
will be five dollars and forty cents ($5.40).
(1953 Code, ch. 25, § 14; Ord. No. 2665, § 1, 9-21-64; Ord. No. 3394, § 1, 1-
12-70; Ord. No. 4626, § 3, 3-3-77; Ord. No. 5355, § 1, 4-20-81; Ord. No. 8446,
§ 1, 2-13-95; Ord. No. 9238, § 2, 6-14-99; Ord. No. 9977, § 2, 5-24-04; Ord.
No. 10359, § 2, 12-12-06, eff. 1-16-07; Ord. No. 10510, § 2, 3-18-08, eff. 7-1-
08; Ord. No. 11072, § 2, 5-21-13, eff. 7-1-13)
Sec. 27-31. Definitions.
In this article, unless the context otherwise requires:
   (1)   Basic volume charge means a monthly water charge per Ccf for all
monthly water use.
   (2)   Ccf means one hundred (100) cubic feet of water and is equal to seven
hundred forty-eight (748) gallons.
   (3)   Commercial means a customer classification of service wherein family
units do not normally reside and includes, but is not limited to, motels,
hotels, rest homes, fraternal organizations, laundries, service stations,
bottling works, hospitals, restaurants, wholesale, retail and other business
establishments, governmental offices or organizations.
   (4)   Community garden means a customer classification of service where
water is provided by way of an irrigation meter to an area of land operated for
not for profit individuals or groups to grow and harvest food crops primarily
for the use of its members who typically cultivate individual garden plots.
   (5)   Construction water means water service provided under the terms of
section
27-16.2 for water use on construction projects, such as utility pipeline
installations or repairs, street or highway construction, site grading, dust
control, and concrete mixing. Construction water may not be used to replace
water that would otherwise be available from a metered private plumbing or
irrigation system, and may not be used to fill swimming pools or landscape
features. Construction water may not be resold to any third party.
   (6)   Department means the city department of water.
   (7)   Director means the chief officer of the department of water and is the
officer designated as the superintendent of the water department in chapter X,
section 8 of the Charter.
   (8)   Governmental customer means the United States and any agency or
department of the United States, any customer on land owned by the United
States in trust for a Native American tribe or part of a federally-established
reservation, the State of Arizona and any agency or department of the State of
Arizona, and any political subdivision of the State of Arizona, including any
County, any Arizona City or Town, a School District, a Flood Control District,
or a Fire District. The rates established in Section
27-33 for City of Tucson and customers located in other incorporated
jurisdictions will apply to any governmental customer, even if the governmental
customer is located in unincorporated Pima County. Governmental customers shall
not be charged the differential rate.
   (9)   Industrial means a customer classification of services that use at
least five million (5,000,000) gallons of water per month for manufacturing
purposes at one (1) geographically contiguous location or use sixty million
(60,000,000) or more gallons of water in any calendar year for manufacturing
purposes at one (1) geographically contiguous location; and schools in the
Tucson Unified School District (TUSD) by prior contract with the city.
   (10)   Mobile home park with sub-meters means a mobile home park classified
as a multi- family customer that utilizes sub-meters to separately meter and
bill each user within the mobile home park.
   (11)   Multi-family means a customer classification consisting of more than
three (3) residential units served by one (1) master meter.
   (12)   Nonparticipating applicant for service shall mean an applicant for
new water connection to a subdivision, or parcel of land that has not
participated in the cost of the installation of the water supply main to which
the connection will be made.
   (13)   Reclaimed water means wastewater which has received postsecondary
treatment.
   (14)   Residential means a customer classification consisting of one (1)
residential unit (single-family) or two (2) or three (3) residential units
(duplex-triplex) served by one (1) master meter.
   (15)   Summer shall mean, for the purposes of computing water rates, the
period of time from March 1 through November 30. This change will be effective
starting with March 1, 2024, summer period.
   (16)   Summer surcharges shall mean an amount charged per Ccf for summer
monthly water use in excess of the average monthly winter consumption of water.
The Tier 1 summer surcharge applies to all monthly water use in excess of the
average winter monthly consumption of water and is in addition to the basic
volume charge. The Tier 2 summer surcharge applies to all monthly water use in
excess of one hundred forty-five (145) percent of the average winter monthly
consumption of water and is an addition to the basic volume charge and the Tier
1 summer surcharge. A customer with zero consumption during the winter will be
charged for all consumption during the summer months at the block 2 rate (base
plus Tier 1 summer surcharge).
   (17)   Water facilities means booster plants, storage tanks, wells, pumping
equipment, distribution and service lines and all other appurtenances to a
water system other than meters.
   (18)   Winter shall mean, for the purpose of computing water rates, the
period of time from December 1 through February 28 (February 29 in leap years).
This change will be in effect starting with the December 1, 2023 winter period.
(Ord. No. 4489, § 3, 5-24-76; Ord. No. 4496, §§ 1, 2, 6-7-76; Ord. No. 4550, §
1, 8-10-76; Ord. No. 4626, § 4, 3-3-77; Ord. No. 5235, § 1, 10-6-80; Ord. No.
6327, § 1, 11-4-85; Ord. No. 7171, § 1, 4-17-89; Ord. No. 8024, § 1, 4-12-93;
Ord. No. 8120, §§ 1, 2, 9-7-93; Ord. No. 8121, § 1, 9-7-93; Ord. No. 8483, § 1,
5-15-95; Ord. No. 8768, §§ 1, 2, 10-28-96; Ord. No. 9156, § 1, 11-9-98; Ord.
No. 9477, § 1, 10-23-00; Ord. No. 96-4, § 1, 9-10-01; Ord. No. 9763, § 1, 9-9-
02; Ord. No. 9979, § 1, 6-7-04; Ord. No. 10415, § 1, 6-12-07, eff. 7-9-07; Ord.
No. 11993, § 1, 3-7-23; Ord. No. 11982, § 1, 1-11-23; Ord. No. 12052, § 1, 10-
17-23)
Sec. 27-32. Charges for water service.
   Charges for water utility service shall be made at monthly intervals and
shall, to the extent possible, be consistent with the policy for charging for
water in direct proportion to the cost of securing, developing and delivering
water to the customers of the city water system. Charges for water utility
service for customers within unincorporated Pima County, but not governmental
customers, will be set in proportion to costs, plus a reasonable differential.
Water charges will be computed through the summation of service charge, the
monthly water use charge, the water supply fee surcharge, the conservation
charge and summer surcharges where applicable.
   In addition to cost-of-service considerations, the differential charged to
customers within unincorporated Pima County may be established and structured
to advance critical policy considerations, including but not limited to
supporting annexation and incorporation; and promoting environmental
sustainability and water conservation, particularly in areas outside the city
limits where the city has limited powers to promote those interests.
(Ord. No. 4489, § 4, 5-24-76; Ord. No. 4550, § 2, 8-10-76; Ord. No. 4626, § 5,
3-3-77; Ord. No. 6222, § 1, 4-22-85; Ord. No. 8024, § 2, 4-12-93; Ord. No.
9477, § 1, 10-23-00; Ord. No. 9763, § 1, 9-9-02; Ord. No. 10535, § 1, 6-3-08,
eff. 7-7-08; Ord. No. 10673, § 1, 6-2-09, eff. 7-6-09; Ord. No. 11881, § 1, 10-
19-21; Ord. No. 11993, § 1, 3-7-23; Ord. No. 12137, § 1, 12-10-24; Ord. No.
12178, § 1, 6-17-25)
Sec. 27-32.1. Monthly reclaimed water service charges.
   For the purposes of computing reclaimed water charges:
   (1)   The service charge shall be levied whether or not any water is
provided and is hereby fixed at the following per month per connection:
                      MONTHLY SERVICE CHARGE RATE SCHEDULES BY SERVICE SIZE FOR
Service Size (inches) INCORPORATED AREAS WITHIN PIMA COUNTY
                      FY 2023 FY 2024 FY 2025 FY 2026 FY 2027
                      MONTHLY SERVICE CHARGE RATE SCHEDULES BY SERVICE SIZE FOR
Service Size (inches) INCORPORATED AREAS WITHIN PIMA COUNTY
                      FY 2023   FY 2024   FY 2025   FY 2026   FY 2027
5/8                   $10.98    $11.78    $12.64    $13.56    $14.55
1                     $20.20    $21.68    $23.26    $24.96    $26.78
1 ½                  $35.58    $38.17    $40.96    $43.95    $47.16
2                     $54.03    $57.97    $62.20    $66.74    $71.62
2 ½                  $78.63    $84.37    $90.53    $97.14    $104.23
3                     $103.23   $110.76   $118.85   $127.53   $136.83
4                     $173.95   $186.65   $200.28   $214.90   $230.59
6                     $351.07   $376.70   $404.20   $433.71   $465.37
8                     $527.58   $566.09   $607.42   $651.76   $699.34
10                    $804.33   $863.05   $926.05   $993.65   $1,066.19
12                    $1,327.09 $1,423.96 $1,527.91 $1,639.45 $1,759.13
 
   (2)   In addition to the applicable service charge, the charge for reclaimed
water shall be:
   FY 2019: $2.00 per Ccf ($872.00 per acre-foot).
   FY 2023: $2.13 per Ccf ($928.00 per acre-foot)
   FY 2024: $2.26 per Ccf ($983.00 per acre-foot)
   FY 2025: $2.38 per Ccf ($1,037.00 per acre-foot)
   FY 2026: $2.51 per Ccf ($1,094.00 per acre-foot)
   The foregoing service charges and rates may be adjusted every year during
and as a part of the annual water rate adjustment.
(Ord. No. 6327, § 2, 11-4-85; Ord. No. 6411, § 1, 4-28-86; Ord. No. 6692, § 1,
4-13-87; Ord. No. 6925, § 1, 4-11-88; Ord. No. 7171, § 2, 4-17-89; Ord. No.
7391, § 1, 4-16-90; Ord. No. 8024, § 3, 4-12-93; Ord. No. 9156, § 2, 11-9-98;
Ord. No. 9477, § 1, 10-23-00; Ord. No. 96-4, § 1, 9-10-01; Ord. No. 9763, § 1,
9-9-02; Ord. No. 9842, § 1, 5-12-03; Ord. No. 9979, § 1, 6-7-04; Ord. No.
10305, § 1, 7-6-06; Ord. No. 10415, § 1, 6-12-07; Ord. No. 10535, § 1, 6-3-08,
eff. 7-7-08; Ord. No. 10673, § 1, 6-2-09, eff. 7-6-09; Ord. No. 10795, § 1, 5-
25-10, eff. 7-5-10; Ord. No. 10896, § 1, 5-24-11, eff. 7-5-11; Ord. No. 10987,
§ 1, 5-22-12, eff. 7-2-12; Ord. No. 11073, § 1, 5-21-13, eff. 7-1-13; Ord. No.
11177, § 1, 6-3-14, eff. 7-4-14; Ord. No. 11270, § 1, 5-19-15, eff. 7-6-15;
Ord. No. 11361, § 1, 5-17-16; Ord. No. 11551, § 1, 5-22-18; Ord. No. 11982, §
1, 1-11-23; Ord. No. 12052, § 1, 10-17-23; Ord. No. 12178, § 1, 6-17-25)
Note:
   FY 2023 rates effective 2-13-23
   FY 2024 rates effective 7-3-23
   FY 2025 rates effective 7-1-24
   FY 2026 rates effective 8-4-25
   FY 2027 rates effective 7-6-26
Sec. 27-33. Monthly potable water service charges.
   For the purposes of computing monthly water charges:
   (1)   Monthly service charges shown in the following table applies to all
customer classes. The fee shall be charged whether or not any water is
provided.
                      MONTHLY SERVICE CHARGE RATE SCHEDULES BY SERVICE SIZE FOR
Service Size (inches) INCORPORATED AREAS WITHIN PIMA COUNTY
                      FY 2023 FY 2024 FY 2025 FY 2026 FY 2027
                      MONTHLY SERVICE CHARGE RATE SCHEDULES BY SERVICE SIZE FOR
Service Size (inches) INCORPORATED AREAS WITHIN PIMA COUNTY
                      FY 2023   FY 2024   FY 2025   FY 2026   FY 2027
5/8                   $16.33    $17.52    $18.81    $19.22    $21.72
¾                    $22.03    $23.89    $25.63    $26.20    $29.60
1                     $33.42    $36.61    $39.29    $40.15    $45.37
1 ½                  $61.91    $68.42    $73.43    $75.05    $84.79
2                     $96.09    $106.59   $114.40   $116.91   $132.09
2 ½                  $141.67   $157.49   $169.02   $172.73   $195.16
3                     $187.24   $208.39   $223.64   $228.55   $258.23
4                     $318.27   $354.71   $380.68   $389.04   $439.56
6                     $646.43   $721.17   $773.96   $790.96   $893.66
8                     $973.44   $1,086.35 $1,165.87 $1,191.48 $1,346.19
10                    $1,486.18 $1,658.94 $1,780.36 $1,819.48 $2,055.74
12                    $2,454.68 $2,740.50 $2,941.08 $3005.69  $3,395.98
 
                      MONTHLY SERVICE CHARGE RATE SCHEDULES BY SERVICE
Service Size (inches) SIZE FOR UNINCORPORATED PIMA COUNTY
                      FY 2026 FY 2027
                      MONTHLY SERVICE CHARGE RATE SCHEDULES BY SERVICE
Service Size (inches) SIZE FOR UNINCORPORATED PIMA COUNTY
                      FY 2026   FY 2027
5/8                   $22.87    $23.89
¾                    $31.18    $32.56
1                     $47.78    $49.90
1 ½                  $89.30    $93.26
2                     $139.13   $145.30
2 ½                  $205.55   $214.68
3                     $271.98   $284.05
4                     $462.95   $483.51
6                     $941.24   $983.03
8                     $1,417.86 $1,480.81
10                    $2,165.18 $2,261.31
12                    $3,576.77 $3,735.58
 
   (2)   Monthly water use charges in addition to the service charge shall be
applicable to each service connection and shall be per Ccf and vary with
customer classification and volumes used according to the following table:
RATE SCHEDULES BY CUSTOMER CLASSES FOR INCORPORATED PIMA COUNTY
   RATE SCHEDULES BY CUSTOMER CLASSES FOR AREAS WITHIN INCORPORATED PIMA COUNTY
 
Residential Single-Family $/Ccfs
                          FY 2023 FY 2024 FY 2025 FY 2026 FY 2027
1 - 7 Ccf                 $2.07   $2.18   $2.31   $2.32   $2.58
8 - 15 Ccf                $3.82   $4.02   $4.24   $4.25   $4.70
16 - 30 Ccf               $8.39   $8.50   $8.74   $8.56   $9.23
Over 30 Ccf               $12.93  $13.10  $13.31  $12.87  $13.65
 
 
Residential Duplex-Triplex $/Ccfs
                           FY 2023 FY 2024 FY 2025 FY 2026 FY 2027
1 -10 Ccf                  $2.07   $2.18   $2.31   $2.32   $2.58
11 - 20 Ccf                $3.82   $4.02   $4.24   $4.25   $4.70
21 -35 Ccf                 $8.39   $8.50   $8.74   $8.56   $9.23
Over 35 Ccf                $12.93  $13.10  $13.31  $12.87  $13.65
 
 
Multi-Family        $/Ccfs
                    FY 2023 FY 2024 FY 2025 FY 2026 FY 2027
Basic Volume Charge $3.42   $3.57   $3.74   $3.75   $4.08
 
Mobile Home Park With Sub-Meters $/Ccf
                                 FY 2023 FY 2024 FY 2025 FY 2026 FY 2027
Mobile Home $/Ccf
Park With   FY 2023 FY 2024  FY 2025    FY 2026     FY 2027
Sub-Meters
Basic
Volume      $2.56   $2.68    $2.80      $2.78       $3.05
Charge
Commercial  $/Ccf
                    FY 2024  FY 2024    FY 2025     FY 2025
                    July 3,  Effectiv e July 1 2024 Effective
            FY 2023 2023-    March 1,   - February  February 3, FY 2026 FY 2027
                    February 2024       3, 2025     2025
                    29, 2024
Basic
Volume      $3.36   $3.49    $3.43      $3.43       $3.59       $3.57   $3.91
Charge
Tier 1
Summer
Surcharge:
for usage
during
March-      $1.08   $1.14    $1.14      $1.14       $1.19       $1.19   $1.30
November
above 100%
of winter
(December-
February)
average
Tier 2
Summer
Surcharge:
for usage
during
March-
November
above 145%  $0.29   $0.31    $0.31      $0.31       $0.32       $0.31   $0.35
of winter
(December-
February)
average,
added to
Tier 1
Surcharge
 
 
Industrial  $/Ccf
(more than
5 Mg per            FY 2024
month &             July 3,  FY 2024   FY 2025   FY 2025
Tucson      FY 2023 2023-    Effective Effective Effective   FY 2026 FY 2027
Unified             February March 1,  March 1,  February 3,
School              29, 2024 2024      2024      2024
District by
contract)
Basic
Volume      $3.38   $3.53    $3.50     $3.50     $3.66       $3.65   $3.99
Charge
Tier 1
Summer
Surcharge:
for usage
during
March-      $1.08   $1.14    $1.14     $1.14     $1.19       $1.19   $1.30
November
above 100%
of winter
(December-
February)
average
Tier 2
Summer
Surcharge:
for usage
during
March-
November
above 145%  $0.29   $0.31    $0.31     $0.31     $0.32       $0.31   $0.35
of winter
(December-
February)
average,
added to
Tier 1
Surcharge
 
 
Construction Water  $/Ccf
                    FY 2023 FY 2024 FY 2025 FY 2026 FY 2027
Basic Volume Charge $3.70   $4.02   $4.20   $4.18   $4.58
 
 
Community Garden    $/Ccf
Basic Volume Charge FY 2023 FY 2024 FY 2025 FY 2026 FY 2027
Small Agriculture   $2.56   $2.67   $2.79   $2.78   $3.04
Basic Volume Charge                         $2.78
 
   (3)   Monthly water use charges in addition to the service charge shall be
applicable to each service connection and shall be per Ccf and vary with
customer classification and volumes used according to the following table:
   RATE SCHEDULES BY CUSTOMER CLASSES FOR UNINCORPORATED PIMA COUNTY
 
Residential Single-Family $/Ccfs
                          FY 2026 FY 2027
1-7 Ccf                   $2.76   $2.84
8-15 Ccf                  $5.06   $5.64
16-30 Ccf                 $10.18  $12.00
Over 30 Ccf               $15.31  $19.11
 
Residential Duplex-Triplex $/Ccf
                           FY 2026 FY 2027
1 - 10 Ccf                 $2.76   $2.84
11 - 20 Ccf                $5.06   $5.64
21 - 35 Ccf                $10.18  $12.00
Over 35 Ccf                $15.31  $19.11
Multi-Family               $/Ccf
                           FY 2026 FY 2027
Basic Volume Charge        $4.43   $4.49
 
Mobile Home Park with Sub-Meters                               $/Ccf
                                                               FY 2026 FY 2027
Basic Volume Charge                                            $3.31   $3.36
Community Garden                                               $3.31   $3.35
Basic Volume Charge
Small Agriculture                                              $3.31
Basic Volume Charge
Commercial                                                     $/Ccf
                                                              FY 2026 FY 2027
Basic Volume Charge                                            $4.25   $4.38
Tier 1 Summer Surcharge: for usage during March-November above $1.42   $1.43
100% of winter (December-February) average
Tier 2 Summer Surcharge: for usage during March-November above
145% of winter (December-February) average, added to Tier 1    $0.37   $0.38
Surcharge
Industrial (more than 5 Mg per month & Tucson Unified School   FY 2026 FY 2027
District by contract)
Basic Volume Charge                                            $4.34   $4.43
Tier 1 Summer Surcharge: for usage during March-November above $1.42   $1.43
100% of winter (December-February) average
Tier 2 Summer Surcharge: for usage during March-November above
145% of winter (December-February) average, added to Tier 1    $0.37   $0.38
Surcharge
 
 
Construction Water  $/Ccf
                    FY 2026 FY 2027
Basic Volume Charge $4.97   $5.04
 
   (4)   The water supply fee surcharge shall be in addition to the service
charge and water use charges for all customer classes and apply to all monthly
water use at the rate of one dollar and twenty-five cents ($1.25).
   (5)   The conservation charge shall be in addition to the service charge and
water use charges for all potable water customer classes and apply to all
monthly water use at the rate of fif-teen cents ($0.15) per Ccf.
(Ord. No. 4497, § 1, 6-7-76; Ord. No. 4549, § 1, 8-10-76; Ord. No. 4550, § 3,
8-10-76; Ord. No. 4626, § 6, 3-3-77; Ord. No. 4763, § 2, 2-27-78; Ord. No.
4928, § 1, 1-8-79; Ord. No. 5137, § 1, 4-21-80; Ord. No. 5355, § 2, 4-20-81;
Ord. No. 5557, § 1, 5-3-82; Ord. No. 5756, § 2, 5-2-83; Ord. No. 6001, § 1, 4-
23-84; Ord. No. 6222, § 2, 4-22-85; Ord. No. 6411, § 2, 4-28-86; Ord. No. 6692,
§ 2, 4-13-87; Ord. No. 6925, § 2, 4-11-88; Ord. No. 7171, § 3, 4-17-89; Ord.
No. 7391, § 2, 4-16-90; Ord. No. 7607, § 1, 4-15-91; Ord. No. 7804, § 1, 4-20-
92; Ord. No. 8024, §, 4-12-93; Ord. No. 8120, § 3, 9-7-93; Ord. No. 8480, § 1,
4-10-95; Ord. No. 8483, § 2, 5-15-95; Ord. No. 8768, § 3, 10-28-96; Ord. No.
9156, § 3, 11-9-98; Ord. No. 9477, § 1, 10-23-00; Ord. No. 96-4, § 1, 9-10-01;
Ord. No. 9704, § 2, 5-13-02; Ord. No. 9763, § 1, 9-9-02; Ord. No. 9842, § 1, 5-
12-03; Ord. No. 9979, § 1, 6-7-04; Ord. No. 10305, § 1, 7-6-06; Ord. No. 10359,
§ 2, 12-12-06, eff. 1-16-07; Ord. No. 10415, § 1, 6-12-07; Ord. No. 10535, § 1,
6-3-08, eff. 7-7-08; Ord. No. 10673, § 1, 6-2-09, eff. 7-6-09; Ord. No. 10795,
§ 1, 5-25-10, eff. 7-5-10; Ord. No. 10896, § 1, 5-24-11, eff. 7-5-11; Ord. No.
10987, § 1, 5-22-12, eff. 7-2-12; Ord. No. 11073, § 1, 5-21-13, eff. 7-1-13;
Ord. No. 11177, § 1, 6-3-14, eff. 7-4-14; Ord. No. 11270, § 1, 5-19-15, eff. 7-
6-15; Ord. No. 11361, § 1, 5-17-16; Ord. No. 11551, § 1, 5-22-18; Ord. No.
11881, § 1, 10-19-21; Ord. No. 11982, § 1, 1-11-23; Ord. No. 12052, § 1, 10-17-
23; Ord. No. 12137, § 1, 12-10- 24; Ord. No. 12178, § 1, 6-17-25; Ord. No.
12179, § 1, 6-17-25)
Note:
   FY 2023 rates effective 2-13-23
   FY 2024 rates effective 7-3-23
   FY 2025 rates effective 7-1-24
   FY 2026 rates effective 8-7-25
   FY 2027 rates effective 7-6-26
Sec. 27-34. Charges for fire protection service.
Charges for fire protection service shall be made monthly and according to the
following table:
Service Size (inches) FY 2023 FY 2024 FY 2025 FY 2026 FY 2027
Service Size (inches)       FY 2023 FY 2024 FY 2025 FY 2026 FY 2027
2" w/ detector check valve  $15.14  $16.18  $17.29  $18.50  $19.79
3" w/ detector check valve  $25.45  $27.54  $29.43  $31.49  $33.68
4" w/ detector check valve  $39.86  $43.44  $46.43  $49.67  $53.13
6" w/ detector check valve  $76.94  $84.34  $90.14  $96.43  $103.16
8" w/ detector check valve  $114.01 $125.24 $133.85 $143.19 $153.18
10" w/ detector check valve $172.71 $189.99 $203.05 $217.22 $232.38
12" w/ detector check valve $281.88 $310.41 $331.74 $354.90 $379.66
 
(Ord. No. 4489, § 6, 5-24-76; Ord. No. 4626, § 7, 3-3-77; Ord. No. 4656, § 1,
5-23-77; Ord. No. 4763, § 3, 2-27-78; Ord. No. 4928, § 2, 1-8-79; Ord. No.
5137, § 2, 4-21-80; Ord. No. 5355, § 3, 5-2-83; Ord. No. 5557, § 2, 5-3-82;
Ord. No. 5756, § 3, 5-2-83; Ord. No. 6001, § 2, 4-23-84; Ord. No. 6222, § 3, 4-
22-85; Ord. No. 6411, § 3, 4-2-86; Ord. No. 6692, § 3, 4-13-87; Ord. No. 6925,
§ 3, 4-11-88; Ord. No. 7171, § 4, 4-17-89; Ord. No. 7391, § 3, 4-16-90; Ord.
No. 96-4, § 1, 9-10-01; Ord. No. 9763, § 1, 9-9-02; Ord. No. 10415, § 1, 6-12-
07; Ord. No. 10535, § 1, 6-3-08, eff. 7-7-08; Ord. No. 10673, § 1, 6-2-09, eff.
7-6-09; Ord. No. 10795, § 1, 5-25-10, eff. 7-5-10; Ord. No. 10896, § 1, 5-24-
11, eff. 7-5-11; Ord. No. 10987, § 1, 5-22-12, eff. 7-2-12; Ord. No. 11073, §
1, 5-21-13, eff. 7-1-13; Ord. No. 11177, § 1, 6-3-14, eff. 7-4-14; Ord. No.
11270, § 1, 5-19-15, eff. 7-6-15; Ord. No. 11361, § 1, 5-17-16; Ord. No. 11551,
§ 1, 5-22-18; Ord. No. 11982, § 1, 1-11-23; Ord. No. 12052, § 1, 10-17-23)
Note:
   FY 2023 rates effective 2-13-23
   FY 2024 rates effective 7-3-23
   FY 2025 rates effective 7-1-24
   FY 2026 rates effective 7-7-25
   FY 2027 rates effective 7-6-26
Sec. 27-35. Charges for installation of water service connections.
There shall be an installation charge for all water service connections.
   (1)   Charges for the installation of a metered water service connection,
including the service line, the meter, an automatic meter reading device and
pavement replacement, shall vary with the size of the meter installed according
to the following table:
 
Size of Meter (inches) Charge
5/8                    $2,333.68
3/4                    2,325.69
1                      2,469.08
1 1/2                  3,073.56
2                      3,444.53
 
   (2)   Charges for the installation of a metered water service connection,
including the service line, the meter and an automatic meter reading device,
which does not require pavement replacement, shall vary with the size of the
meter installed according to the following table:
 
Size of Meter (inches) Charge
5/8                    $1,454.68
3/4                    1,446.69
1                      1,590.08
1 1/2                  2,194.56
2                      2,565.53
 
   (3)   Charges for the installation of multiple 5/8" metered water service
connections at the same location, including the service lines and the automated
read meters, with pavement replacement, shall vary with the number of
connections according to the following table:
No. of Meters Charge
No. of Meters Charge
2             $2,939.60
3             3,611.73
4             4,178.63
5             4,988.95
6             5,469.26
7             6,969.41
8             7,536.81
9             8,708.21
10            9,275.13
11            10,430.79
12            10,997.68
 
   (4)   Charges for the installation of multiple 5/8" metered water service
connections at the same location, including the service lines and the meters,
which do not require pavement replacement shall vary with the number of
connections according to the following table:
No. of Meters Charge
No. of Meters Charge
2             $2,060.60
3             2,715.48
4             3,282.38
5             3,851.20
6             4,331.51
7             4,986.41
8             5,553.81
9             6,213.71
10            6,780.63
11            7,436.04
12            8,002.93
 
   (5)   Charges for the installation of two 1" metered water service
connections in the same trench, including the service lines, the meters, and
pavement replacement, shall be three thousand two hundred twenty-nine dollars
and eighty-five cents ($3,229.85).
   (6)   Charges for the installation of two 1" metered water service
connections in the same trench, including the service lines and the meters,
which do not require pavement replacement, shall be two thousand three hundred
fifty dollars and eighty-five cents ($2,350.85).
   (7)   Meter installation with an automatic meter reading device including
all materials to be installed by Tucson Water, charges shall be in accordance
with the following table:
 
Size of Meter (inches) Charge
5/8                    $475.76
3/4                    467.77
1                      533.57
1 1/2                  785.29
2                      918.23
 
      Charges for meter installations with an automated reading device where
the developer will install the box and bricks on an existing water service line
shall be in accordance with the following table:
 
Size of Meter (inches) Charge
5/8                    $393.66
3/4                    385.67
1                      432.84
1 1/2                  642.36
2                      775.30
 
   (8)   Charges for the installation of an additional metered water connection
at the same time and in the same trench as the installation of fire protection
service shall be in accordance with the current city contract for such work.
The current contract shall be posted in the customer reception area of the
water utility's new development unit and may be reviewed by an applicant for
any type of water service. No administrative fee in addition to that referenced
in section
27-35(9) shall be charged to the applicant. Charges for installation of a meter
on such a service line connection shall be in accordance with the tables in
section
27-35(7).
   (9)   Charges for the installation of unmetered fire protection service,
including any required service lines or piping, shall be in accordance with the
current city contract for such work. The current contract shall be posted in
the customer reception area of the water utility's new development unit and may
be reviewed by an applicant for any type of water service. In addition, an
applicant for fire protection service shall pay an administrative fee of three
hundred seventeen dollars ($317.00) for each such service request.
   (10)   Charges for the installation of a fire hydrant, including the
installation of service lines necessary to provide fire hydrants, shall be in
accordance with the current city contract for such work. The current contract
shall be posted in the customer reception area of the water utility's new
development unit and may be reviewed by an applicant for any type of water
service. In addition, an applicant for a fire hydrant shall pay an
administrative fee of three hundred seventeen dollars ($317.00) for each
service request.
   (11)   Charges for the installation of a consumer requested ball valve on
the property side of the meter shall be based upon the cost of material in
accordance with the following table:
 
Size of Meter (inches) Charge
5/8                    $33.16
3/4                    33.16
1                      70.67
1 1/2                  123.85
2                      192.18
 
   (12)   Charges for relocating an existing meter at the customer's request
shall be in accordance with the following table:
 
Size of Meter (inches) Change in Location of Up to Change in Location of 11 to
                       10 Feet                     20 Feet
5/8                    $608.39                     $754.93
3/4                    608.39                      754.93
1                      665.44                      819.67
1 1/2                  898.42                      1,109.34
2                      1,071.60                    1,328.94
 
Meter relocations of greater than twenty (20) feet shall be charged according
to section
27-35(1) or
27-35(2).
   (13)   When the customer has not exposed the dead at curb for meter
installation Tucson Water will perform the service and the customer will pay a
fee of two hundred forty-six dollars and twenty-eight cents ($246.28).
   (14)   A customer who cancels any new service installation will be charged a
fee of twenty-five dollars and fifty-six cents ($25.56).
   (15)   Whenever reclaimed water signs and poles are needed after initial
installation, the customer will be charged a fee of forty-eight dollars and
twenty-nine cents ($48.29).
   (16)   When a customer needs to have Tucson Water close the valves in the
water system in order to isolate the fire service connection to their property
so a licensed contractor can inspect the fire service, a fee of one hundred
thirty-one dollars and twenty-seven cents ($131.27) will be charged.
   (17)   Charges for uncommon service installations or rare aspects of common
installations shall be based on estimated actual costs and provided in a
written quotation to the applicant.
   (18)   When a major component of an installation must be replaced with a
more costly version of the component (such as a concrete meter box being
replaced with a cast iron meter box), the applicant shall be informed of the
replacement and charged for the more costly version.
   (19)   Unusual actual construction costs in excess of ten (10) percent of
the installation charges established in section
27-35 may be assessed and collected prior to the activation of service.
   (20)   All applicable "pass-through" fees, such as special paving required
for moratorium streets, permit fees, rights-of-way costs, recording fees and
taxes, shall be added to the installation charges in section
27-35.
   (21)   Contractor non-compliant. A new water meter installation that
violates the water department's standards will be brought into compliance and a
fee of seventy-nine dollars and seventy-three cents ($79.73) will be charged to
the contractor.
(Ord. No. 4489, § 7, 5-24-76; Ord. No. 4763, § 4, 2-27-78; Ord. No. 5137, § 3,
4-21-80; Ord. No. 5235, § 2, 10-6-80; Ord. No. 5355, 4, 4-20-81; Ord. No. 5557,
§ 3, 5-3-82; Ord. No. 5756, § 4, 5-2-83; Ord. No. 6222, § 4, 4-22-85; Ord. No.
6692, § 4, 4-13-87; Ord. No. 6925, § 4, 4-11-88; Ord. No. 7171, § 5, 4-17-89;
Ord. No. 7391, § 4, 4-16-90; Ord. No. 7607, § 2, 4-15-91; Ord. No. 7797, § 2,
4-13-92; Ord. No. 8121, § 2, 9-7-93; Ord. No. 8446, § 2, 2-13-95; Ord. No.
8747, § 2, 8-5-96; Ord. No. 8768, § 4, 10-28-96; Ord. No. 9018, § 1, 2-23-98;
Ord. No. 9043, §§ 2, 3, 4-13-98; Ord. No. 9238, § 3, 6-14-99; Ord. No. 9377, §
1, 4-17-00; Ord. No. 9388, § 1, 5-22-00; Ord. No. 9555, § 1, 5-14-01; Ord. No.
9704, § 2, 5-13-02; Ord. No. 9842, § 1, 5-12-03; Ord. No. 9977, § 2, 5-24-04;
Ord. No. 10359, § 2, 12-12-06, eff. 1-16-07; Ord. No. 10510, § 2, 3-18-08, eff.
7-1-08; Ord. No. 10897, § 2, 5-24-11, eff. 7-5-11; Ord. No. 11072, § 2, 5-21-
13, eff. 7-1-13; Ord. No. 11177, § 1, 6-3-14, eff. 7-4-14)
Sec. 27-36. System equity, Central Arizona Project, and areas-specific fees.
   (a)   A system equity fee shall be charged for connections to the potable
system.
   (1)   The system equity fee recovers the infrastructure costs incurred to
provide capacity to serve new users. The fee has been calculated by multiplying
the cost for one gallon of capacity (cost of capacity-generating infrastructure
divided by the gallons of capacity provided by that infrastructure) by the
capacity required by a new connection (as determined by meter size).
   The system equity fee will be used to pay principal and interest on
outstanding water revenue bond debt. Separate recording of fee proceeds and
uses will be maintained.
   (2)   A system equity fee shall be charged for potable metered connections
to the water system, except for (1) construction water meter connections, (2)
connections within isolated systems and, (3) connections within the Peppertree
Plan and Santa Rita Bel Air Plan areas; connections within these two areas will
be charged fees per Section
27-36(b) and Section
27-36(c).
Meter Size (inches) Charge
Meter Size (inches) Charge
5/8                 $1,311.00
3/4                 1,967.00
1                   3,278.00
1 1/2               6,555.00
2                   10,488.00
3                   20,976.00
4                   36,053.00
6                   73,809.00
8                   111,435.00
10                  170,430.00
12                  281,865.00
 
   Charges for replacement of an existing meter with a meter of larger size
shall be computed based on the incremental difference between the system equity
fee for the respective meters at the time of filing the application for meter
change-out. No refunds will be credited for replacement of an existing meter
with a meter of smaller size.
   (b)   A Central Arizona Project ("CAP") Water Resource Fee shall be charged
for connections to the potable system.
   (1)   The CAP water resource fee recovers costs incurred for acquisition of
CAP water rights from new connections, by determining the cost per acre-foot of
CAP water rights available for new connections divided by the connection's
capacity requirement (as determined by meter size).
   (2)   The CAP water resource fee will be used to pay for payments made to
the Central Arizona Water Conservation District for back CAP capital/water
right costs, administrative fees resulting from the city's CAP allocation, and
payments for future CAP capital/water right payments made to the Central
Arizona Water Conservation District.
   If revenues in a given year from the CAP water resource fee exceed the above
uses related to CAP capital/water right payments, the revenues will be used as
reimbursement for monies previously spent on back capital/water right payments:
these revenues may be used to fund various requirements, including the
establishment of a reserve for future water right acquisitions.
   A separate recording of fee proceeds and uses will be maintained.
   (3)   The CAP water resource fee shall be charged for potable metered
connections to the water system, except for (i) construction water meter
connections, (ii) connections within isolated systems, including Santa Rita Bel
Air, until such time as this isolated system is interconnected to the central
water system, (iii) connections within the Peppertree Ranch area, and (iv)
connections within the Dove Mountain Area which are subject to a pre-existing
development agreement.
Meter Size (inches) Charge
Meter Size (inches) Charge
5/8                 $ 200.00
3/4                 300.00
1                   500.00
1 1/2               1,000.00
2                   1,600.00
3                   3,200.00
4                   5,500.00
6                   11,250.00
8                   17,000.00
10                  26,000.00
12                  43,000.00
 
   Charges for replacement of an existing meter with a meter of larger size
shall be computed based on the incremental difference between the CAP water
resource fee for the respective meters at the time of filing the application
for meter change-out. No refunds will be credited for replacement of an
existing meter with a meter of smaller size.
   (c)   The director may impose area-specific water development fees to
recover the capital costs associated with the design and construction of a
water supply system for specific water service areas. The Peppertree Ranch and
Santa Rita Bel Air fees recover certain infrastructure costs within the
specific areas. The fees have been calculated by allocating these costs to the
number of meters (based on equivalent meter sizes) planned for the specific
areas.
   (1)   Peppertree Ranch water service area. The boundaries of the Peppertree
Ranch water service area are hereby established as shown on a map entitled
"Peppertree Ranch Water Service Area", copies of which are on file in the
office of the city clerk and Tucson Water. Each new water connection shall pay
a Peppertree Ranch water development fee in accordance with the following
table:
Meter Size Peppertree Ranch Water
(inches)   Development Fee
Meter Size Peppertree Ranch Water
(inches)   Development Fee
5/8        $188.00
1          470.00
1 1/2      940.00
2          1,504.00
3          3,290.00
4          4,700.00
6          9,400.00
8          15,040.00
10         21,620.00
12         32,900.00
 
   (2)   Santa Rita Bel Air Isolated System. Each new connection to the Santa
Rita Bel Air Isolated System shall pay a Santa Rita Bel Air isolated water
system fee in accordance with the following table:
Meter Size Santa Rita Bel Air
(inches)   Isolated Water System Fee
Meter Size Santa Rita Bel Air
(inches)   Isolated Water System Fee
5/8        $1,814
1          4,535
1 1/2      9,070
2          14,512
3          29,024
4          49,885
6          102,128
8          154,190
10         235,820
12         390,010
 
   (3)   Diamond Bell Isolated System. Each new connection to the Diamond Bell
Isolated System shall pay a Diamond Bell isolated water system fee in
accordance with the following table:
 
Meter Size Diamond Bell
(inches)   Isolated Water System Fee
5/8        $2,778
1          6,945
1 1/2      13,890
2          22,224
3          44,448
4          76,395
 
   (d)   The director may impose area-specific water development fees to
recover the capital costs associated with the design and a construction of a
water supply system for specific water service areas. The Peppertree Ranch and
Santa Rita Bel Air fees recover certain infrastructure costs within the
specific areas. The fees have been calculated by allocating these costs to the
number of meters (based on equivalent meter sizes) planned for the specific
areas.
(Ord. No. 4980, § 1, 5-29-79; Ord. No. 5268, § 1, 12-8-80; Ord. No. 5424, § 1,
8-3-81; Ord. No. 5425, § 1, 8-3-81; Ord. No. 5426, § 1, 8-3-81; Ord. No. 5786,
§§ 1--4, 6-13-83; Ord. No. 6025, §§ 1--4, 6-11-84; Ord. No. 6249, §§ 1--5, 6-3-
85; Ord. No. 9136, § 1, 10-5-98; Ord. No. 9842, § 1, 5-12-03; Ord. No. 9935, §
1, 2-9-04; Ord. No. 10202, § 1, 9-27-05; Ord. No. 10385, § 1, 4-4-07, eff. 7-9-
07; Ord. No. 10386, § 1, 4-4-07; Ord. No. 10643, § 1, 3-24-09, eff. 7-6-09;
Ord. No. 10644, § 1, 3-24-09, eff. 7-6-09; Ord. No. 10958, § 1, 1-24-12, eff.
7-2-12; Ord. No. 10959, § 1, 1-24-12, eff. 7-2-12)
   Editor's note – It should be noted that Ord. No. 10958, § 5, states that the
fee changes approved by this ordinance (§
27-36(b)) shall take effect on July 2, 2012, and shall apply to all meter
readings accepted after July 2, 2012. Additionally, Ord. No. 10959, § 5, states
that the fee changes approved by this ordinance (§
27-36(a)) shall take effect on July 2, 2012, and shall apply to all meter
applications accepted after July 2, 2012.
Sec. 27-37. Agreements for construction of water facilities authorized.
   The director may permit the construction of water facilities to provide
water service in areas where no water service is available. Construction may be
accomplished by (1) the applicant's contractor (private contract) or (2) city
contract or city force account.
   (1)   The director is authorized to permit construction of water facilities
by private contract upon written application. Agreements for construction of
water facilities shall provide that all costs are at the sole expense of the
applicant except as noted therein.
   a.   The facilities will be constructed, at the sole expense and cost of the
applicant, within streets, avenues, alleys and rights-of-way pursuant to grants
of easements.
   b.   Plans for construction will be provided by the applicant, certified by
a registered professional engineer, and reviewed and accepted by the director
or his designee.
   c.   With each application for the construction of water facilities
authorized by this section, the applicant shall execute and deliver to the
director, an agreement for the construction thereof by private contract. If the
agreement conforms with the provisions of this chapter, the director will
authorize construction of the applicant's water facilities.
   d.   The construction of water facilities so authorized will be inspected
and tested for water quality and water pressure by the director or his
designee, and will comply in every respect with the material and installation
standard of the department.
   e.   The applicant will be assessed fees for plan review, inspection, and
system isolation (for connection of constructed water facilities to the
existing system). Water system research required by an applicant prior to the
submission of any plan will be charged at the Master Plan rate (first
submittal, first sheet) indicated below. The Master Plan fee(s) will also be
applicable when the Master Plan itself is submitted for review and approved by
water staff. Plan review fees will be collected upon plan submittal or re-
submittal, in accordance with the following schedule:
Review Service      Fee
Master Plan Only:   
Review Service                                               Fee
Master Plan Only:                                            
First Submittal                        First Sheet           $364.47
                                      Each Subsequent Sheet 63.61
Each Re-submittal of Plan                                   138.84
Design Review Only:                                          
First Submittal                        First Sheet           373.08
                                      Each Subsequent Sheet 127.24
First Re-submittal of Design:          First Sheet           138.84
                                      Each Subsequent Sheet 63.61
Each Subsequent Re-submittal of Design                      138.84
Plan Revision                                               127.24
 
   f.   Construction inspection fees will be collected prior to the director's
authorization of construction of applicant's water facility (section
27-37(1)). Fees will be calculated as follows:
   Pipeline inspection:
   Projects of 200 linear feet or less. . . . .$317.00
   Projects greater than 200 linear feet, per linear foot. . . . .$7.00
   Other facility inspection (non-pipeline), per facility. . . . .$67.94 per
hour
   System isolation fee, per pipeline project or facility. . . . .$270.21
   (2)   The director is authorized to elect to charge the applicant an
appropriate fee and design and construct, by city contract or by city force
account, applicant pipeline extensions or other water facilities. An applicant
will be assessed an hourly rate of one hundred forty-seven dollars and forty-
eight cents ($147.48) if Tucson Water provides the design and construction
documents for the electrical and control portions of applicant-required
facilities. If the extension or facility is to be designed and constructed by
force account, the applicant will be charged the estimated design and
construction costs of such extensions or facilities as determined by the
director or his or her designee; or if the extension or facility is to be
designed and constructed by city contract, the cost to the applicant shall be
based on the costs referenced in current contracts. Current contracts shall be
available in the customer reception area of the water utility's new development
unit and may be reviewed by an applicant for any type of water service. In
addition to the design or construction cost, the applicant shall pay the fees
indicated in
27-37(1)(f) and if applicable, the fees indicated in
27-37(1)(e).
   In addition, the applicant shall pay a protected main service fee of
seventy-five dollars ($75.00), such fee recovering the costs of administering
the protected main program.
   (3)   The director may require an applicant to install "on-site" or "off-
site" water facilities of a size greater than is required to provide service to
the applicant's development; provided, however, that the director refund the
cost of the oversizing to the applicant. The refund amount for oversized
pipelines and valves shall be computed from the following tables for the
quantities actually installed:
                                              Refund Amount
Applicant Size (inches) Size Requested (inches) Pipe (per foot) Valve
                                              Refund Amount
Applicant Size (inches) Size Requested (inches) Pipe (per foot) Valve
6                       8                       $8.96           $466.67
6                       12                      46.83           1,766.67
6                       16                      69.46           5,000.00
8                       12                      37.88           1,300.00
8                       16                      60.50           4,533.33
12                      16                      22.63           3,233.33
 
For sizes larger than sixteen (16) inches, the cost differential shall be as
determined by the director based on the most recent bids for equivalent
installations. Where field conditions require extraordinary costs, the director
may reimburse a share proportionate to the oversizing required by the city. In
these situations the applicant shall provide documentation of actual costs
incurred.
   (4)   Every nonparticipating applicant for a connection to a water main
installed shall be assessed a fee designed to recover a pro rata share of the
initial capital cost of the:
   a.   Distribution main installation. The fee shall be based on the lineal
foot frontage of the subdivision, lot or parcel to be served, as measured along
the street, alley or easement right-of-way line to which the connection will be
installed. The fee shall be in accordance with the following table:
 
Inches Fee Amount
6      $23.00
8      27.48
12     46.42
16     57.73
 
   In addition, the applicant shall pay a protected main service fee of sixty-
three dollars and ninety cents ($63.90), such fee recovering the costs of
administering the protected main program.
   b.   Water facilities other than distribution mains. The fee shall be
calculated and based upon the percentage of non-participant's acreage or
service connections to the total anticipated service area acreage or number of
services possible to be served by the facility and factored against the total
cost of the facility's construction. In addition, the applicant shall pay a
protected facility service fee of sixty-three dollars and ninety cents
($63.90), such fee recovering the costs of administering the protected facility
program.
(Ord. No. 4489, § 9, 5-24-76; Ord. No. 4621, § 4, 2-7-77; Ord. No. 4626, § 8,
3-3-77; Ord. No. 5235, § 3, 10-6-80; Ord. No. 6240, § 1, 5-20-85; Ord. No.
7391, § 5, 4-16-90; Ord. No. 8415, § 1, 12-5-94; Ord. No. 8838, § 1, 3-17-97;
Ord. No. 9043, § 4, 4-13-98; Ord. No. 9388, § 1, 5-22-00; Ord. No. 9555, § 1,
5-14-01, eff. 6-25-01; Ord. No. 9704, § 2, 5-13-02, eff. 6-24-02; Ord. No.
9725, § 1, 6-24-02, eff. 7-29-02; Ord. No. 9842, § 1, 5-12-03; Ord. No. 9977, §
2, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 10359, § 2, 12-12-06, eff. 1-16-07; Ord. No. 10510, § 2,
3-18-08, eff. 7-1-08; Ord. No. 10897, § 2, 5-24-11, eff. 7-5-11; Ord. No.
11072, § 2, 5-21-13, eff. 7-1-13)
Sec. 27-38. Provisions for refund of cost of water mains or water facilities
installed by private contract under certain conditions authorized.
Should water facilities installed pursuant to section
27-37 be installed in such a manner as to provide water service to a property
not participating in the construction cost, the director may enter into an
agreement for partial refund of the cost of the facilities so installed.
   (1)   In no case will the agreed refund amount exceed the total funds to be
collected as authorized in section
27-37(4).
   (2)   Such refunds shall continue for a maximum period of fifteen (15) years
from the date of the agreement. Any balances remaining unpaid shall be
considered canceled, and the city shall be fully discharged from any further
obligation under the agreement.
(Ord. No. 5235, § 4, 10-6-80; Ord. No. 6240, § 2, 5-20-85; Ord. No. 8121, § 3,
9-7-93; Ord. No. 9238, § 4, 6-14-99; Ord. No. 9842, § 1, 5-12-03)
   Note: See editor's note following §
27-31.
Sec. 27-38.1. Provisions for refund of cost of water mains or facilities funded
and installed by the city under certain conditions authorized.
Should water mains or water facilities installed and funded by the city to
provide water service to a property not participating in the construction cost,
the director may designate the water main or water facility as "city protected"
and collect a protected main fee or a protected facility fee and service fee
pursuant to section
27-37(4).
(Ord. No. 9111, § 1, 9-8-98; Ord. No. 9388, § 1, 5-22-00)
Sec. 27-39. Reserved.
   Editors Note: Ord. No. 3394, § 10, adopted Jan. 12, 1970, amended this Code
by repealing former §
27-39 derived from 1953 Code, ch. 25, § 22d, and Ord. No. 1938, § 8. Former §
27-39 contained additional charges for remote areas.
Sec. 27-40. Sales taxes and in-lieu-of franchise taxes.
All applicable sales taxes and in-lieu-of franchise taxes are to be added on
all water sales in all areas.
(1953 Code, ch. 25, § 22e; Ord. No. 1938, § 9; Ord. No. 3394, § 11, 1-12-70)
Sec. 27-41. Accommodation and standby water service.
The city water department may supply accommodation and standby water service
under the following conditions:
   Sec. 27-41.1(1). Where the city water department has sufficient water
service available, at the location service is desired, to supply the applicant
for accommodation or standby service without impairing service to the
department's regular customers.
   Sec. 27-41.1(2). The applicant shall pay the full costs of making the
physical connection, including any main extension, the service connection and
meter.
   Sec. 27-41.1(3). Charges shall be as follows:
   (a)   The minimum applicable monthly charge according to the meter size and
quantity of water used.
   (b)   Minimum charge is to be billed for a full twelve (12) months, or in
the event the meter is removed for any cause, the charge for reconnection shall
be thirty-two dollars and ninety-five cents ($32.95).
(Ord. No. 2665, § 9, 9-21-64; Ord. No. 3394, § 12, 1-12-70; Ord. No. 9388, § 1,
5-22-00; Ord. No. 9704, § 2, 5-13-02; Ord. No. 10510, § 2, 3-18-08, eff. 7-1-
08; Ord. No. 11072, § 2, 5-21-13, eff. 7-1-13)
   Note: Former § 27-41.1.
Sec. 27-42. Temporary services authorized; conditions; rates.
For temporary services to circuses, fairs, camps and construction works, etc.,
the temporary nature or limited duration of which enterprise is known in
advance, and also to operations of a speculative exploratory character or of a
doubtful permanence, the water utility will, if in the opinion of the
superintendent of the water department the furnishing of such service will not
work an undue hardship upon it or its then existing consumers, furnish such
temporary service under the following conditions:
   Sec. 27-42(1). The applicant for such temporary service shall be required to
pay to the water utility the cost of installing and removing any facilities
necessary in connection with the furnishing of such service by the utility.
   Sec. 27-42(2). Each applicant for temporary service may be required to
deposit with the water utility a sum of money equal to the estimated amount of
the water utility's charges for such service, or to secure otherwise, in a
manner satisfactory to the water utility, the payment of any bills which may
accrue by reason of such service so furnished or supplied.
   Sec. 27-42(3). Nothing in this section shall be construed as limiting or in
any way affecting the right of the water utility to collect from the consumer
any other or additional sum of money which may become due and payable to the
water utility from the consumer by reason of the temporary service furnished or
to be furnished hereunder.
   Sec. 27-42(4). Actual water used shall be charged for at the above rate.
(1953 Code, ch. 25, § 23)
Sec. 27-43. Charge when meter not registering properly.
   (a)   In the event any water meter has failed to register the water used,
the estimated charge for water service shall be based on the previous year's
consumption amount. If the customer does not have consumption history for the
prior year period, the average of the class or other equitable method may be
utilized.
   (b)   In the event meters that are equipped with an automatic meter reading
device (AMRs) that fail to transmit readings, the billing will be corrected by
utilizing the actual meter reading registered on the meter. The consumption
will be distributed over the months where the reading transmission failed.
   (c)   When the accuracy of a water meter is questioned by the consumer, the
department shall cause an official test to be made upon payment by the consumer
in the amount of one hundred eleven dollars and thirty-seven cents ($111.37).
For testing three (3) inch or larger meters, the charge shall be based on a
department estimate of the actual cost.
If, upon completion of the official test, it is found that the meter is
registering over three (3) percent more water than actually passes through at
any flow, another meter will be substituted therefor, and the fee charge for
such test will be refunded to the applicant. An adjustment for a period of
three (3) months prior to the test will be made on the basis of the percentage
the meter is over-registering.
(1953 Code, ch. 25, § 24; Ord. No. 4489, § 11, 5-24-76; Ord. No. 4626, § 9, 3-
3-77; Ord. No. 7391, § 6, 4-16-90; Ord. No. 8446, § 3, 2-13-95; Ord. No. 9238,
§ 5, 6-14-99; Ord. No. 9377, § 1, 4-17-00; Ord. No. 9388, § 1, 5-22-00; Ord.
No. 9555, § 1, 5-14-01; Ord. No. 9704, § 2, 5-13-02; Ord. No. 9842, § 1, 5-12-
03; Ord. No. 9977, § 2, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 10359, § 2, 12-12-06, eff. 1-16-07;
Ord. No. 10510, § 2, 3-18-08, eff. 7-1-08; Ord. No. 10897, § 2, 5-24-11, eff.
7-5-11; Ord. No. 11072, § 2, 5-21-13, eff. 7-1-13)
Sec. 27-44. Charge when meter removed.
   Whenever a meter has been removed for any cause for more than thirty (30)
days, the superintendent of the water department may fix a flat charge based
upon the average charges for the previous three (3) months, or the same amount
as was charged during the same month or period the year preceding, whichever is
the lower amount.
(1953 Code, ch. 25, § 24)
Sec. 27-45. Charge for water used for public works or improvements.
   In addition to the rates established by this article, the superintendent of
the water department is hereby directed to charge and collect for all water
used by any person performing any street improvement or other public work
contract with the city.
(1953 Code, ch. 25, § 29)
Sec. 27-46. Charge for water used in flooding excavations.
   The superintendent of the water department is hereby directed to charge and
collect a reasonable amount for all waters used by any person in flooding
trenches and other excavations which have been made or dug in the construction
of any sewers, manholes, pipelines, gas mains, telephone or electric light
conduits in the city; and the rate to be so charged shall be fixed by the
superintendent of the water department.
(1953 Code, ch. 25, § 30)
Sec. 27-47. Water charges when not otherwise provided.
   Any and all water consumption not specifically mentioned or provided for in
this article shall be charged by special rate, to be assessed by the
superintendent of the water department.
(1953 Code, ch. 25, § 31)
Sec. 27-48. Liability for charges where one service pipe serves multiple
premises.
   Whenever a service enters upon any property and its branches and extensions
pass through the bounds of such property for the purpose of furnishing a supply
of water to any adjoining property, the property upon which the service first
enters shall be charged for the water furnished by any and all branches,
extensions, etc., of the service; and should a meter be installed upon such
service, the rate for water shall be assessed to the property first named.
(1953 Code, ch. 25, § 28; Ord. No. 11072, § 2, 5-21-13, eff. 7-1-13)
Sec. 27-49. When and where bills due and payable.
   Water rates are due and payable at the office of the water department upon
determination of the amount of charge for the water rate. Water rates are
delinquent if not paid within twenty (20) days of the date the charges are due
and payable.
(1953 Code, ch. 25, § 25; Ord. No. 3394, § 13, 1-12-70)
Sec. 27-50. Discontinuing service for non-payment of water bill; customer right
to dispute account balance.
   (1)   Discontinuing service for nonpayment.
   (a)   If a customer's account balance is greater than seventy-five dollars
($75.00) and if that balance has been outstanding for forty (40) days, the
customer shall be given written notice that the account is past due. This
notice shall also inform the customer of the right to dispute the balance, in
accordance with section
27-50(2). The notice shall further state that the customer has seven (7) days
from the date of the written notice to contact the utility if the customer
wishes to dispute the balance before a hearing officer in accordance with
section
27-50(2).
      (b)   If no payment has been received within seven (7) days following the
written notice, the customer shall be given a secondary notice that the account
is delinquent and the service subject to turn-off. At this time a delinquent
service charge of eleven dollars and twenty-five cents ($11.25) shall be
assessed on the customer's account.
   (c)   If the delinquent balance is not paid within an additional seven (7)
days, the water supply shall, without further notification, be turned off, the
meter locked, and a delinquent service charge of fifty-five dollars and fifty-
two cents ($55.52) assessed on the customer's account. However, if the customer
is disputing the water bill in accordance with section
27-50(2), water service shall not be turned off until, or unless, the
customer's dispute is found to be without merit by the hearing officer.
   (d)   If a customer whose meter has been locked has not paid within an
additional seven (7) days, the customer's account shall be terminated. Prior to
reestablishing service, the full account balance shall be paid.
   (2)   Customer right to dispute account balance.
   (a)   Customers objecting to the actions, policies, or decisions of the
water department with regard to utility service billing may informally appeal
to the billing office superintendent in person, by telephone, or via electronic
and/or postal mail.
   (b)   The billing office will attempt, in a timely manner, to resolve the
situation.
   (c)   If the problem is not resolved by an informal appeal, the customer
shall be advised of the right to an administrative hearing.
   (d)   The director of the water utility shall appoint a hearing officer to
resolve customer billing disputes. For any particular dispute, the hearing
officer shall have had no previous involvement with the customer's case. In the
event that such involvement exists, the director shall designate another
hearing officer.
   (e)   This hearing officer shall be authorized to make a decision as to the
validity of the customer's dispute, and, if the customer's dispute is found to
be valid, shall also be authorized to make the appropriate corrections to the
customer's account, including the potential removal of delinquent service
charges.
   (f)   If the hearing officer requires a more complete set of facts than can
be gathered at the time of the hearing, the officer shall make whatever
investigation is necessary before rendering a decision.
   (g)   The customer's water service shall not be terminated until and unless
the hearing officer completes the investigation and finds the customer's
dispute to be without merit. However, the hearing process does not relieve the
customer of the obligation to pay water bills. The customer must continue to
pay in a timely manner, all water bills received or be subject to delinquent
service charges should the account balance exceed seventy-five dollars
($75.00).
   (h)   The hearing officer's determination regarding disputed customer
account balance is final.
(1953 Code, ch. 25, § 26; Ord. No. 2665, § 10, 9-21-64; Ord. No. 3394, § 14, 1-
12-70; Ord. No. 4626, § 10, 3-3-77; Ord. No. 4874, § 1, 9-5-78; Ord. No. 5355,
§ 5, 4-20-81; Ord. No. 9043, § 5, 4-13-98; Ord. No. 9238, § 6, 6-14-99; Ord.
No. 9388, § 1, 5-22-00; Ord. No. 9704, § 2, 5-13-02; Ord. No. 10359, § 2, 12-
12-06, eff. 1-16-07; Ord. No. 10510, § 2, 3-18-08, eff. 7-1-08; Ord. No. 10897,
§ 2, 5-24-11, eff. 7-5-11; Ord. No. 11072, § 2, 5-21-13, eff. 7-1-13)
Sec. 27-51. Resuming service after discontinued for nonpayment or violations.
   (1)   In no case shall any individual or plumber turn on the water supply
when the supply has been turned off for nonpayment of amounts owing on the
customer's account or for any other cause referenced in chapter
27. All water service that has been turned off by the water utility shall be
turned on again solely by the water utility.
   (2)   If the utility has removed the customer's meter to prevent illegal use
of water after the customer's account had been terminated for delinquency or
any other cause, the customer shall pay thirty-two dollars and ninety-five
cents ($32.95) to have the meter reinstalled, in addition to any other
outstanding balance on the customer's account, before the utility restores
water service to the customer.
(1953 Code, ch. 25, § 27; Ord. No. 9388, § 1, 5-22-00; Ord. No. 9555, § 1, 5-
14-01; Ord. No. 9704, § 2, 5-13-02; Ord. No. 10510, § 2, 3-18-08, eff. 7-1-08;
Ord. No. 11072, § 2, 5-21-13, eff. 7-1-13)
Sec. 27-52. Customer service relief and courtesy adjustments.
   Adjustments are offered to customers upon their request when there is a
valid high water use such as leaks, theft, vandalism, or other known
consumption. They are also given when there is unexplained high water use. All
other applicable water charges and taxes are applied after the adjustment is
given.
   (1)   Adjustments are given when all of the following conditions are met:
   (a)   Water use by the customer has returned to normal levels.
   (b)   The use in question was more than twenty (20) Ccfs.
   (c)   An adjustment has not been given on the account within the past three
(3) years.
   (d)   The water use in question must have occurred within the past seven (7)
months.
   (e)   No adjustments are made available for reclaimed water or construction
water accounts.
   (2)   Customer relief adjustment.
   (a)   A customer relief adjustment is calculated by charging a residential
customer for high water use at the current adopted rate for the same water use
block of the same month of the prior year.
   (b)   The customer relief adjustment applies to the residential single
family and duplex-triplex customer classes.
   (3)   Courtesy adjustment.
   (a)   A courtesy adjustment is calculated by taking the difference of water
use between the high water use month and the same month in the previous year
and allowing one half (1/2) of that amount to be dismissed.
   (b)   The courtesy adjustment is for customer classes of multifamily, mobile
home parks w/sub-meters, commercial, and industrial.
(Ord. No. 10999, § 1, 6-19-12)
   Editor's note – Section 4 of Ord. No. 10999, adopted June 19, 2012, provides
that the fee adjustments approved by Ord. No. 10999 shall take effect for water
meters read on or after July 2, 2012.
Sec. 27-53. Pre-annexation and development agreement fees.
   (a)   A seven hundred and fifty dollar ($750) Pre-Annexation and Development
Agreement ("PADA") application fee will be assessed for each application for
water service to parcels outside the City limits. The fee will be assessed per
Pima County Tax Parcel Number, and will not be assessed for parcels deemed
ineligible for water service under the City of Tucson's Water Service Policy.
   (b)   A one thousand dollar ($1,000) Pre- Annexation and Development
Agreement ("PADA") fee per Equivalent Dwelling Unit (EDU) will be assessed for
each application for water service to parcels outside the City Limits. The fee
will be assessed per Pima County Tax Parcel Number and will be assessed for
each water meter obtained after a parcel has paid its application fee under
Section
27-53 (1) and has completed all requisite plan submittals and obtained
approvals for water service.
(Ord. No. 11812, § 1, 1-20-21; Ord. No. 11831, § 1, 4-20-21)
   Editor’s note – Section 2 of Ord. No. 11812, adopted January 20, 2021, and
section 2 of Ord. No. 11831, adopted April 20, 2021, provide that the PADA
application fee shall take effect on or after July 1, 2021.
Sec. 27-54. Returned checks.
The city may impose a reasonable charge to handle the processing of checks
received as payment for charges referenced in any article of chapter
27, which checks are returned for nonpayment for any reason. Should such check
or bank draft be received for a delinquent balance in excess of seventy-five
dollars ($75.00), whose balance (1) has been outstanding for forty (40) days or
more, and (2) is either not being formally disputed in accordance with section
27-50(2) or the hearing officer under section
27-50(2) has found in favor of the water utility, the customer's service may be
turned off and the meter locked without prior notification.
(Ord. No. 9043, § 6, 4-13-98; Ord. No. 9388, § 1, 5-22-00; Ord. No. 10305, § 1,
7-6-06, eff. 8-7-06)
Sec. 27-55. Monthly green stormwater infra structure fee.
   Monies collected pursuant to this section will be managed by the City of
Tucson Water Department for funding green stormwater infrastructure projects
within the City of Tucson.
2026:   $0.15 per Ccf of water usage (748 gallons)
(Ord. No. 11726, § 1, 2-4-20; Ord. No. 12180, § 3, 6-17-25)
Secs. 27-56--27-59. Reserved.
ARTICLE III.
CITIZENS' WATER ADVISORY COMMITTEE*
__________
*   Editors Note: Ord. No. 4638, § 1, adopted Apr. 25, 1977, specifically
amended the Code by adding art. III, §§
27-60--27-62. Sections 2--4 did not expressly amend the Code; hence
codification as §§
27-63--27-65 was at the discretion of the editor.
__________
Sec. 27-60. Creation.
There is hereby established an entity to be called the Citizens' Water Advisory
Committee to the city.
(Ord. No. 4638, § 1, 4-25-77)
Sec. 27-61. Functions and purposes.
The functions, purposes, powers and duties of the committee shall be to:
   (a)   Act as the official advisory body on water capital improvement program
planning and rate structure formulation to city government;
   (b)   Annually review the proposed water system capital improvement program,
and recommend to the governing body an annual and a six-year capital budget;
   (c)   Annually review the water revenue requirements of the water system and
recommend to the governing body rate adjustments as required; promote the
concerns of Tucson Water customers by ensuring that recommended water rate
adjustments are kept to the absolute minimum necessary, consistent with adopted
mayor and council plans and policies; and ensure that the water system delivers
safe, high-quality water to all its customers.
   (d)   Review and report to the governing body on the long-term (twenty (20)
to thirty (30) years) water source and capital needs of the water system,
utilizing staff of the water utility and other sources for the information
necessary for such review;
   (e)   Consult with the governing body from time-to-time as may be required
by the mayor and council relative to water resource development needs;
   (f)   Annually review the "Tucson Water Resources Plan 1990--2100" and
recommend revisions thereto to the governing body as required;
   (g)   Initiate comprehensive revision of the "Tucson Water Resources Plan
1990-- 2100" at five-year intervals or more frequently as required and
recommend the necessary changes thereto to the governing body.
   (h)   Review or make recommendations on policies affecting those water
issues which the committee deems appropriate.
(Ord. No. 4638, § 1, 4-25-77; Ord. No. 7279, § 1, 9-11-89; Ord. No. 8183, §§ 1,
2, 2-7-94; Ord. No. 8262, § 1, 4-25-94)
Sec. 27-62. Membership composition, terms and qualifications.
   (a)   Appointment.  The citizens' water advisory committee shall be composed
of fifteen (15) members who shall be customers of the Tucson Water utility, as
either a residential user or owning an enterprise using Tucson Water, and shall
serve without compensation.
   (b)   Selection process.  The mayor and each council member shall appoint
one (1) member of the committee. The city manager, utilizing the resources of
his office, shall nominate eight (8) members for final approval by the mayor
and council.
It is suggested that appointed members have professional or technical
competence in one of the following areas:
   (1)   Utility rate making;
   (2)   Water resource planning;
   (3)   Business management;
   (4)   Accounting;
   (5)   Financial analysis;
   (6)   Public health;
   (7)   Water system engineering;
   (8)   Resource economics;
   (9)   Hydrology;
   (10)   Landscape architecture;
   (11)   Water law.
   (c)   Terms. The term of those committee members appointed by the mayor and
council shall be coterminous with that of the appointing elected official. The
term of those committee members nominated by the city manager and appointed by
the mayor and council shall be four (4) years, or shall be coterminous with the
term of the nominating city manager, whichever is less.
   (d)   The director of the water department and the director of the Pima
County Regional Wastewater Reclamation Department shall serve as non-voting, ex
officio, advisory members of the committee, who do not count toward the quorum,
but may fully participate in all committee and subcommittee discussions. As
used in this subsection, "director" means the director or the director's
designee.
(Ord. No. 4638, § 1, 4-25-77; Ord. No. 7261, § 1, 8-7-89; Ord. No. 9172, § 1,
12-7-98; Ord. No. 10379, § 1, 3-20-07; Ord. No. 10606, § 1, 11-25-08)
Sec. 27-63. Committee organization.
The citizens’ water advisory committee chairperson and a vice-chairperson shall
be selected by a majority of the committee members annually within the first
two weeks of December, and the members shall adopt their own rules and
regulations in relation to the committee’s powers and duties, and shall appoint
their own executive committees, standing committees and subcommittees, and
shall meet at such time and places as determined by the committee.
(Ord. No. 4638, § 2, 4-25-77; Ord. No. 11269, § 2, 5-19-15)
Sec. 27-64. Committee reports.
The citizens' water advisory committee shall render to the mayor and council an
annual report on or before March 1 and send additional reports and
recommendations as it determines, or as requested by the mayor and council.
Minutes of the committee shall be filed with the city clerk.
(Ord. No. 4638, § 3, 4-25-77)
Sec. 27-65. Limitation of powers.
Neither the citizens' water advisory committee nor any member may incur city
expenses without prior authorization of the mayor and council, nor may it
obligate the city in any manner or form.
(Ord. No. 4638, § 4, 4-25-77)
ARTICLE IV.
GROUNDWATER CONSULTANT BOARD
Sec. 27-66. Creation.
There is hereby established an entity to be called the "groundwater consultant
board."
(Ord. No. 4840, § 1, 6-26-78)
Sec. 27-67. Functions and purposes.
   (a)   The purpose of the groundwater consultant board will be the review and
evaluation of all geologic, hydrologic and economic factors affecting the
development of all available water resources in eastern Pima County.
   (b)   The functions, powers and duties of the board shall be as follows:
   (1)   Review all hydrogeologic data which has become available since the
United States Geological Survey work on the Tucson Basin was published.
   (2)   Review past and present exploration drilling programs conducted by the
city.
   (3)   Make recommendations for alternatively or additional methods,
procedures or techniques for data acquisition and processing.
   (4)   Develop from the above findings, alternative short-term and long-term
groundwater development strategies for city implementation.
   (5)   Develop alternative short-term and long-term water resources
strategies through evaluation of the cost-effectiveness of various sources
available to the region.
   (6)   Outline steps which must be taken for the development of a basin-wide
management plan.
   (7)   Evaluate alternative actions the city should take with regard to land
surface subsidence.
   (8)   Develop and evaluate alternative wastewater re-use schemes which could
be implemented by the city, consistent with the basin-wide management plan.
   (9)   Review and comment upon water department policies affecting such
programs as land acquisition for water rights, transfers, conservation and
capital improvements. Recommend additional policies for consideration.
(Ord. No. 4840, § 1, 6-26-78)
Sec. 27-68. Selection and compensation of consultants.
   (a)   The director of the department of water and sewers shall select
consultants from within or without the Tucson area to serve on the groundwater
consultant board. The consultants so retained shall be qualified water resource
investigators who possess a thorough knowledge of local hydrogeologic
conditions. The consultants may be asked to work individually on projects or
may act as a board. The recommendation of the groundwater consultant board
shall be advisory only.
   (b)   Membership on the groundwater consultant board shall be unlimited in
number, and each member of the board shall sign a personal services contract
with the city.
   (c)   Members of the groundwater consultant board shall serve for an
indefinite period of time, and the director of the department of water and
sewers shall have the power to remove any member of the board upon giving
notice as provided in the personal services contract.
   (d)   The members of the groundwater consultant board shall be paid at the
rate of forty dollars ($40.00) per hour for work performed as a member of the
board, and shall be reimbursed for personal car use at the rate of twenty cents
($0.20) per mile.
   (e)   The department of water and sewers shall annually appropriate funds
not exceeding twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for the purpose of
financing the needs of the groundwater consultant board.
(Ord. No. 4840, 1, 6-26-78; Ord. No. 4906, § 1, 11-13-78)
Sec. 27-69. Limitation of powers.
Neither the groundwater consultant board nor any member shall incur expenses or
commit the city to payment for any tangible or intangible thing without first
seeking the authority of the director of the department of water and sewers.
(Ord. No. 4840, § 1, 6-26-78)
ARTICLE V.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION AND CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL*
__________
*   Editors Note: Ord. No. 9976, § 1, adopted May 24, 2004, repealed the former
Art. V, §§
27-71--27-87, and § 2 enacted a new Art. V, §§
27-70--27-86, as set out herein. The former Art. V pertained to similar subject
matter and derived from Ord. No. 7380, § 1, 5-21-90; Ord. No. 8202, § 1, 2-7-
94; Ord. No. 8446, § 4, 2-13-95; Ord. No. 9043, § 7, 4-13-98; Ord. No. 9238, §
7, 6-14-99; Ord. No. 9704, § 3, 5-13-02.
__________
Sec. 27-70. Definitions.
   Auxiliary water supply means any water supply available to a premises or
another purveyor's water supply system. These auxiliary waters may include
additional water services from Tucson Water's public water supply, other water
purveyors or any other natural source.
   AWWA means the American Water Works Association.
   Backflow Prevention Assembly means an assemblance of one (1) or more body
components including shutoff valves that has been approved by the Foundation
for Cross- Connection Control and Hydraulic Research at the University of
Southern California.
   Backflow prevention assembly tester (registered) means a person who is
currently certified by an authority recognized in the Arizona Department of
Environmental Quality regulations and is approved and registered with Tucson
Water to test, repair, and maintain backflow prevention assemblies.
   Compliance date means the date by which the backflow prevention assembly/
reclaimed water site inspection compliance report must be received by Tucson
Water or for violations of this article, the specified date by which a
violation must be remedied.
   Compliance fee means the fee that is charged to recover the administrative
costs that are incurred when a customer's water service is discontinued.
   Consecutive systems means another public or private water system where
Tucson Water is the sole source of water for the other purveyor's water system.
   Contamination means any condition, device or practice which, in the judgment
of Tucson Water, may create a danger to health and well being. This includes an
impairment of the public water supply by the introduction or admission of any
foreign substance that degrades the water quality and creates a health hazard.
   Courtesy notice means any written notice informing a customer that a
backflow method is not operating correctly or does not meet applicable codes or
that the reclaimed water site is not in compliance.
   Cross-connection protection means the degree of protection against cross-
connections existing between the public water supplies and private plumbing
systems.
   Customer means the person/entity accepting financial responsibility for
water service from Tucson Water.
   Four-day notice means the written notice that is personally delivered to the
site when the customer fails to meet the requirements imposed by this article
stating that water service will be discontinued in four days, excluding the day
the notice is delivered, if the requirements of this article are not met.
   Gray water system, pressurized means any premise where there is a gray water
collection and distribution system that is pressurized with any kind of pump.
   Hazard means a cross connection or potential cross connection between the
public water supply and a private plumbing system involving any substance that
could, if introduced into the public water supplies, be aesthetically
objectionable or a nuisance, cause severe damage to the physical facilities of
the public water supply systems, cause death, illness, or spread disease, or
have a high probability of causing such effects.
   Improper means not functioning within the manufacturer's or Tucson Water's
specifications or the requirements of this article.
   Inspection means a visual examination of a reclaimed water site or any
backflow protection equipment, materials, workmanship and operational
performance. All reclaimed water site inspections also include a cross-
connection test.
   Maintenance means work performed or repairs made to keep backflow prevention
assemblies operable and in compliance.
   Pollution means any actual or potential threat to the physical facilities of
the public water supply systems or to the public water supplies which, although
not dangerous to health, would constitute a nuisance or be aesthetically
objectionable, or could cause damage to the system or its appurtenances. This
includes any substance that generally would not be a health hazard but would
constitute a nuisance, or be aesthetically objectionable, if introduced into
the water supply.
   Proper means functioning within the parameters of the manufacturer's and
Tucson Water's specifications and the requirements of this article.
   Rainwater system, pressurized means any premise where there is a rain water
harvesting collection and distribution system that is pressurized with any kind
of pump.
   Reclaimed water means water that is provided through the Tucson Water
reclaimed system.
   Reclaimed water site means any premise where reclaimed water is used.
   Reclaimed water site tester means a certified backflow prevention assembly
tester who is certified by and is registered with Tucson Water to perform
reclaimed water site inspections in the Tucson Water service area.
   Service connection means a piping connection between Tucson Water's meter
and a customer's private plumbing system.
   Service protection means the acceptable backflow prevention method installed
between Tucson Water's meter and a customer's private plumbing system.
   Testing means an authorized procedure to determine the operational and
functional status of a backflow prevention assembly.
(Ord. No. 9976, § 2, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 10563, § 1, 7-8-08; Ord. No. 10867, § 1,
12-21-10)
Sec. 27-71. Purpose and application.
The purpose of this article is:
   (1)   To protect the public water supplies of Tucson Water from the
possibility of contamination or pollution by preventing the backflow of
contaminants and pollutants into the public water supply systems.
   (2)   To promote the elimination or control of cross-connections, actual or
potential, between a customer's internal water systems, plumbing fixtures,
industrial piping systems, and the public water supply.
   (3)   To provide for a continuing program of cross-connection control which
will prevent the contamination or pollution of the public water supply systems.
   (4)   To implement the requirements of AAC R18-4-215 requiring public water
systems to protect against backflow, and to this end this article shall be
construed and applied consistent with the requirements of AAC R18-4-215.
(Ord. No. 9976, § 2, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 10867, § 1, 12-21-10)
Sec. 27-72. Backflow prevention required.
   (a)   When Tucson Water determines that the water supplied by the public
water systems may be subject to contamination or pollution, an approved
backflow prevention method shall be required at every service connection to a
customer's water system. The customer shall install the required backflow
protection within the time specified by Tucson Water. In determining the time
in which backflow protection shall be installed, Tucson Water shall consider
the degree of hazard potential to the public water supplies.
   (b)   The backflow prevention method required shall be determined by Tucson
Water. The method required by Tucson Water shall be sufficient to protect
against the hazard potential, as determined by Tucson Water, to the public
water supplies.
(Ord. No. 9976, § 2, 5-24-04)
Sec. 27-73. Hazard potential.
The hazard potential to the public water supply systems from a customer's
private plumbing system shall be determined using the following hazard factors
as each is defined in section
27-70:
   (1)   Contamination.
   (2)   Cross-connection protection.
   (3)   Pollution.
(Ord. No. 9976, § 2, 5-24-04)
Sec. 27-74. Backflow prevention methods; list.
   (a)   A backflow prevention method shall be any assembly or other means
designed to prevent backflow. The following are the recognized backflow
prevention methods which Tucson Water may require under section
27-72 or section
27-75:
   (1)   Air gap (AG): The unobstructed vertical distance through the free
atmosphere between the opening of the pipe or faucet supplying potable water to
a tank, plumbing fixture or other device. An approved air gap shall be at least
double the effective opening of the supply pipe or faucet and in no case less
than one (1) inch above the flood rim.
   (2)   Reduced pressure principle assembly (RPA): An assembly containing two
(2) independently acting approved check valves together with a hydraulically
operating, mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve located
between the check valves, and at the same time below the first check valve. The
assembly shall include properly located test cocks and tightly closing shutoff
valves located at each end of the assembly.
   (3)   Double check valve assembly (DCVA): An assembly composed of two (2)
independently acting, approved check valves, including tightly closing shutoff
valves located at each end of the assembly and fitted with properly located
test cocks.
   (4)   Pressure vacuum breaker assembly (PVB): An assembly containing an
independently operating, loaded check valve and an independently operating,
loaded air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check valve. The
assembly shall be equipped with properly located test cocks and tightly closing
shutoff valves located at each end of the assembly.
   (5)   Spill-resistant pressure vacuum breaker (SVB): An assembly containing
an independently operating internally loaded check valve and independently
operating loaded air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check
valve. The assembly shall be equipped with a properly located resilient seated
test cock, properly located bleed/vent valve and tightly closing resilient
seated shutoff valves located at each end of the assembly.
   (6)   Double check detector assembly (DCDA or DDCVA): An assembly composed
of a line size approved double check valve assembly with a bypass containing a
specific water meter and an approved double check valve assembly.
   (7)   Reduced pressure principle detector assembly (RPDA): An assembly
composed of a line size approved reduced pressure principle assembly with a
bypass containing a specific water meter and an approved reduced pressure
principle assembly.
   (b)   A backflow prevention method may be approved by Tucson Water if it is
contained in section 7.2 of the Manual of Cross-Connection Control, Ninth
Edition, USC- FCCCHR, KAP-200 University Park MC 2531, Los Angeles, California,
90089-2531, December 1993 (cross connection manual). The current list of
approved methods shall be available for inspection at Tucson Water to any
customer required to install a backflow prevention assembly.
   (c)   Any backflow prevention assembly equipped with test cocks shall have
been issued a certificate of approval by the USC Foundation for Cross-
Connection Control and Hydraulic Research or a third-party certifying entity
that is unrelated to the product's manufacturer or vendor, and is approved by
the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality. Any backflow prevention
assembly not equipped with test cocks shall be certified by a third party
entity unrelated to the product's manufacturer or vendor and approved by the
Arizona Department of Environmental Quality.
(Ord. No. 9976, § 2, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 10867, § 1, 12-21-10)
Sec. 27-75. Backflow prevention methods required.
   (a)   Whenever the following items exist or activities are conducted on
premises served by the public water systems, a potential hazard to the public
water supplies shall be presumed, and a backflow prevention method of the type
specified herein for that item or activity must be utilized or installed at
each service connection for that premises. If an activity or item is not on the
following list, it shall be evaluated by Tucson Water and a method of backflow
prevention will be determined.
   (1)   Cooling tower, boiler, condenser, chiller, and other cooling systems:
RPA.
   (2)   Tank, vessel, receptacle, and all other water connections, including
mobile units, except emergency vehicles and private swimming pools: RPA.
   (3)   Icemaker (other than a residential service): RPA.
   (4)   Water-cooled equipment, boosters, pumps or autoclaves: RPA.
   (5)   Water treatment facilities and all water processing equipment (other
than residential water softeners): RPA.
   (6)   Bottle washer, bedpan washer, garbage can washer: RPA.
   (7)   Pesticide, herbicide, fertilizer, and chemical applicators (other than
typical in- home use): RPA.
   (8)   Aspirator: RPA.
   (9)   Commercial dishwashers, food processing and/or preparation equipment,
carbonation equipment, or other food service processes: RPA.
   (10)   Decorative fountain, baptismal, or any location water is exposed to
atmosphere: RPA.
   (11)   X-ray equipment, plating equipment, or any other photographic
processing equipment: RPA.
   (12)   Auxiliary water supply and/or connections to unapproved water supply
systems: RPA.
   (13)   Reclaimed water sites with potable water connection: RPA.
   (14)   Recreational vehicle dump stations (sewer), or any other location
where water may be exposed to bacteria, virus or gas: RPA.
   (15)   Any premises on which chemicals, oils, solvents, pesticides,
disinfectants, cleaning agents, acids or other pollutants and/or contaminants
are handled in a manner by which they may come in direct contact with water, or
there is evidence of the potential to contact water: RPA.
   (16)   Materials and piping systems unapproved by the City Plumbing Code or
Environmental Protection Agency for potable water usage: RPA.
   (17)   Separately metered or unprotected irrigation systems, and
construction water services: RPA or PVB/SVB as allowed.
   (18)   Any premises where a cross-connection is maintained or where internal
backflow protection is required pursuant to the City Plumbing Code: RPA.
   (19)   Multimetered properties with more than one (1) meter connected: RPA.
   (20)   Fire systems--AWWA Classes 1 and 2 and all systems constructed of a
piping material not approved for potable water pursuant to the City Plumbing
Code: DCVA or Double Detector CVA. Furthermore, fire systems, Classes 1 and 2,
that are under the jurisdiction of the fire department or a fire district that
requires periodic sprinkler system testing similar to the city's are exempt
from this article: DCVA.
   (21)   Fire systems--AWWA Class 3, 4, 5, 6: RPA or RPA with detector.
   (22)   Fire systems which require backflow protection and where backflow
protection is required on the industrial/domestic service connection that is
located on the same premises, both service connections will have adequate
backflow protection for the highest degree of hazard affecting either system:
RPA (Requirement may be waived by Tucson Water).
   (23)   Any premises which has a source of water supply that is not accepted
by the public water system and or not approved by the Arizona Department of
Environmental Quality: As determined by Tucson Water.
   (24)   Any premises where an unprotected cross-connection exists or where
there has previously occurred a cross connection problem within the premises:
As determined by Tucson Water.
   (25)   Any premises where there is a significant possibility that a cross-
connection problem will occur and entry onto the premises is restricted to the
extent that cross-connection inspections can not be made with sufficient
frequency or on sufficiently short notice to assure that unprotected cross-
connections do not exist: As determined by Tucson Water.
   (26)   Multi-use commercial property: RPA.
   (27)   Properties with active private wells: RPA.
   (28)   Consecutive systems, when required by Tucson Water: RPA.
   (29)   Fire hydrant/construction water: RPA.
   (30)   Jumper connection to new water mains: RPA.
   (31)   Any building three (3) stories or greater than thirty-four (34) feet
in height as measured from the service level: RPA.
   (32)   Any premise on which there is a pressurized gray water system: RPA.
   (33)   Any premise on which there is pressurized rain water harvesting
system: RPA.
   (b)   When two (2) or more of the activities listed above are conducted on
the same premises and served by the same service connection or multiple service
connections, the most restrictive backflow prevention method required for any
of the activities conducted on the premises shall be required to be installed
at each service connection. The order of most restrictive to least restrictive
backflow prevention methods shall be as follows:
   (1)   Air gap (AG).
   (2)   Reduced pressure principle assembly (RPA).
   (3)   Reduced pressure principal detector assembly (RPDA).
   (4)   Double check valve assembly (DCVA).
   (5)   Double check detector assembly (DCDA).
   (6)   Pressure vacuum breaker assembly (PVB).
   (7)   Spill resistant pressure vacuum breaker (SVB).
(Ord. No. 9976, § 2, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 10867, § 1, 12-21-10)
Sec. 27-76. Backflow assembly installation requirements.
   (a)   Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed and maintained by
the customer, at the customer's expense and in compliance with the standards
and specifications adopted by the city, at each service connection. The
customer is responsible for notifying Tucson Water of any installation, repair,
relocation or replacement. A backflow prevention assembly shall be installed as
close as practicable to the service connection. Any backflow prevention method
shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications and
Tucson Water's standard details for installation.
   (b)   The assembly shall have a diameter at least equal to the diameter of
the service connection or service line at point of connection. Each service
connection will require its own backflow prevention assembly.
   (c)   The assembly shall be in an accessible location approved by Tucson
Water. The RPA, RPDA, DCVA, DCDA, PVB, and SVB shall be installed above ground
and per Tucson Water standard details.
   (d)   When a customer desires a continuous water supply, two (2) backflow
prevention assemblies shall be installed parallel to one another at the service
connection to allow a continuous water supply during testing and maintenance of
the backflow prevention assemblies. When backflow prevention assemblies are
installed parallel to one another, the sum of the cross-sectional areas of the
assemblies shall be at least equal to the cross-sectional area of the service
connection or service line piping at the point of installation, and the
assemblies shall be of the same type, size, and manufacturer.
   (e)   For an AG installation all piping installed between the user's
connection and the receiving tank shall be entirely visible unless otherwise
approved in writing by Tucson Water.
   (f)   Backflow prevention assemblies shall not be installed in a meter box,
pit or vault.
   (g)   A PVB or SVB assembly may be installed for use on a landscape water
irrigation system if:
   (1)   The water use beyond the assembly is for irrigation purposes only;
   (2)   The PVB/SVB is installed in accordance with manufacturer's
specifications;
   (3)   The irrigation system is designed and constructed to be incapable of
inducing backpressure;
   (4)   Chemigation, the injection of chemical pesticides and fertilizers, is
not used or provided for in the irrigation system; and
   (5)   No other source of water is available on the premises.
If these five criteria are not met, then an RP assembly is required.
   (h)   No person shall alter, modify, bypass or remove a backflow prevention
method without the approval of Tucson Water.
   (i)   Installation of the backflow prevention assembly must be completed
within the time specified in the notice to install or within forty-five (45)
days of the water meter installation. A time extension may be granted by Tucson
Water.
   (j)   If a customer fails to install a backflow prevention assembly pursuant
to this article, Tucson Water shall discontinue water service and assess a
compliance fee pursuant to this article.
(Ord. No. 9976, § 2, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 10867, § 1, 12-21-10)
Sec. 27-77. Installation of backflow prevention assemblies for fire systems.
In addition to the requirements of section
27-75 the following shall also apply.
   (a)   Fire systems:
   (1)   Fire protection systems may consist of sprinklers, hose connections,
and hydrants. Sprinkler systems may be dry or wet, open or closed. Systems
consisting of fixed-spray nozzles may be used indoors or outdoors for
protection of flammable-liquid and other hazardous processes. It is standard
practice, especially in cities, to equip automatic sprinkler systems with fire
department pumper connections.
   (2)   A meter (compound, detector check) should not normally be permitted as
part of a backflow prevention assembly. An exception may be made, however, if
the meter and backflow prevention assembly are specifically designed for that
purpose.
   (3)   For cross-connection control, fire protection systems shall be
classified on the basis of water source and arrangement of supplies as follows:
   a.   Class 1: Direct connections from public water mains only; no pumps,
tanks or reservoirs; no physical connection from other water supplies; no
antifreeze or other additives of any kind; all sprinkler drains discharging to
atmosphere, dry wells or other safe outlets.
   b.   Class 2: Same as class 1, except that booster pumps may be installed in
the connections from the street mains. It is necessary to avoid drafting so
much water that pressure in the water main is reduced below twenty (20) psi.
   c.   Class 3: Direct connection from public water supply main plus one (1)
or more of the following: elevated storage tanks; fire pumps taking suction
from above-ground covered reservoirs or tanks; and pressure tanks (all storage
facilities are filled or connected to public water only, the water in the tanks
to be maintained in a potable condition).
Otherwise, Class 3 systems are the same as class 1. Class 3 systems will
generally require minimum protection (approved double check valves) to prevent
stagnant waters from backflowing into the public potable water system.
   d.   Class 4: Directly supplied from public mains similar to classes 1 and
2, and with an auxiliary water supply on or available to the premises; or an
auxiliary supply may be located within seventeen hundred (1,700) feet of the
pumper connection. Class 4 systems will normally require backflow protection at
the service connection. The type (air gap or reduced pressure) will generally
depend on the quality of the auxiliary supply.
   e.   Class 5: Directly supplied from public mains, and interconnected with
auxiliary supplies, such as: pumps taking suction from reservoirs exposed to
contamination, or rivers and ponds; driven wells, mills or other industrial
water systems; or where antifreeze or other additives are used. Classes 4 and 5
systems normally would need maximum protection (air gap or reduced pressure) to
protect the public water system.
   f.   Class 6: Combined industrial and fire protection systems supplied from
the public water mains only, with or without gravity storage or pump suction
tanks. Class 6 system protection would depend on the requirements of both
industry and fire protection, and could only be determined by a survey of the
premises.
   (b)   Installation of assembly: When a backflow prevention assembly is
required for a water service connection supplying water only to a fire system,
the assembly shall be installed on the service line in compliance with standard
specifications adopted by the city. (Installation of DCVA's or DDCVA's in a
vertical position on the riser may be allowed on fire systems with Tucson Water
approval.)
(Ord. No. 9976, § 2, 5-24-04)
Sec. 27-78. Inspections.
   (a)   A customer's water systems shall be available at all times during
business operations for premises inspection and backflow prevention assembly
testing by Tucson Water. The inspection shall be conducted to determine whether
any cross-connection or other hazard potentials exist and to determine
compliance with this article and modifications, if any, pursuant to section
27-81.
   (b)   Tucson Water shall inspect all new sites, assembly installations,
assembly relocations and assemblies that have been repaired for compliance.
   (c)   A waived premise is a property for which Tucson Water has determined
there are currently no hazard potentials. All waived premises shall be
inspected periodically or when there has been a change in owner/tenant or there
has been a use change.
   (d)   If a customer refuses entry to a premises for inspection during
business operations, Tucson Water may discontinue water service, require
backflow prevention or take any steps allowed by law to gain entry to the
premises.
   (e)   Tucson Water shall inspect all new reclaimed water sites prior to the
delivery of reclaimed water to ensure that no cross-connections with Tucson
Water's potable system exist and that the site complies with all applicable
state and local regulations.
   (f)   Beginning on January 1, 2015 all reclaimed water sites, except single
family residences, are required to have an annual reclaimed water site
inspection and cross-connection test performed by a reclaimed water site tester
certified by and registered with Tucson Water. The inspection will ensure that
no cross-connections with Tucson Water's potable system exist and that the site
complies with all applicable state and local regulations, including regulations
pertaining to signage, ponding, overspray, site plan, and discharge off of the
site. The reclaimed water site inspection program will be administered as
provided in section
27-80.
   (g)   All single family sites will be inspected once every five years by
Tucson Water at no cost to the customer. The inspection will ensure that no
cross-connections with Tucson Water's potable system exist and that the site
complies with all applicable state and local regulations, including regulations
pertaining to signage, ponding, overspray, site plan, and discharge off of the
site.
(Ord. No. 9976, § 2, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 10867, § 1, 12-21-10)
Sec. 27-79. Permit.
   (a)   Installation permits for the installation of all backflow prevention
assemblies required by Tucson Water shall be obtained from Tucson Water prior
to installation. A separate permit shall be obtained for each required backflow
prevention assembly to be installed, including replacement or relocation.
   (b)   It shall be the duty of the person doing the work authorized by the
permit to notify Tucson Water, orally or in writing, that the work is ready for
inspection. Such notification shall be given not less than twenty-four (24)
hours before the work is to be inspected and shall be given only if there is
reason to believe that the work done will meet current city codes and
regulations.
   (c)   Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of the City
Plumbing Code or this article, Tucson Water or an authorized representative may
order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any persons engaged in
the doing or causing such work to be done; and any such person shall forthwith
stop such work until authorized by Tucson Water to proceed with the work.
   (d)   Any Tucson Water employee may, in writing, suspend or revoke a permit
issued under provisions of this article, whenever the permit is issued in error
or on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or in violation of any
ordinance or regulation of any provision of the City Plumbing Code or this
article.
(Ord. No. 9976, § 2, 5-24-04)
Sec. 27-80. Test, inspection, notification, maintenance, records.
   (a)   The compliance date shall be set by Tucson Water.
   (b)   Tucson Water shall notify the customer at least forty-five (45) days
before the compliance date for each backflow prevention assembly and/or
reclaimed water site inspection.
   (c)   The customer shall test each backflow prevention assembly at least
once a year. Test intervals for any backflow prevention assembly may not exceed
twelve (12) months. If an inactive water service is reactivated, the backflow
prevention assembly associated with that service shall be tested if more than
twelve (12) months have passed since the last test.
   (d)   For compliance testing or inspection the customer shall not test any
backflow prevention assembly or inspect any reclaimed water site more than
forty-five (45) days prior to the compliance date.
   (e)   The customer may request in writing a change of the compliance date
for any backflow prevention assembly and/or reclaimed water site. No annual
compliance date may be changed to be more than twelve (12) months after the
most recent test or inspection. No five (5) year compliance date may be changed
to be more than sixty (60) months after the most recent inspection.
   (f)   If any testing reveals the assembly to be defective or is in improper
operating condition, the customer shall perform any necessary repairs,
including replacement of the assembly, which will return the assembly to proper
operating condition. If an assembly is replaced, relocated or repaired, a new
test shall be performed on such assembly and submitted to Tucson Water.
   (g)   If by the compliance date Tucson Water has not received the required
backflow prevention assembly test and/or reclaimed water site inspection
results, Tucson Water shall provide a four (4) day notice in writing to the
site that Tucson Water will discontinue potable/reclaimed water service if the
required backflow prevention assembly test and/or reclaimed water site
inspection results are not received by the date specified in the four (4) day
notice. Tucson Water shall assess a fee when the four (4) day notice is
delivered. If the test and/or inspection results are not received by Tucson
Water by the date specified in the four (4) day notice Tucson Water shall
discontinue water service and add a compliance fee to the customer's water
bill.
   (h)   If Tucson Water determines at any time between compliance dates that a
backflow method is not operating correctly or does not meet applicable codes or
that a reclaimed water site does not comply with regulations, Tucson Water
shall provide a courtesy notice in writing to the customer and/or site
specifying the date by which the backflow method must meet applicable codes and
be operating properly or the reclaimed water site must be in compliance. If by
the date specified in the courtesy notice the backflow method or reclaimed
water site does not meet applicable codes and regulations, Tucson Water will
provide a four (4) day notice to the site specifying the date by which the
backflow method or reclaimed water site must meet applicable codes/regulations.
Tucson Water shall add a fee to the customer's water bill when the four (4) day
notice is delivered. If by the date specified in the four (4) day notice the
backflow method or reclaimed water site does not meet applicable codes/
regulations, Tucson Water shall discontinue water service and add a compliance
fee to the customer's water bill.
   (i)   If Tucson Water or a customer learns or discovers during any interim
period between tests/inspections that an assembly is defective or is in
improper operating condition or that the reclaimed water site is noncompliant,
the customer shall perform any necessary repairs including replacement of the
assembly, which will return the assembly or reclaimed water site to proper
operating/compliant condition.
   (j)   The backflow prevention assembly testing shall be performed by an
individual certified to conduct such testing by the California-Nevada Section
of the AWWA, the Arizona State Environmental Technical Training Center or other
certifying authority approved by the Arizona Department of Environmental
Quality. A list of certified testers registered with Tucson Water shall be
maintained by Tucson Water and shall be available upon request to all persons
required to install or maintain a backflow prevention assembly.
   (k)   Test procedures shall be performed as required by the Arizona
Department of Environmental Quality as set forth in chapter nine of the Manual
for Cross-Connection Control. The tester shall provide test/inspection results
to the customer and to Tucson Water, and shall maintain a copy of the results
for their records.
   (l)   The customer shall maintain records, of all test/inspection results
and of all servicing, repairs, and replacements of the backflow prevention
assembly. Test and/or inspection results shall be submitted electronically to
Tucson Water within five (5) days after completion of the activity for which
the record is made.
   (m)   Fire systems shall not be out of service for more than eight (8)
consecutive hours due to testing, maintenance or repairs. The fire department
shall be notified immediately of any changes in fire service status.
   (n)   Tucson Water may test any backflow prevention assembly or inspect any
reclaimed water site at any time.
   (o)   Test equipment shall be maintained and calibrated annually by an
agency approved by Tucson Water as required by the cross connection manual. A
copy of the annual equipment calibration certificates shall be submitted to
Tucson Water to maintain equipment registration and certification. Test
equipment for testing backflow prevention assemblies in Tucson Water's service
area shall be registered with and approved by Tucson Water. Test equipment used
on anything other than potable water backflow prevention assemblies shall not
be used to test such assemblies and shall be identified as non-potable test
equipment.
   (p)   Backflow prevention assembly/reclaimed water site testers shall
register with Tucson Water if they are conducting backflow prevention assembly
testing/reclaimed water site inspections in Tucson Water's service area.
Testers shall submit a current copy of their certification or recertification
upon registration. A Tucson Water registration issued to a backflow prevention
assembly/reclaimed water site tester may be revoked or suspended upon
certification expiration or for improper testing, maintenance, inspections,
reporting or other improper practices.
(Ord. No. 9976, § 2, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 10563, §§ 2, 3, 7-8-08; Ord. No. 10867,
§ 1, 12-21-10)
Sec. 27-81. Determination, modification or waiver of backflow prevention
requirements.
If Tucson Water determines, after inspection of the customer's system, that a
backflow prevention method less restrictive than that required in section
27-75 will provide adequate protection of the public water supply, Tucson Water
may, at its sole discretion, modify or waive the requirements of section
27-75 accordingly. In determining, waiving, or modifying backflow requirements,
Tucson Water shall consider the hazard potential to the public water system
based on the design of the customer's water system.
(Ord. No. 9976, § 2, 5-24-04)
Sec. 27-82. Discontinuance of water service.
   (a)   If Tucson Water discovers that a customer has not installed a required
backflow prevention method, or that a backflow prevention method has been
improperly tested or maintained, bypassed or removed, or that an unprotected
cross-connection exists in the customer's water system or any other violation
of this article has occurred, the water service to that service connection
shall be discontinued. If the condition is not remedied subsections
27-80(g) and (h) shall apply. The service shall not be restored until the
condition is remedied or Tucson Water authorizes a turn on for assembly testing
and continuance of service.
   (b)   Water service to a fire sprinkler system shall not be subject to
discontinuance under this section. If a condition, which would otherwise result
in discontinuance of fire service is not remedied, discontinuance of the
potable water service shall result. See subsections
27-80 (g) and (h).
   (c)   Tucson Water may discontinue, without notice, water service to any
customer when Tucson Water discovers any potential for contamination of the
public water systems by the customer's private plumbing system.
(Ord. No. 9976, § 2, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 10563, § 4, 7-8-08; Ord. No. 10867, § 1,
12-21-10)
Sec. 27-83. Administrative appeal.
An administrative appeal may be taken whenever a question arises over any of
the requirements of this article, and the applicant wishes to appeal the
decision of Tucson Water or seek a variance from the requirements of this
article. The appeal may be made to the backflow prevention hearing committee as
follows:
   (1)   The applicant shall file a written appeal on the forms provided by the
Tucson Water Backflow Prevention Office within ten (10) working days from the
date of the decision by Tucson Water that the applicant wishes to appeal. The
applicant shall set forth, in detail, and on the form provided, the basis for
their request, and may attach additional documentation to the form.
   (2)   The appeal will be heard by the hearing committee within seven (7)
working days, after receipt of the written appeal, at a regular specified time.
Formal Arizona Rules of Evidence will not apply, but any testimony or evidence
offered must be relevant to the issue in question.
   (3)   The hearing committee shall consist of three (3) members each of whom
shall be knowledgeable or experienced in backflow prevention, plumbing, or
water system hydraulics. One (1) member shall be appointed by the director of
Tucson Water. One (1) member shall be appointed by the director of the
department of development services. One (1) member shall be appointed from the
full membership of the City of Tucson Small Business Commission. Additional
inspectors or other technical persons may be present for a particular appeal.
   (4)   The applicant shall provide adequate information at the hearing to
fully describe the conditions in question and to establish the justification
and basis for the applicant's request.
   (5)   The applicant may, but is not required to, personally attend the
hearing.
(Ord. No. 9976, § 2, 5-24-04)
Sec. 27-84. Violation a civil infraction.
It shall be a civil infraction for any person to violate any of the
requirements of this article.
(Ord. No. 9976, § 2, 5-24-04)
Sec. 27-85. Reserved.
Sec. 27-86. Fees.
   (a)   The fee for issuing a permit to install a backflow prevention assembly
and inspecting the installation shall be seventy-six dollars and fifty-one
cents ($76.51).
   (b)   A four (4) day notice fee of seventy-six dollars and fifty-one cents
($76.51) will be assessed when the customer fails to meet the requirements
imposed by this article and a Tucson Water inspector personally delivers a
notice to the site stating that water service will be discontinued in four days
if the requirements are not met.
   (c)   A compliance fee of seventy-six dollars and fifty-one cents ($76.51)
will be assessed when the customer fails to meet the requirements imposed by
this article and Tucson Water discontinues potable or reclaimed water service.
   (d)   A fee of sixteen dollars and fourteen cents ($16.14) will be assessed
to backflow prevention assembly testers:
   (1)   whenever registering or reregistering their backflow test equipment
with Tucson Water, as required in Sec.
27-80(o); and
   (2)   whenever registering or reregistering their certification to perform
backflow prevention assembly testing with Tucson Water, as required in Sec.
27-80(p).
(Ord. No. 9976, § 2, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 10359, § 3, 12-12-06, eff. 1-16-07; Ord.
No. 10510, § 3, 3-18-08, eff. 7-1-08; Ord. No. 10897, § 3, 5-24-11, eff. 7-5-
11; Ord. No. 11072, § 3, 5-21-13, eff. 7-1-13)
Secs. 27-87--27-89. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI.
EMERGENCY WATER CONSERVATION RESPONSE*
__________
*   Editors Note: By Ordinance 8564, the mayor and council called a special
election for November 7, 1995, at which public initiative petition 1994-1001
would be submitted to the city's qualified electors. By Ordinance 8574, the
mayor and council approved the ballot label for that special election, which
included the full text of the proposed Code amendment presented in the
initiative petition. The proposed initiative was approved by the electorate and
is now part of the Tucson Code.
The initiative as passed was denominated article VI of chapter
27 of the Tucson Code, containing sections
27-90 through
27-93. However, chapter
27 of the Tucson Code already contained an article VI (entitled "Emergency
Water Conservation Response") consisting of sections
27-90--
27-99. The existing article VI was enacted subsequent to the filing of the
blank version of public initiative petition 1994-1001 but prior to its approval
by the voters.
The city has determined that the initiative measure should be denominated as
article VII of chapter
27, rather than article VI, and that its various sections should be numbered as
sections
27-100 through
27-103, rather than as sections
27-90 through
27-93.
__________
Sec. 27-90. Purpose.
This article establishes a city emergency water conservation response plan.
(Ord. No. 8461, § 1, 3-20-95)
Sec. 27-91. Declaration of policy.
It is hereby declared that, because of varying conditions related to water
resource supply and distribution system capabilities, it is necessary to
establish and to enforce methods and procedures to ensure that, in time of
emergency shortage of the local water supply, the water resources available to
the city are put to the maximum beneficial use, that the unreasonable use, or
unreasonable method of use is prevented, and that conservation of water is
accomplished in the interests of the customers of the city water department and
for the public health, safety, and welfare.
(Ord. No. 8461, § 1, 3-20-95)
Sec. 27-92. Application.
   (a)   This article applies to all departments of the city, and to all city
water customers who own, occupy, or control water use on any premises as
defined in section
27-10.
   (b)   No person shall make, cause, use, or permit the use of water received
from the city water department for residential, commercial, industrial,
governmental or any other purpose in any manner contrary to any provision in
this article.
   (c)   Mandatory emergency conservation measures shall be implemented based
upon the declaration of an emergency pursuant to section
27-93.
(Ord. No. 8461, § 1, 3-20-95)
Sec. 27-93. Declaration of water emergency authorized.
The mayor and council or, in the absence of a quorum, the mayor or the mayor's
designate, upon the recommendation of the director of the city water department
is hereby authorized to declare a water emergency and to implement mandatory
conservation measures as set forth in this article.
(Ord. No. 8461, § 1, 3-20-95)
Sec. 27-94. Implementation, termination.
   (a)   The director of the water department shall develop guidelines which
set forth general criteria to assist the mayor and council, or in the absence
of a quorum, the mayor or the mayor's designate in determining when to declare
a water emergency. Upon declaration of a water emergency, the city manager
shall report in writing to the mayor and council providing the reasons for and
expected duration of such emergency and describing implementation of emergency
water conservation measures.
   (b)   Upon the cessation of the condition or conditions giving rise to the
water emergency, or upon majority vote of the mayor and council, or in the
absence of a quorum, the mayor or the mayor's designate shall declare the water
emergency terminated. Upon such termination, the mandatory conservation
measures shall no longer be in effect.
(Ord. No. 8461, § 1, 3-20-95)
Sec. 27-95. Mandatory emergency water conservation measures.
Upon declaration of a water emergency and notification to the public, the
following mandatory restrictions upon nonessential uses shall be enforced:
   (1)   All outdoor irrigation, except for those areas irrigated with
reclaimed water, is prohibited. If the city manager deems it appropriate, a
schedule designating certain outdoor watering days may be implemented in place
of the irrigation ban.
   (2)   Washing of sidewalks, driveways, parking areas, tennis courts, patios
or other paved areas with water from any pressurized source, including garden
hoses, except to alleviate immediate health or safety hazards, is prohibited.
   (3)   The outdoor use of any water-based play apparatus connected to a
pressurized source is prohibited.
   (4)   Operation of water cooled space and equipment cooling systems below an
operating efficiency level of two cycles of concentration is prohibited.
   (5)   Restaurants and other food service establishments are prohibited from
serving water to their customers, unless water is specifically requested by the
customer.
   (6)   Operation of outdoor misting systems used to cool public areas is
prohibited.
   (7)   The filling of swimming pools, fountains, spas or other exterior water
features is prohibited.
   (8)   The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers and other types of mobile
equipment is prohibited, except at facilities equipped with wash water
recirculation systems, and for vehicles requiring frequent washing to protect
public health, safety and welfare.
(Ord. No. 8461, § 1, 3-20-95)
Sec. 27-96. Variances.
The city manager, or the city manager's designate, is authorized to review
hardship cases and special cases within which strict application of this
chapter would result in serious hardship to a customer. A variance may be
granted only for reasons involving health, safety or economic hardship.
Application for variance from requirements of this chapter must be made on a
form provided by the director.
(Ord. No. 8461, § 1, 3-20-95)
Sec. 27-97. Violation.
   (a)   In the event of any violation of this article, a written notice shall
be placed on the property where the violation occurred and a duplicate mailed
to the person who is regularly billed for the service where the violation
occurs and to any person known to the department who is responsible for the
violation or it's correction. Such notice shall describe the violation and
order that it be corrected, ceased or abated immediately or within such
specified time as the department determines is reasonable under the
circumstances and shall contain a description of the fees and penalties
associated with such violation. If such order is not complied with, the
department may forthwith disconnect the service where the violation occurs. A
two hundred fifty dollar ($250.00) fee shall be imposed for the reconnection of
any service disconnected pursuant to noncompliance, which shall be in addition
to other fees or charges imposed by this chapter for disconnection of service.
   (b)   In addition to being grounds for discontinuation of service, violation
of any provision of this article shall be a civil infraction. An individual or
corporation convicted of violating provisions of this section shall be assessed
a civil penalty of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
(Ord. No. 8461, § 1, 3-20-95)
Sec. 27-98. Enforcement.
The city manager is authorized to designate city employees to enforce the
provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 8461, § 1, 3-20-95)
Sec. 27-99. Definitions.
   Department means the city water department.
   Director means director of the city water department.
   Economic hardship means a threat to an individual's or business' primary
source of income.
   Notification to public means notification through local media, including
interviews and issuance of news releases.
   Outdoor watering day means a specific day, as described in a specific
outdoor watering plan, during which irrigation with sprinkler systems or
otherwise may take place.
(Ord. No. 8461, § 1, 3-20-95)
ARTICLE VII.
WATER CONSUMER PROTECTION ACT*
__________
*   Editors Note: See note for Article VI.
__________
Sec. 27-100. Method.
   (a)   The city shall use only groundwater from unpolluted sources as its
potable water supply for a five-year interim period beginning on the effective
date of this article [November 13, 1995], except as specifically provided in
section
27-101.
   (b)   The city shall take the necessary actions to ensure that it is in
total compliance with its existing contract for Central Arizona Project (CAP)
water.
   (c)   For five (5) years from the effective date of this article [November
13, 1995], CAP water delivered to the city shall be used only for one or more
of the following purposes:
   (1)   For selling or exchanging water under the terms of the city's existing
CAP subcontract.
   (2)   To preserve Tucson's groundwater for domestic use by replacing
groundwater which would otherwise have been withdrawn for uses other than as
potable water such as agriculture, mining or other industry.
   (3)   To prevent land subsidence and augment Tucson's groundwater supply by
basin and stream bed recharge.
   (4)   To replace other water supplies currently being employed for
industrial and landscape irrigation use including parks, golf courses and
schools.
   (5)   For direct well injection if it is treated as described in section
27-101 and is free from disinfection by-products.
(Ord. No. 8564, § 1, 8-7-95)
Sec. 27-101. Exception.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, CAP water may be directly
delivered as a potable water supply only if it is treated in a manner
sufficient to ensure that the quality of the delivered water is equal to or
better in salinity, hardness and dissolved organic material than the quality of
the groundwater being delivered from Tucson's Avra Valley well field on the
effective date of this article [November 13, 1995].
(Ord. No. 8564, § 1, 8-7-95; Ord. No. 8574, § 1, 9-5-95)
Sec. 27-102. Recharge.
   (a)   The city shall not recharge water in any area that contains or is
adversely effected by toxic landfills.
   (b)   To prevent land subsidence within the city's central well field, all
groundwater withdrawals shall be completely replenished, as measured over any
five-year period, using recharge including recharge of CAP water treated as
provided in section
27-100(c)(5).
(Ord. No. 8564, § 1, 8-7-95; Ord. No. 8574, § 1, 9-5-95)
Sec. 27-103. Definitions.
In this article, unless the context otherwise requires:
   (1)   Pollution means the presence of an amount of any substance in
groundwater which exceeds any standard prescribed by the laws of the state or
the United States for potable water.
   (2)   Disinfection by-products are the chemical compounds formed when
chlorine, ozone or chloramines are used to disinfect water containing dissolved
organic material.
(Ord. No. 8564, § 1, 8-7-95; Ord. No. 8574, § 1, 9-5-95)
   Editors Note: Section
27-100 through
27-103 added as the result of an Initiative Special Election held November 7,
1995, pursuant to a citizen-initiated measure--Initiative Petition No. 1994-
1001. The amendment became effective on November 13, 1995.
Secs. 27-104--27-109. Reserved.
ARTICLE VIII.
DROUGHT PREPAREDNESS AND RESPONSE PLAN
Sec. 27-110. Purpose.
This article establishes a city drought preparedness and response plan.
(Ord. No. 10380, § 1, 3-20-07)
Sec. 27-111. Declaration of policy.
It is hereby declared that, because of varying conditions related to water
resource supply and distribution system capabilities during drought, it is
necessary to establish and to enforce drought response stages and drought
response measures to ensure that the water resources available to the city are
put to the maximum beneficial use; that unreasonable use, or unreasonable
method of use is prevented; and that conservation of water is accomplished in
the interests of the customers of the city and for the public health, safety,
and welfare.
(Ord. No. 10380, § 1, 3-20-07)
Sec. 27-112. Application.
   (a)   This article applies to all departments of the city, and to all city
water customers who own, occupy, or control water use on any premises as
defined in section
27-10.
   (b)   No person shall make, cause, use, or permit the use of water received
from the department for residential, commercial, industrial, governmental or
any other purpose in any manner contrary to any provision in this article.
   (c)   Mandatory drought response measures shall be implemented based upon
the declaration of drought response stages pursuant to section
27-115.
(Ord. No. 10380, § 1, 3-20-07)
Sec. 27-113. Declaration of drought response stages, implementation,
termination.
   (a)   Stage 1 or Stage 2 drought response will be declared by the city
manager, or any designee, on the advice of the director. A Stage 3 or Stage 4
drought response will be declared by the mayor and council, or any designee,
upon the recommendation of the city manager.
   (b)   The director shall develop guidelines which set forth general criteria
to assist the city manager or mayor and council, or any designee, in
determining drought response stages.
   (c)   Following the declaration of any drought response stage, the
department will implement appropriate response actions, including but not
limited to public notification and various drought response measures.
   (d)   The director will continually monitor drought conditions and promptly
recommend that the drought stage level increase if conditions worsen.
Similarly, the director will advise the city manager to rescind Stage 1 or 2,
or to recommend termination of Stage 3 or 4, if warranted by lessened drought
conditions.
(Ord. No. 10380, § 1, 3-20-07)
Sec. 27-114. Triggers for each drought response stage.
Each drought response stage will be triggered by specific conditions related to
the availability of Colorado River water as determined by the tier elevations
of Lake Mead pursuant to the Lower Basin Drought Contingency Plan adopted
between the United States and non-federal parties:
   (a)   Drought Response Stage 1/Drought Contingency Plan Tier 0 trigger: When
the United States Bureau of Reclamation projects that the water level in Lake
Mead on January 1 of any calendar year will be between 1090' and 1075' above
sea level.
   (b)   Drought Response Stage 2/Drought Contingency Plan Tier 1 trigger: When
the United States Bureau of Reclamation projects that the water level in Lake
Mead on January 1 of any calendar year will be below 1075' above sea level.
   (c)   Drought Response Stage 3/Drought Contingency Plan Tier 2 trigger: When
the United States Bureau of Reclamation projects that the water level in Lake
Mead on January 1 of any calendar year will be below 1045' above sea level.
   (d)   Drought Response Stage 4/Drought Contingency Plan Tier 3 trigger: When
the United States Bureau of Reclamation projects that the water level in Lake
Mead on January 1 of any calendar year will be below 1025' above sea level or
the volume of water delivered by the Central Arizona Project to Tucson Water is
less than annual potable demand.
(Ord. No. 10380, § 1, 3-20-07; Ord. No. 11794, § 1, 10-20-20)
Sec. 27-115. Response actions for each drought response stage.
Upon declaration of a drought response stage the director shall be authorized
to implement and enforce any or all of the drought response measures for a
specific drought response stage included in the last-adopted Drought
Preparedness and Response Plan on file with the city clerk's office.
(Ord. No. 10380, § 1, 3-20-07)
Sec. 27-116. Variances.
The director, or the director's designee, is authorized to review special cases
within which strict application of this chapter would result in serious
hardship to a customer. A variance may be granted only for reasons involving
health, safety or economic hardship. Application for variance from requirements
of this article must be made on a form provided by the director. The department
may charge a fee to process a variance request.
(Ord. No. 10380, § 1, 3-20-07)
Sec. 27-117. Violation.
   (a)   Violations of this article will result in a written notice placed on
the property where the violation occurred. A duplicate will be mailed to the
person who is regularly billed for the service where the violation occurs and
to any person known to the department who is responsible for the violation or
its correction. The notice will describe the violation and order that it be
corrected, ceased or abated immediately or within such specified time as the
department determines is reasonable under the circumstances. The notice of
violation will contain a description of the possible fees and penalties
associated with said violation. If the order is not complied with, the
department may disconnect the service where the violation occurs and the then
current disconnection charge will be applied to the customer account.
Reconnection of any service disconnected for non-compliance will require
payment of the then current complete new service connection charge in addition
to other fees or charges imposed by this ordinance for disconnection of
service.
   (b)   In addition to being grounds for discontinuation of service, violation
of any provision of this article shall be a civil infraction. An individual or
corporation convicted of violating provisions of this section shall be assessed
a civil penalty of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or more
than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation.
(Ord. No. 10380, § 1, 3-20-07)
Sec. 27-118. Enforcement.
This article will be enforced by the department. The city manager, in
consultation with the director, is authorized to designate additional city
employees to assist in enforcement, should conditions warrant.
(Ord. No. 10380, § 1, 3-20-07)
Sec. 27-119. Definitions.
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:]
   Department means the City of Tucson Water Department (Tucson Water).
   Director means the Director of the City of Tucson Water Department.
   Economic hardship means a threat to a primary source of income for an
individual or business.
   Notification to public means notification through local media, including
interviews and issuance of news releases and/or department bill inserts.
(Ord. No. 10380, § 1, 3-20-07)
Chapter 28
TUCSON PROCUREMENT CODE*
__________
*   Editors Note: Ord. No. 9913, § 1, adopted Nov. 17, 2003, amended chapter
28 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former chapter
28, §§
28-1--28-5, 28-11, 28-12, 28-15--28-37, 28-41--28-45, 28-47--28-56, 28-58, 28-
62, 28-63, 28-66--28-71, 28-75--28-118, 28-126--28-129, 28-132--28-134, 28-137-
-28-144, 28-145--28-151, 28-152--28-160, pertained to similar subject matter
and derived from Ord. No. 7973, § 4, adopted Jan. 25, 1993. See the Code
Comparative Table.
__________
Art. I.   In General, §§ 28-1--28-10
Art. II.   Procurement Director Authority, §§ 28-11--28-14
Art. III.   Source Selection and Contract Formation, §§ 28-15--28-40
Art. IV.   Specifications, §§ 28-41--28-46
Art. V.   Procurement of Professional Design Services and Capital Improvements,
§§ 28-47--28-57
Art. VI.   Contract Terms and Conditions, §§ 28-58--28-61
Art. VII.   Cost Principles, §§ 28-62--28-65
Art. VIII.   Materials Management, §§ 28-66--28-74
Art. IX.   Legal and Contractual Remedies, §§ 28-75--28-125
Art. X.   Cooperative Purchasing, §§ 28-126--28-131
Art. XI.   Reserved, §§ 28-132--28-136
Art. XII.   Affirmative Action by City Contractors, §§ 28-137--28-146
Art. XIII.   Small Business Enterprise Program, §§ 28-147--28-151.5
Art. XIV.   Living Wage, §§ 28-152--28-159
Art. XV.   Contract Requirements for the Mitigation of Heat-Related Illnesses
and Injuries in the Workplace, §§ 28-160 – 28-162
Art. XIV.   Prevailing Wage, §§ 28-163 – 28-168
Article I. General Provisions
Sec.
28-1.   Applicability.
Sec.
28-2.   Definitions.
Sec.
28-3.   Supplementary general principles of law applicable.
Sec.
28-4.   Requirement of good faith.
Sec.
28-5.   Confidential information.
Secs.
28-6--28-10.   Reserved.
Article II. Procurement Director Authority
Sec.
28-11.   Authority of the director.
Sec.
28-12.   Written determinations.
Secs.
28-13, 28-14. Reserved.
Article III. Source Selection and Contract Formation
Sec.
28-15.   Definitions.
Sec.
28-16.   Methods and dollar thresholds of source selection.
Sec.
28-17.   Competitive sealed bidding.
Sec.
28-18.   Competitive sealed proposals.
Sec.
28-19.   Contracting for legal counsel.
Sec.
28-20.   Reserved.
Sec.
28-21.   Sole source procurement.
Sec.
28-22.   Emergency procurements.
Sec.
28-23.   Special procurements.
Sec.
28-24.   Competitive reverse auctions.
Sec.
28-25.   Cancellation of solicitations.
Sec.
28-26.   Rejection of individual bids, proposals, quotations or statements of
qualifications.
Sec.
28-27.   Responsibility of bidders, offerors and respondents.
Sec.
28-28.   Bid and contract security, material or service contracts.
Sec.
28-29.   Reserved.
Sec.
28-30.   Reserved.
Sec.
28-31.   Multi-term contracts.
Sec.
28-32.   Right to inspect.
Sec.
28-33.   Right to audit records.
Sec.
28-34.   Reporting of anticompetitive practices.
Sec.
28-35.   Prospective vendor databases.
Sec.
28-36.   Contract form and execution.
Sec.
28-37.   Assignment of rights and duties.
Sec.
28-38.   Efficient resource procurement and utilization.
Sec.
28-39.    Reserved.
Sec.
28-40.   Reserved.
Article IV. Specifications
Sec.
28-41.   Reserved.
Sec.
28-42.   Maximum practicable competition.
Sec.
28-43.   Specifications prepared by other than city personnel.
Sec.
28-44.   Brand name or equal specification.
Sec.
28-45.   Brand name specification.
Sec.
28-46.   Reserved.
Article V. Procurement of Professional Design Services and Capital Improvements
Sec.
28-47.   Definitions.
Sec.
28-48   Procurement of construction.
Sec.
28-49.   Procurement of professional design services.
Sec.
28-50.   Procurement of construction services.
Sec.
28-51.   Construction by city employees.
Sec. 28-52--28-57.   Reserved.
Article VI. Contract Terms and Conditions
Sec.
28-58.   Contract terms and conditions.
Secs.
28-59--28-61.   Reserved.
Article VII. Cost Principles
Sec.
28-62.   Cost principles.
Sec.
28-63.   Cost or pricing data.
Secs.
28-64, 28-65. Reserved.
Article VIII. Materials Management
Sec.
28-66.   Definitions.
Sec.
28-67.   Materials management guidelines.
Sec.
28-68.   Inventory management.
Sec.
28-69.   Disposition of surplus property.
Sec.
28-70.   Disposition of unclaimed, lost, confiscated property.
Sec.
28-71.   Donations.
Secs.
28-72--28-74.   Reserved.
Article IX. Legal and Contractual Remedies
Sec.
28-75.   Definitions.
Sec.
28-76.   Authority of the contract officer.
Sec.
28-77.   Right to protest.
Sec.
28-78.   Filing of a protest.
Sec.
28-79.   Time for filing protests.
Sec.
28-80.   Stay of procurements during the legal due process.
Sec.
28-81.   Confidential information.
Sec.
28-82.   Decision by the contract officer on a protest.
Sec.
28-83.   Remedies for a protest.
Sec.
28-84.   Appeals to the director.
Sec.
28-85.   Notice of appeal.
Sec.
28-86.   Reserved.
Sec.
28-87.   Contract officer report on an appeal.
Sec.
28-88.   Remedies for an appeal of a protest.
Sec.
28-89.   Dismissal before hearing.
Sec.
28-90.   Hearing.
Sec.
28-91.   Filing of a contract claim.
Sec.
28-92.   Contract officer’s decision on a contract claim.
Sec.
28-93.   Issuance of a timely decision on a contract claim.
Sec.
28-94.   Appeals on a contract claim to the director.
Sec.
28-95.   City claims against a contractor.
Sec.
28-96.   Hearing.
Sec.
28-97.   Mediation.
Sec.
28-98.   Arbitration.
Sec.
28-99.   Authority to debar or suspend.
Sec.
28-100.   Debarment or suspension causes.
Sec.
28-101.   Matters not proper for debarment or suspension.
Sec.
28-102.   Initiation of debarment.
Sec.
28-103.   Period of debarment.
Sec.
28-104.   Notice.
Sec.
28-105.   Notice to affiliates.
Sec.
28-106.   Imputed knowledge.
Sec.
28-107.   Suspension.
Sec.
28-108.   Period and scope of suspension.
Sec.
28-109.   Suspension notice, hearing, determination and appeal.
Sec.
28-110.   Reinstatement.
Sec.
28-111.   Limited participation.
Sec.
28-112.   Master list for suspension and debarment.
Sec.
28-113.   Hearing procedures.
Sec.
28-114.   Hearing officer’s decision.
Sec.
28-115.   Reserved.
Sec.
28-116.   Reserved.
Sec.
28-117.   Judicial review of protests, claims, debarments or suspensions.
Sec.
28-118.   Exclusive remedy.
Secs.
28-119--28-125.   Reserved.
Article X. Cooperative Purchasing
Sec.
28-126.   Definitions.
Sec.
28-127.   Applicability.
Sec.
28-128.   Cooperative purchasing agreements required.
Sec.
28-129.   Cooperative purchasing authorized.
Secs.
28-130, 28-131. Reserved.
Article XI. Reserved
Secs.
28-132--28-136.   Reserved.
Article XII. Affirmative Action by City Contractors
Sec.
28-137.   Definitions.
Sec.
28-138.   Provision against discrimination required in all city contracts.
Sec.
28-139.   Reporting requirements.
Sec.
28-140.   Duties and requirements of contractors on city contracts;
responsibility for implementation.
Sec.
28-141.   Inability or failure to comply with affirmative action obligations.
Sec.
28-142.   Administrative responsibility.
Sec.
28-143.   Exemptions.
Sec.
28-144.   Sanctions.
Secs.
28-145, 28-146. Reserved.
Article XIII. Small Business Enterprise Program
Sec.
28-147.   Definitions.
Sec.
28-148.   Administrative provisions.
Sec.
28-149.   Establishment of SBE program goals for construction and construction
services projects.
Sec.
28-150.   SBE plans for eligible projects.
Sec.
28-151.   Establishment of SBE program goals for professional design services.
Sec.
28-151.1.   SBE plans for eligible design projects.
Sec.
28-151.2.   SBE good faith effort.
Sec.
28-151.3.   Applicability to procurement of goods, materials, and services.
Sec.
28-151.4.   Program compliance.
Sec.
28-151.5.   Additional terms.
Article XIV. Living Wage
Sec.
28-152.   Conditions for use.
Sec.
28-153   Eligible contract.
Sec.
28-154.   Ineligible contracts.
Sec.
28-155.   Eligible employee.
Sec.
28-156.   Reserved.
Sec.
28-157.   Wages.
Sec.
28-158.   Compliance.
Sec.
28-159.   Records.
Article XV. Contract Requirements for the Mitigation of Heat-Related Illnesses
and Injuries in the Workplace
Sec.
28-160.   Definitions.
Sec.
28-161.   Contract requirements.
Sec.
28-162.   Administrative responsibility.
Article XVI. Prevailing Wage
Sec.
28-163.   Definitions.
Sec.
28-164.   Payment of prevailing wages.
Sec.
28-165.   Required recordkeeping and notice posting.
Sec.
28-166.   Enforcement.
Sec.
28-167.   Sanctions.
Sec.
28-168.   Regulation.
ARTICLE I.
GENERAL PROVISIONS*
__________
*   Editors Note: Ord. No. 10404, § 1, adopted May 15, 2007, amended Arts. I--
X in their entirety to read as herein set out. Former Arts. I--X, §§
28-1--28-5, 28-11, 28-12, 28-15--28-37, 28-41--28-45, 28-47--28-52, 28-58, 28-
62, 28-63, 28-66--28-71, 28-74--28-118, 28-126--28-129, pertained to similar
subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 9913, § 1, adopted Nov. 17, 2003;
Ord. No. 10292, § 1, adopted June 27, 2006; Ord. No. 10328, §§ 1, 2, adopted
Oct. 10, 2006.
__________
Sec. 28-1. Applicability.
   Sec. 28-1(1). The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the following:
   (a)   Every expenditure of public monies by this city irrespective of their
source, including federal assistance monies;
   (b)   Disposal of property; and
   (c)   Contracts where there is no expenditure of public monies or where the
city is offering something of value to the business community when the city
determines source selection and award of a contract.
   Sec. 28-1(2). The following are exempt from the provisions of this chapter:
   (a)   Grants awarded by the city and approved by mayor and council;
   (b)   The sale or lease of city real property;
   (c)   Contracts for professional witnesses if the purpose of such contracts
is to provide for services or testimony relating to an existing or probable
judicial proceeding in which this city is or may become a party or to contracts
for special investigative services for law enforcement purposes;
   (d)   Agreements negotiated by the city attorney in settlement of litigation
or threatened litigation;
   (e)   The purchases of materials for resale in a concession operation;
   (f)   Contracts for municipal improvement districts; or
   (g)   Contracts entered into with an eligible entity as defined by Public
Law 105-285, section 673(1)(a)(i), as amended, for designated community
services block grant monies and any other monies given to the eligible entity
that accomplish the purpose of Public Law 205-285, section 672.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Sec. 28-2. Definitions.
In this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:
   Sec. 28-2(1). "Business" means any corporation, partnership, individual,
sole proprietorship, joint stock company, joint venture or any other private
legal entity.
   Sec. 28-2(2). "Change order" means a written document authorized by the
director which directs the contractor to make changes with or without the
consent of the contractor.
   Sec. 28-2(3). "City" means the municipal corporation now existing and known
as the City of Tucson.
   Sec. 28-2(4). "Construction" means the process of building, altering,
repairing, improving or demolishing any public infrastructure facility,
including public structure, public building, or other public improvements of
any kind to any real property. Construction does not include the routine
operation, routine repair, or routine maintenance of an existing public
infrastructure facility, including structures, buildings or real property.
   Sec. 28-2(5). "Construction services" means either of the following for
construction- manager-at risk, design-build and job-order-contracting project
delivery methods:
   (a)   Construction, excluding services through the construction-manager-at-
risk or job- order-contracting project delivery methods.
   (b)   A combination of construction and, as elected by the city, one or more
related services, such as finance services, maintenance services, operations
services, design services and preconstruction services, as those services are
authorized in the definitions of construction- manager-at-risk, design-build or
job-order-contracting in section
28-47.
   Sec. 28-2(6). “Contract” means all types of city agreements, regardless of
what they may be called, for the procurement of materials, services,
construction, construction services or the disposal of materials.
   Sec. 28-2(7). "Contract amendment" means any written alteration in the terms
and conditions of any contract accomplished by mutual action of the parties of
the contract.
   Sec. 28-2(8). "Contract officer" means any person duly authorized by the
director to facilitate the source selection process, including but not limited
to, preparing solicitations and written determinations, conducting
negotiations, making award recommendations, and administering contracts.
   Sec. 28-2(9). "Contractor" means any person who has a contract with the
city.
   Sec. 28-2(10). "Days", unless otherwise specified, means calendar days and
shall be computed pursuant to A.R.S. section 1-243.
   Sec. 28-2(11). "Department" means the department of procurement.
   Sec. 28-2(12). "Designee" means a duly authorized representative of the
director, designated by the director.
   Sec. 28-2(13).“Director” means the director of the department of procurement
and the central procurement and contracting authority for the city, or the
director's designee.
   Sec. 28-2(14). "Disposal of material" means sale of surplus, unclaimed and
seized property by public auction, competitive sealed bidding, small purchase
procedures or other appropriate method designated by this chapter.
   Sec. 28.2(15). "Electronic" means electrical, digital, magnetic, optical,
electromagnetic, or any other similar technology.
   Sec. 28-2(16). "Grant" means the furnishing by this city of assistance,
whether financial or otherwise, to any person to support a program authorized
by law. Grant does not include an agreement whose primary purpose is to procure
a specific end product, whether in the form of materials, services or
construction. A contract resulting from such an agreement is not a grant but a
procurement contract.
   Sec. 28-2(17). "In writing" has the same meaning as "written" or "writing"
in A.R.S. 47-1201, which includes printing, typewriting, electronic
transmission, facsimile, or any other intentional reduction to tangible form.
   Sec. 28-2(18). “Materials” means all property, including but not limited to,
equipment, supplies, and buildings but does not include land, a permanent
interest in land or leases of real property.
   Sec. 28-2(19). “Person” means any corporation, consultant, business,
individual, union, committee, club, other organization or group of individuals.
   Sec. 28-2(20). “Procurement” means buying, purchasing, renting, leasing or
otherwise acquiring any materials, services, construction or construction
services. Procurement also includes all functions that pertain to the
acquisition of any material, service, construction or construction services,
including description of requirements, selection and solicitation of sources,
preparation, negotiation and award of contract, and all phases of contract
administration.
   Sec. 28-2(21). “Public notice” means the distribution or dissemination of
information to interested parties using methods that are reasonably available.
Such methods may include electronic mailing lists and a website maintained for
that purpose.
   Sec. 28-2(22). “Services” means the furnishing of labor, time or effort by a
contractor, consultant, subcontractor or subconsultant which does not involve
the delivery of a specific end product other than required design documents or
reports and performance. Services do not include employment agreements or
collective bargaining agreements. The definition of services includes, but is
not limited to, consulting, personal, professional, legal counsel, auditing,
technical, professional design and construction services.
   Sec. 28-2(23). "Specification" is used interchangeably with "scope", "scope
of services", or "scope of work" and means any description of the physical or
functional characteristics, or of the nature of a material, service or
construction item. Specification may include a description of any requirement
for inspecting, testing, or preparing a material, service, or construction item
for delivery.
   Sec. 28-2(24). “Subcontractor or subconsultant” means a person who contracts
to perform work or render service to a contractor or consultant as defined by
this section or to another subcontractor or subconsultant as a part of a
contract with the city.
   Sec. 28-2(25). “Using agency” means any organizational unit of the city,
which utilizes any materials, services or construction procured under this
chapter.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Sec. 28-3. Supplementary general principles of law applicable.
Unless displaced by the particular provisions of this chapter, the principles
of law and equity, including the uniform commercial code of this state, the
common law of contracts as applied in this state and law relative to agency,
fraud, misrepresentation, duress, coercion and mistake supplement the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07)
Sec. 28-4. Requirement of good faith.
This chapter requires all parties involved in the negotiation, performance, or
administration of city contracts to act in good faith.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07)
Sec. 28-5. Confidential information.
Confidential information shall be designated as follows:
   Sec. 28-5(1). If a person believes that a bid, proposal, offer,
specification, or protest contains information that should be withheld from
public record, a statement advising the contract officer of this fact should
accompany the submission and the information shall be so identified wherever it
appears.
   Sec. 28-5(2). The information identified by the person as confidential may
not be disclosed until the contract officer makes a written determination.
   Sec. 28-5(3). The contract officer shall review the statement and
information and may determine in writing that the information shall be withheld
or disclosed.
   Sec. 28-5(4). If the contract officer determines to disclose the
information, the contract officer shall inform the person in writing of such
determination.
   Sec. 28-5(5). Notwithstanding the above provisions, in the event records
marked as confidential are requested for public release, the city shall release
records marked confidential ten (10) working days after the date of notice to
the person of the request for release, unless the person has, within the ten
(10) day period, secured a protective order, injunctive relief or other
appropriate order from a court of competent jurisdiction, enjoining the release
of the records.
   Sec. 28-5(6). The city shall not, under any circumstances, be responsible
for securing a protective order or other relief enjoining the release of
records marked confidential. Nor shall the city be in any way financially
responsible for any costs associated with securing such an order.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Secs. 28-6--28-10. Reserved.
ARTICLE II.
PROCUREMENT DIRECTOR AUTHORITY*
__________
*   Editors Note: See editor's note at Art. I.
__________
Sec. 28-11. Authority of the director.
   Sec. 28-11(1).Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the director may
adopt operational procedures, consistent with this chapter, governing the
procurement and management of all materials, services, construction and
construction services to be procured by this city and the disposal of
materials.
   Sec. 28-11(2). The director shall serve as the central procurement and
contracting authority of this city.
   Sec. 28-11(3). Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the director
shall:
   (a)   Procure or supervise the procurement of all materials, services and
construction needed by this city.
   (b)   Establish guidelines for the management of all inventories of
materials belonging to this city.
   (c)   Manage the disposal of materials belonging to the city.
   (d)   Sell, trade or otherwise dispose of surplus materials belonging to
this city.
   (e)   Prepare, issue, revise, maintain, and monitor the use of
specifications for materials, services and construction required by this city.
   (f)   Manage the city’s procurement card (pCard) program.
   (g)   Manage the city’s mail services division.
   (h)   Manage the city's Small Business Enterprise (SBE) and Disadvantaged
Business Enterprise (DBE) programs.
Sec. 28-11(4). The director may delegate procurement authority to designees or
to any department or official of the city.
Sec. 28-11(5). The director may determine in writing that noncompliance with
any provision of this chapter is nonsubstantial and may allow for correction or
may waive minor informalities or irregularities. The basis for the decision
shall be included in the determination.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Sec. 28-12. Written determinations.
Written determinations required by this chapter shall be retained in the
department.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07)
Secs. 28-13, 28-14. Reserved.
ARTICLE III.
SOURCE SELECTION AND CONTRACT FORMATION*
__________
*   Editors Note: See editor's note at Art. I.
__________
Sec. 28-15. Definitions.
In this article, unless the context otherwise requires:
   Sec. 28-15(1). "Best value" means a technique in the competitive sealed bid
process which permits the evaluation of objective criteria to determine the
best overall value to the city.
   Sec. 28-15(2). "Discussions" means communication with an offeror, bidder or
respondent for the purpose of:
   (a)   Eliminating minor irregularities, informalities, or apparent clerical
mistakes in the offer or response;
   (b)   Clarifying any offer or response to assure full understanding of, and
responsiveness to, solicitation requirements;
   (c)   Resolving minor variations in contract terms and conditions; or
   (d)   Establishing the competency or financial stability of any offeror,
bidder or respondent.
   Sec. 28-15(3). "Invitation for bid" means all documents, written or
electronic, whether attached or incorporated by reference, which are used for
soliciting bids in accordance with the procedures prescribed in section
28-17.
   Sec. 28-15(4). "Invitation for reverse auction bids" means all
documentation, written or electronic, whether attached or incorporated by
reference, which are used for soliciting bids in accordance with procedures
prescribed in section
28-24.
   Sec. 28-15(5). "Minor informality" means mistakes, or non-judgmental errors,
that have negligible effect on price, quantity, quality, delivery, or other
contractual terms and the waiver or correction of such mistakes does not
prejudice other bidders, offerors or respondents.
   Sec. 28-15(6). “Negotiations” means an exchange of information or any form
of cooperation during which the offeror and the city may alter or otherwise
change the scope of work, conditions, terms, and price, unless prohibited, of
the proposed contract.
   Sec. 28-15(7). "Proposal revision" means a change to a proposal made after
the solicitation closing date, at the request of or as allowed by a contract
officer, as the result of negotiation.
   Sec. 28-15(8). "Request for proposals" means all documents, written or
electronic, whether attached or incorporated by reference, which are used for
soliciting proposals in accordance with procedures prescribed in section
28-18.
   Sec. 28-15(9). "Request for qualifications" means all documents, written or
electronic, whether attached or incorporated by reference, which are used for
soliciting responses from qualified respondents in accordance with article V.
   Sec. 28-15(10). "Request for quotation" means a process for small purchases
as defined in section
28-16.
   Sec. 28-15(11). “Responsible bidder, offeror, or respondent” means a person
who has the capability to perform the contract requirements and the integrity
and reliability which will assure good faith performance.
   Sec. 28-15(12). “Responsive bidder “ means a person who submits a bid which
conforms in all material respects to the invitation for bids.
   Sec. 28-15 (13). “Reverse auction” means an electronic auction in which the
role of the buyer and seller are reversed. In an ordinary auction (also known
as a forward auction), buyers compete to obtain a good or service. In a reverse
auction, sellers compete to obtain business. Bids shall be publicly posted
throughout the auction to encourage competition.
   Sec. 28-15(14). “Solicitation” means an invitation for bids, a request for
technical proposals, a request for proposals, a request for qualifications, a
request for quotations, an invitation for reverse auction bids or any other
invitation or request by which the city invites a person to participate in a
procurement.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Sec. 28-16. Methods and dollar thresholds of source selection.
   All contracts of the city shall be awarded by one of the methods of source
selection specified in this chapter and by the dollar thresholds specified
herein.
   Sec. 28-16(1). Small purchases. A small purchase is any contract not
exceeding the dollar amount prescribed in A.R.S. § 41-2535(A) of the Arizona
Procurement Code. Small purchases may be made in accordance with the small
purchase procedures authorized in this section. Contract requirements shall not
be artificially divided so as to constitute a small purchase under this
section.
   Sec. 28-16(1)(a). Small purchases under ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00).
The director shall adopt operational procedures for making small purchases of
ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or less.
   Sec. 28-16(1)(b). Small purchases over ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00).
Insofar as it is practical for small purchases in excess of ten thousand
dollars ($10,000.00) but less than the dollar amount prescribed in A.R.S. § 41-
2535(A) of the Arizona Procurement Code, a request for quotation shall be
solicited from no less than three (3) businesses. Award shall be made to the
responsible respondent, whose offer is most advantageous to the city and
conforms in all material respects to the small purchase requirements. The
responses shall be maintained as a public record.
   Sec. 28-16(2). Consideration of taxes in small purchases. In evaluating
small purchases, except for procurement of construction, for purposes of
evaluating price, the director shall include the amount of applicable business
privilege tax. The amount of a city's business privilege tax shall not be
included in the evaluation except in those instances in which the award is
between a Tucson bidder and an Arizona-based, non-Tucson bidder. In this event,
the applicable city business privilege tax shall be included in the non-Tucson
bidder's price for evaluation purposes only.
   Sec. 28-16(3). Purchases exceeding the small dollar threshold: Purchases
that exceed the dollar amount prescribed in A.R.S. § 41-2535(A) of the Arizona
Procurement Code shall be made in accordance with one of the procedures
authorized in the following sections:
28-17 (competitive sealed bidding),
28-18 (competitive sealed proposals),
28-21 (sole source procurements),
28-22 (emergency procurements),
28-23 (special procurements),
28-24 (competitive reverse auctions),
28-48 (procurement of professional design services), and
28-50 (procurement of construction services).
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Sec. 28-17. Competitive sealed bidding.
   Sec. 28-17(1). Invitation for bids.
   (a)   Competitive sealed bids shall be solicited through an invitation for
bids. The invitation for bids shall include specifications and any applicable
evaluation criteria. Contractual terms and conditions may be included within
the solicitation document or incorporated by reference.
   (b)   A prequalification process may be conducted prior to the issuance of
an invitation for bids in order to establish a list of qualified bidders. In
the event a prequalification process is used, the contract officer shall only
consider bids that are submitted from prequalified bidders.
   Sec. 28-17(2). Public notice. Notice of the invitation for bids shall be
electronically posted and the invitation for bids shall be available for public
inspection not less than fourteen (14) days prior to the date set forth therein
for the opening of bids. A shorter time may be deemed necessary for a
particular procurement as determined in writing by the director. The public
notice shall state the place, date, and time of bid opening.
   Sec. 28-17(3). Late bids. A bid is late if it is received at the location
designated in the invitation for bids after the time and date set for bid
opening. The department's clock is the governing clock. A late bid shall be
rejected. A late bid shall not be opened except for, if necessary,
identification purposes. Such bids may be returned to the bidder. Bidders
submitting bids that are rejected as late shall be so notified.
   Sec. 28-17(4). Bid opening. Bids shall be opened publicly in the presence of
one or more witnesses at the time and place designated in the invitation for
bids. The name of each bidder and the amount of each bid, as well as other
relevant information as the director deems appropriate shall be recorded.
Unless otherwise determined by the director, this record shall be open to
public inspection. In the event no attendees are present for bid opening, the
sealed bids shall be opened by the department and a "bid" or "no bid" may be
recorded on the tabulation sheet. The bid may then be given to the appropriate
person for recording. The attendance sheets will indicate that there were no
attendees present. Unless otherwise determined by the director, the bids shall
not be opened for public inspection until after a contract is awarded. After a
notice of intent to award is issued, or in the absence of a notice of intent to
award, after final execution of the contract, the bids shall be available for
public inspection, except to the extent that the withholding of information is
permitted or required by law. If the bidder designates a portion of its bid as
confidential, it shall isolate and identify in writing the confidential
portions in accordance with section
28-5.
   Sec. 28-17(5). Bid acceptance and bid evaluation. Bids shall be
unconditionally accepted without alteration or correction, except as authorized
in this chapter. Bids shall be evaluated based on the requirements set forth in
the invitations for bids, which may include criteria to determine acceptability
such as inspection, testing, quality, workmanship, delivery, and suitability
for a particular purpose. The invitation for bids shall set forth the
evaluation criteria to be used. No criteria may be used in bid evaluation that
is not set forth in the invitation for bids.
   Sec. 28-17(6). Correction or withdrawal of bids; cancellation of awards.
Correction or withdrawal of inadvertently erroneous bids before or after bid
opening, or cancellation of awards or contracts based on such bid mistakes, may
be permitted where appropriate. Mistakes discovered before bid opening may be
modified or withdrawn by written notice received in the department prior to the
time set for bid opening.
Mistakes discovered after bid opening may be modified or withdrawn only to the
extent that the bidder can show by clear and convincing evidence that a mistake
of a nonjudgmental character was made, the nature of the mistake, and the bid
price actually intended. After bid opening, no changes in bid prices or other
bid provisions prejudicial to the interest of the city or fair competition
shall be permitted. In lieu of bid correction, a bidder alleging a mistake may
be permitted to withdraw its bid if:
   (a)   The mistake is clearly evident on the face of the bid document but the
intended correct bid is not similarly evident; or
   (b)   The bidder submits evidence that clearly and convincingly demonstrates
that a mistake was made.
All decisions to permit the correction or withdrawal of bids, or to cancel
awards based on bid mistakes, shall be supported by a written determination
made by the director.
   Sec. 28-17(7). Contract award.
   (a)   General. The contract shall be awarded by appropriate notice to the
lowest responsible and responsive bidder whose bid conforms in all material
respects to requirements and criteria set forth in the invitation for bids.
   (b)   Contract award based on best value. Notwithstanding section
28-17(7)(a), the contract may be awarded on best value analysis provided that
the criteria for analysis was included in the invitation for bids in accordance
with section
28-17(1). The contract shall be awarded by appropriate written notice to the
responsive, responsible bidder whose bid is determined to be the best value to
the city and that conforms in all material respects to requirements and
criteria set forth in the invitation for bids.
   (c)   Procurement of recycled material. If the price of recycled material,
which conforms to specifications, is within ten (10) percent of a low bid
material, which is not recycled, and the recycled material bidder is otherwise
the lowest responsible and responsive bidder, the award shall be made to the
bidder offering the recycled material. The director is authorized to purchase
recycled material where the price differential between available virgin
material and recycled content material is greater than ten (10) percent when
the additional cost, as determined by the director, is deemed insignificant and
substantial budget impacts will not result.
   (d)   Consideration of taxes in competitive sealed bidding. In evaluating
the bids, except for procurement of construction, and for purposes of
determining the low bidder, the director shall include the amount of applicable
business privilege tax. The amount of a city's business privilege tax shall not
be included in the evaluation except in those instances in which the award is
between a Tucson bidder and an Arizona-based, non-Tucson bidder. In this event,
the applicable city business privilege tax shall be included in the non-Tucson
bidder's price for evaluation purposes only to determine the lowest bidder.
   (e)   Public record. After the city issues a notice of intent to award, or
in the absence of a notice of intent to award upon final contract execution,
the bids shall be available for public inspection, except to the extent that
the withholding of information is permitted or required by law. If the bidder
designates a portion of its bid as confidential, it shall isolate and identify
in writing the confidential portions in accordance with section
28-5 (confidential information).
   Sec. 28-17(8). Low tie bids. If there are two (2) or more low responsive
bids from responsible bidders that are identical in price and other evaluation
criteria and that meet all the requirements and criteria set forth in the
invitation for bids, award may be made by random selection in a manner
prescribed by the director.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Sec. 28-18. Competitive sealed proposals.
   Sec. 28-18(1). Request for proposals.
   (a)   Competitive sealed proposals shall be solicited through a request for
proposals. The request for proposals shall include a scope of work and any
applicable evaluation criteria. Contractual terms and conditions may be
included within the solicitation document or incorporated by reference.
   (b)   A prequalification process may be conducted prior to the issuance of a
request for proposals in order to establish a list of qualified offerors. In
the event a prequalification process is used, the contract officer shall only
consider proposals that are submitted from prequalified offerors.
   Sec. 28-18(2). Public notice. Notice of request for proposal shall be
electronically posted and the request for proposal shall be available for
public inspection not less than fourteen (14) days prior to the date set forth
therein for the opening of bids. A shorter time may be deemed necessary for a
particular procurement as determined in writing by the director. The public
notice shall state the place, date, and time of bid opening.
   Sec. 28-18(3). Late proposals. A proposal is late if it is received at the
location designated in the request for proposals after the time and date set
for receipt of proposals. Late proposals shall be rejected in accordance with
section
28-17(3).
   Sec. 28-18(4). Receipt of proposals. Proposals shall not be opened publicly.
No proposals shall be handled as to permit disclosure of the contents of any
proposal to competing offerors. Proposals shall be open for public inspection
after a notice of intent to award is issued, or in the absence of a notice of
intent to award, after final execution of the contract, except to the extent
that the withholding of information is permitted or required by law. If the
offeror designates a portion of its proposal as confidential, it shall isolate
and identify in writing the confidential portions in accordance with section
28-5 (confidential information).
   Sec. 28-18(5). Withdrawal of proposals. Proposals may be withdrawn by
written notice before or after proposal opening and may be permitted where
appropriate. All decisions to permit the withdrawal of a proposal after opening
shall be supported by a written determination made by the director.
   Sec. 28-18(6). Consideration of taxes in competitive sealed proposals. In
evaluating the proposals, except for procurement of construction, and for
purposes of evaluating price, the director shall include the amount of
applicable business privilege tax. The amount of a city's business privilege
tax shall not be included in the evaluation except in those instances in which
the award is between a Tucson offeror and an Arizona-based, non-Tucson offeror.
In this event, the applicable city business privilege tax shall be included in
the non-Tucson offeror's price for evaluation purposes.
   Sec. 28-18(7). Evaluation of proposals.
   (a)   Evaluation criteria. The request for proposals shall state the
criteria to be used in the evaluation of the proposals and shall include their
relative importance. Specific numerical weighting is not required to be
published.
   (b)   Selection committee. The director shall appoint a selection committee
to evaluate the proposals and make a recommendation based on the criteria set
forth in the request for proposals. No other factors or criteria may be used in
the evaluation.
   Sec. 28-18(8). Discussion with offerors. Discussions may be conducted with
offerors.
   Sec. 28-18(9). Negotiations with offerors and revisions to proposals.
Negotiations may be conducted with offerors. Offerors shall be accorded fair
and equal treatment in conducting negotiations and there shall be no disclosure
of any information derived from proposals submitted by competing offerors.
   (a)   Concurrent negotiations. Negotiations may be conducted concurrently
with offerors for the purpose of determining source selection and/or contract
award.
   (b)   Exclusive negotiations. Exclusive negotiations may be conducted with
the offeror whose proposal is determined in the source selection process to be
most advantageous to the city. Exclusive negotiations may be conducted
subsequent to concurrent negotiations or may be conducted without requiring
previous concurrent negotiations. Exclusive negotiations shall not constitute a
contract award nor shall it confer any property rights to the successful
offeror. If exclusive negotiations are conducted and an agreement is not
reached, the city may enter into exclusive negotiations with the next highest
ranked offeror without the need to repeat the formal solicitation process.
   Sec. 28-18(10). Contract award. Contract award shall be made by the director
to the responsible offeror whose proposal is determined in writing to be the
most advantageous to the city taking into consideration the evaluation criteria
set forth in the request for proposals. The contract file shall contain the
basis on which the award is made.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Sec. 28-19. Contracting for legal counsel.
   Sec. 28-19(1). Authority. For the purpose of procuring the services of legal
counsel, as defined by the laws of the state, contracts for the services of
legal counsel shall be awarded with the authorization of the city attorney
except as otherwise provided by law.
   Sec. 28-19(2). Conditions for use. Unless determined by the city attorney
that direct selection is in the best interest of the city, the services of
legal counsel shall be procured in accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07)
Sec. 28-20. Reserved.
Sec. 28-21. Sole source procurements.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, a contract may be awarded
without competition when the director determines in writing, after conducting a
good faith review of available sources, that there is only one source for the
required material, service, or construction item. The using agency requesting a
sole source procurement shall provide written evidence to support a sole source
determination. The director may require that negotiations are conducted as to
price, delivery, and terms. The director may require the submission of cost or
pricing data in connection with an award under this section. Sole source
procurement shall be avoided, except when no reasonable alternative sources
exist. A written determination by the director of the basis for the sole source
procurement shall be maintained as a public record.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Sec. 28-22. Emergency procurements.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the director may make or
authorize others to make emergency procurements of materials, services, or
construction when there exists a threat to public health, welfare, or safety or
if a situation exists which makes compliance with sections
28-17 (competitive sealed bidding),
28-18 (competitive sealed proposals),
28-24 (competitive reverse auctions),
28-49 (procurement of professional design services), or
28-50 (procurement of construction services) contrary to the public interest;
provided that such emergency procurements shall be made with such competition
as is practicable under the circumstances. The using agency requesting an
emergency procurement shall provide written evidence to support an emergency
determination. An emergency procurement shall be limited to those materials,
services, or construction necessary to satisfy the emergency need. A written
determination director of the basis for the emergency procurement and for the
selection of the particular contractor shall be maintained as a public record.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Sec. 28-23. Special procurements.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the director may make, or
authorize others to make, procurements when, due to unusual or special
circumstances, it would be in the best interest of the city to accomplish the
procurement without compliance with sections
28-17 (competitive sealed bidding),
28-18 (competitive sealed proposals),
28-24 (competitive reverse auctions),
28-49 (procurement of professional design services), or
28-50 (procurement of construction services). The using agency requesting a
special procurement shall provide written evidence to support a special
procurement determination. Any special procurement shall be limited to those
materials, services, or construction necessary to satisfy the city’s need and
shall be made with sound fiscal discretion. A written determination by the
director of the basis for the special procurement and for the selection of the
particular contractor shall be maintained as public record. The determination
and the award shall be made in accordance with internal departmental procedures
ensuring that the procurement is fair, honest, prudent, a wise exercise of
discretion and is in the public interest.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Sec. 28-24. Competitive reverse auctions.
   Sec. 28-24(1). Invitation for reverse auction bids.
   (a)   Competitive reverse auction bids shall be solicited through an
invitation for reverse auction bids. The invitation for reverse auction bids
shall be issued and shall include specifications and any applicable evaluation
criteria. Contractual terms and conditions may be included within the
solicitation document or incorporated by reference.
   (b)   A prequalification process may be conducted prior to the issuance of
an invitation for reverse auction bids in order to establish a list of
qualified bidders. In the event a prequalification process is used, the
contract officer shall only consider bids that are submitted from prequalified
bidders.
   Sec. 28-24(2). Public notice. Notice of the invitation for reverse auction
bids shall be electronically posted and the invitation for reverse auction bids
shall be available for public inspection not less than fourteen (14) days prior
to the date set forth therein for the close of the auction. A shorter time may
be deemed necessary for a particular procurement as determined in writing by
the director. The public notice shall state the location of the internet
website hosting the reverse auction.
   Sec. 28-24(3). Bid acceptance and bid evaluation. Bids shall be
unconditionally accepted without alteration or correction, except as authorized
in this chapter. Bids shall be evaluated based on the requirements set forth in
the invitation for reverse auction bids, which may include criteria to
determine acceptability such as inspection, testing, quality, workmanship,
delivery, and suitability for a particular purpose. The invitation for reverse
auction bids shall set forth the evaluation criteria to be used. No criteria
may be used in bid evaluation that is not set forth in the invitation for
reverse auction bids.
   Sec. 28-24(4). Correction or withdrawal of bids; cancellation of awards.
Correction or withdrawal of inadvertently erroneous bids before or after
auction closing, or cancellation of awards or contracts based on such bid
mistakes, may be permitted where appropriate. Mistakes discovered before
auction closing may be modified or withdrawn by written notice received in the
department prior to the time set for auction closing.
Mistakes discovered after auction closing may be modified or withdrawn only to
the extent that the bidder can show by clear and convincing evidence that a
mistake of a nonjudgmental character was made, the nature of the mistake, and
the bid price actually intended. After auction closing, no changes in bid
prices or other bid provisions prejudicial to the interest of the city or fair
competition shall be permitted. In lieu of bid correction, a bidder alleging a
mistake may be permitted to withdraw its bid if:
   (a)   The mistake is clearly evident in the auction transcripts, but the
intended correct bid is not similarly evident; or
   (b)   The bidder submits evidence that clearly and convincingly demonstrates
that a mistake was made.
All decisions to permit the correction or withdrawal of bids, or to cancel
awards based on bid mistakes, shall be supported by a written determination
made by the director.
   Sec. 28-24(5). Contract award. The contract shall be awarded by appropriate
notice to the lowest responsible and responsive bidder whose bid conforms in
all material respects to requirements and criteria set forth in the invitation
for reverse auction bids.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Sec. 28-25. Cancellation of solicitations.
   Sec. 28-25(1). Cancellation of solicitations. An invitation for bids, a
request for proposals, a request for qualifications, an invitation for reverse
auction bids or other solicitation may be cancelled prior to opening or after
opening when it is in the best interest of the city.
   Sec. 28-25(2). Cancellation of solicitations prior to opening.
   (a)   As used in this section, "opening" means the date and time set for
opening of bids, receipt of statements of qualifications or receipt of
proposals in competitive sealed proposals or in the case of a reverse auction
means the date and time set for the auction close.
   (b)   Prior to opening, a solicitation may be cancelled in whole or in part
when the director determines in writing that such action is in the city's best
interest for reasons including but not limited to:
   (i)   The city no longer requires the materials, services, or construction;
   (ii)   The city no longer can reasonably expect to fund the procurement;
   (iii)   Proposed amendments to the solicitation would be of such magnitude
that a new solicitation is in the best interest of the city; or
   (iv)   It is otherwise not advantageous to the city.
   (c)   When a solicitation is cancelled prior to opening, notice of
cancellation shall be publicly posted.
   (d)   The notice of cancellation shall:
   (i)   Identify the solicitation;
   (ii)   Briefly explain the reason for cancellation; and
   (iii)   Where appropriate, explain that an opportunity will be given to
compete on any resolicitation or any future procurements of similar materials,
services, or construction.
   Sec. 28-25(3). Cancellation of solicitation after opening but prior to
award.
   (a)   After opening but prior to award, a solicitation may be cancelled when
the director determines in writing that such action is in the city's best
interest for reasons including but not limited to:
   (i)   The city no longer requires the materials, services or construction;
   (ii)   Ambiguous, erroneous or otherwise inadequate specifications or scopes
of work were part of the solicitation;
   (iii)   The solicitation did not provide for consideration of all factors of
significance to the city;
   (iv)   Prices exceed available funds and it would not be appropriate to
adjust quantities to come within available funds;
   (v)   All otherwise acceptable bids, statements of qualifications or
proposals received are at clearly unreasonable prices;
   (vi)   There is reason to believe that the bids, statements of
qualifications or proposals may not have been independently arrived at in open
competition, may have been collusive, or may have been submitted in bad faith;
   (vii)   Competition was insufficient; or
   (viii)   It is otherwise not advantageous to the city.
   (b)   A notice of cancellation of the solicitation shall be sent to all
persons that submitted bids, statements of qualifications or proposals, and it
shall conform to subsection
28-25(2)(d) of this section.
   (c)   All bids, proposals or statements received shall remain, to the extent
possible, confidential.
   Sec. 28-25(4). Documentation. The reasons for cancellation shall be made a
part of the procurement file and shall be available for public inspection.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Sec. 28-26. Rejection of individual bids, proposals, quotations or statements
of qualifications.
   (a)   A bid may be rejected if:
   (i)   The bidder is determined to be nonresponsible pursuant to section
28-27 (Responsibility of bidders, offerors and respondents);
   (ii)   The bid is nonresponsive in accordance with section
28-17 (competitive sealed bidding);
   (iii)   The proposed price exceeds available funds or is unreasonable; or
   (iv)   It is otherwise not advantageous to the city.
   (b)   A proposal, statement of qualifications, or reverse auction bid may be
rejected if:
   (i)   The person responding to the solicitation is determined to be
nonresponsible pursuant to section
28-27 (responsibility of bidders, offerors and respondents); or
   (ii)   It is unacceptable;
   (iii)   The proposed price exceeds available funds or is unreasonable; or
   (iv)   It is otherwise not advantageous to the city.
   (c)   The reasons for rejection shall be made a part of the procurement file
and shall be available for public inspection.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Sec. 28-27. Responsibility of bidders, offerors and respondents.
   Sec. 28-27(1). Findings of nonresponsibility. If a bidder, offeror or
respondent who otherwise would have been awarded a contract is found
nonresponsible, a written finding of nonresponsibility, setting forth the basis
of the finding, shall be prepared by the contract officer. The unreasonable
failure of a bidder, offeror or respondent to promptly supply information in
connection with an inquiry with respect to responsibility may be grounds for a
finding of nonresponsibility with respect to such bidder or offeror. The
written finding shall be made part of the contract file and be made a public
record.
   Sec. 28-27(2). Right of nondisclosure. Confidential information furnished by
a bidder, offeror or respondent in response to an inquiry of responsibility
pursuant to this section shall not be disclosed by the city outside of the
department, using agency, or individuals involved in the evaluation process
without prior written consent by the bidder, offeror or respondent.
Confidential information shall be identified and managed in accordance with
section
28-5.
   Sec. 28-27(3). Factors. Factors to be considered in determining if a
prospective contractor is responsible include:
   (a)   The proposed contractor's financial, physical, personnel or other
resources, including subcontracts;
   (b)   The proposed contractor's record of performance and integrity;
   (c)   Whether the proposed contractor is qualified legally to contract with
the city; and
   (d)   Whether the proposed contractor supplied all necessary information
concerning its responsibility.
   Sec. 28-27(4). Responsibility criteria. The contract officer may establish
specific responsibility criteria for a particular procurement. Any specific
responsibility criteria shall be set forth in the solicitation.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Sec. 28-28. Bid and contract security, material or service contracts.
The director may require the submission of security to guarantee faithful bid
and contract performance. In determining the amount and type of security
required for each contract, the director shall consider the nature of the
performance and the need for future protection to the city. The requirement for
security must be included in the invitation for bids, invitation for reverse
auction bids or request for proposals. Failure to submit security in the amount
and type of security required may result in the rejection of the bid or
proposal.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07)
Sec. 28-29. Reserved.
Sec. 28-30. Reserved.
Sec. 28-31. Multi-term contracts.
Unless otherwise provided by law, a contract for materials, services or
construction may be entered into for any period of time deemed to be in the
best interest of this city, if the term of the contract and conditions of
renewal or extension, if any, are included in the solicitation and monies are
available for the first fiscal period at the time of contracting. Payment and
performance obligations for succeeding fiscal periods are subject to the
availability and appropriation of monies.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Sec. 28-32. Right to inspect.
The city may, at reasonable times, inspect the part of the plant or place of
business of a contractor, consultant or any subcontractor or subconsultant that
is related to the performance of any contract awarded or to be awarded by this
city.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07)
Sec. 28-33. Right to audit records.
   Sec. 28-33(1). The city may, at reasonable times and places, audit the books
and records of any person who submits cost or pricing data as provided in
article VII of this chapter to the extent that the books and records relate to
the cost or pricing data. Any person who is awarded a contract, change order or
contract modification for which cost or pricing data is required shall maintain
the books and records that relate to the cost or pricing data for three (3)
years from the date of final payment under the contract, unless otherwise
specified in the contract.
   Sec. 28-33(2). The city is entitled to audit the books and records of a
contractor, consultant or any subcontractor or subconsultant under any contract
or subcontract to the extent that the books and records relate to the
performance of the contract or subcontract. The books and records shall be
maintained by the contractor for a period of three (3) years from the date of
final payment under the prime contractor or consultant, and by the
subcontractor or subconsultant for a period of three (3) years from the date of
final payment under the subcontract, unless otherwise specified in the
contract.
   Sec. 28-33(3). All contractors, consultants, subcontractors, and
subconsultants participating in city contracts are required to cooperate fully
and promptly with the city in reviews, investigations and other requests for
information that are related to the performance of any contract awarded or to
be awarded by this city.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Sec. 28-34. Reporting of anticompetitive practices.
If for any reason collusion or other anticompetitive practices are suspected
among any bidders, offerors or respondents a notice of the relevant facts shall
be transmitted to the director and the city attorney. This section does not
require a law enforcement agency conducting an investigation into such
practices to convey such notice to the director.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07)
Sec. 28-35. Prospective vendor databases.
   Sec. 28-35(1). The director shall maintain a prospective vendor database.
Inclusion of the name of a person shall not indicate whether the person is
responsible concerning a particular procurement or otherwise capable of
successfully performing a city contract.
   Sec. 28-35(2). Persons desiring to be included in the prospective vendor
database may register with the department electronically. The department may
remove a person from the prospective vendor database if it is determined that
inclusion is not advantageous to the city.
   Sec. 28-35(3). It shall be the vendor’s sole responsibility to ensure that
vendor registration information is current and active.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Sec. 28-36. Contract form and execution.
All contracts entered into under this chapter shall be executed in the name of
the city by the director and approved as to form by the city attorney.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Sec. 28-37. Assignment of rights and duties.
The rights and duties of a city contract are not transferable or otherwise
assignable without the written consent of the director.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07)
Sec. 28-38. Efficient resource procurement and utilization.
All printed material produced by a contractor in the performance of a contract
shall, whenever practicable, be printed on recycled paper, labeled as printed
on recycled paper, and duplexed.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07)
Sec. 28-39. Reserved.
Sec. 28-40. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV.
SPECIFICATIONS*
__________
*   Editors Note: See editor's note at Art. I.
__________
Sec. 28-41. Reserved.
Sec. 28-42. Maximum practicable competition.
   Sec. 28-42(1). All specifications shall seek to promote overall economy for
the purposes intended and encourage competition in satisfying the city's needs
and shall not be unduly restrictive.
   Sec. 28-42(2). To the extent practicable and unless otherwise permitted by
this chapter, all specifications shall describe the city's requirements in a
manner that does not unnecessarily exclude a material, service, or construction
item.
   Sec. 28-42(3). Restrictive specifications shall not be used unless such
specifications are required and it is not practicable or advantageous to use a
less restrictive specification. The using agency requesting a restrictive
specification shall provide written evidence to support the restrictive
specification. Past success in the material's performance, or inconvenience of
developing specifications do not justify the use of restrictive specifications.
   Sec. 28-42(4). To the extent practicable, the city shall use accepted
commercial specifications and shall procure standard commercial materials.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Sec. 28-43. Specifications prepared by other than city personnel.
The requirements of this chapter regarding the purposes and nonrestrictiveness
of specifications shall apply to all specifications prepared other than by city
personnel, including, but not limited to, those prepared by architects,
engineers, designers, and consultants for public contracts, or subcontractors.
No person preparing specifications shall receive any direct or indirect benefit
from the utilization of such specifications.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07)
Sec. 28-44. Brand name or equal specification.
A brand name or equal specification may be used to describe the standards of
quality, performance, and other salient characteristics needed to meet the
requirements of a solicitation, and which invites offers for equivalent
products from a manufacturer.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Sec. 28-45. Brand name specification.
A brand name specification may be used to identify the sole acceptable item
that meets the city’s needs for purchases above the amount specified in section
28-16(1). The using agency requesting a brand name specification shall provide
written evidence to support a brand name determination. A written determination
by the director of the basis for the brand name shall be maintained as public
record. Past success in the material’s performance, traditional purchasing
practices, or inconvenience of drawing specifications do not justify the use of
a brand name specification.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Sec. 28-46. Reserved.
ARTICLE V.
PROCUREMENT OF PROFESSIONAL DESIGN SERVICES AND CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS*
__________
*   Editors Note: See editor's note at Art. I.
__________
Sec. 28-47. Definitions.
In this article, unless the context otherwise requires:
   Sec. 28-47(1). "Capital improvement" means an outlay of funds for the
acquisition or improvement of real property, which extends the life or
increases the productivity of the real property.
   Sec. 28-47(2). "Construction" means the process of building, altering,
repairing, improving or demolishing any public infrastructure facility,
including public structure, public building, or other public improvements of
any kind to any real property. Construction does not include the routine
operation, routine repair, or routine maintenance of existing public
infrastructures or facilities, including structures, buildings or real
property.
   Sec. 28-47(3). "Construction-manager-at-risk" means a project delivery
method in which:
   (a)   There is a separate contract for design services and a separate
contract for construction services.
   (b)   The contract for construction services may be entered into at the same
time as the contract for design services or at a later time.
   (c)   Design and construction of the project may be in sequential phases or
concurrent phases.
   (d)   Finance services, maintenance services, operations services,
preconstruction services and other related services may be included.
   Sec. 28-47(4). "Construction services" means either of the following for
construction- manager-at-risk, design-build and job-order-contracting project
delivery methods:
   (a)   Construction, excluding services, through the construction-manager-at-
risk or job- order-contracting project delivery methods.
   (b)   A combination of construction and, as elected by the city, one or more
related services, such as finance services, maintenance services, operations
services, design services and preconstruction services, as those services are
authorized in the definitions of construction- manager-at-risk, design-build or
job-order-contracting in this section.
   Sec. 28-47(5). "Cost" means the aggregate cost of all materials and
services, including labor performed by force account.
   Sec. 28-47(6). "Design-bid-build" means a project delivery method in which:
   (a)   There is a sequential award of two (2) separate contracts.
   (b)   The first contract is for design services.
   (c)   The second contract is for construction.
   (d)   Design and construction of the project are in sequential phases.
   (e)   Finance services, maintenance services and operations services are not
included.
   Sec. 28-47(7). "Design-build" means a project delivery method in which:
   (a)   There is a single contract for design services and construction
services.
   (b)   Design and construction of the project may be in sequential phases or
concurrent phases.
   (c)   Finance services, maintenance services, operations services,
preconstruction services and other related services may be included.
   Sec. 28-47(8). "Finance services" means financing for a construction
services project.
   Sec. 28-47(9). "Force account" means work ordered to be done without prior
agreement (i.e., is not included in the negotiated lump sum or unit prices). If
so ordered, the objective is to reimburse the contractor for all costs
associated with the work on an agreed time and materials basis, plus profit
commensurate with those costs.
   Sec. 28-47(10). "Infrastructure facility" means a building; structure; or
networks of buildings, structures, pipes, controls, and equipment that provide
transportation, utilities, public education, or public safety services.
Included are government office buildings; public schools; courthouses; jails;
prisons; water treatment plants, distribution systems, and pumping stations;
wastewater treatment plants, collection systems, and pumping stations; solid
waste disposal plants, incinerators, landfills, and related facilities; public
roads and streets; highways; public parking facilities; public transportation
systems, terminals, and rolling stock; rail, air, and water port structures,
terminals, and equipment.
   Sec. 28-47(11). "Job-order-contracting" means a project delivery method in
which:
   (a)   The contract is a requirements contract for indefinite quantities of
construction.
   (b)   The construction to be performed is specified in job orders issued
during the contract.
   (c)   Finance services, maintenance services, operations services,
preconstruction services, design services and other related services may be
included.
   (d)   A job order for an individual project may not exceed $5,000,000 unless
the Mayor and Council approves a higher limit for that project.
   Sec. 28-47(12). "Maintenance services" means routine maintenance, repair and
replacement of existing facilities, structures, buildings or real property.
   Sec. 28-47(13). "Operations services" means routine operation of existing
facilities, structures, buildings or real property.
   Sec. 28-47(14). "Preconstruction services" means advice during the design
phase.
   Sec. 28-47(15). "Professional design services" means architect services,
assayer services, engineering services, geologist services, landscape architect
services, and land surveying service or any combination of those services that
are legally required to be accomplished, reviewed, and approved by
professionals registered to practice in the pertaining discipline in the State
of Arizona.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15; Ord. No. 12175, §
1, 6-17-25)
Sec. 28-48. Procurement of construction.
   Sec. 28-48(1). Contracts for construction shall be solicited through a
competitive sealed bid process except as otherwise provided for in
28-50 (procurement of construction services),
28-16(1) (small purchases),
28-21 (sole source procurement),
28-22 (emergency procurements) and
28-23 (special procurements). The director shall award and administer contracts
for construction in accordance with the requirements of A.R.S. title 34 and the
Tucson Procurement Code.
   Sec. 28-48(2). Bidders shall submit subcontractor lists for all first tier
subcontracts that are above five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). Bids not in
compliance with this requirement shall be deemed non-responsive. Submission of
the subcontractor list shall act as bidder certification that the work shall be
performed by either the bidder or the listed subcontractors. Modifications,
additions, or substitutions may be allowed at the discretion of the director,
for reasons including but not limited to, subcontractor non-responsiveness,
insolvency, or any other reason deemed by the director to be in the best
interest of the city.
   Sec. 28-48(3). If failure to comply with subsection
28-48(2) would result in the rejection of the lowest responsive bid, and the
next lowest responsive bid is five (5) percent higher (or more) than the lowest
responsive bid, the director shall allow the lowest responsive bidder an
additional two (2) days from the time of bid opening to submit the required
subcontractor list.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 10434, § 1, 7-10-07; Ord. No. 10462, §
1, 10-16-07; Ord. No. 10635, § 1, 2-24-09; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
   Editors Note: Section 2 of Ord. No. 10434 states that "Section 1 [28-48(4)]
shall expire on June 26, 2008."
   Editors Note: Ord. No. 10462, § 4, states that section
28-48(3) shall apply to applicable solicitations issued after the effective
date of this ordinance.
Sec. 28-49. Procurement of professional design services.
Contracts for professional design services shall be solicited through a request
for qualifications except as otherwise provided for in
28-16(1) (small purchases),
28-21 (sole source procurement),
28-22 (emergency procurements) and
28-23 (special procurements). The director shall award and administer contracts
for professional design services in accordance with the requirements of A.R.S.
title 34 and the Tucson Procurement Code.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Sec. 28-50. Procurement of construction services.
Contracts for construction services shall be solicited through a design-build,
construction-manager-at-risk or job-order-contracting selection process
utilizing a request for qualifications except as otherwise provided for in
sections
28-16(1) (small purchases),
28-21 (sole source procurement),
28-22 (emergency procurements) and
28-23 (special procurements). The director shall award and administer contracts
for construction services in accordance with the requirements of A.R.S. title
34 and the Tucson Procurement Code.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Sec. 28-51. Construction by city employees.
A building, structure, addition or alteration of a public facility may be
constructed by force account if the cost does not exceed the amount established
and adjusted each year in accordance with A.R.S. title 34.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07)
Sec. 28-52--28-57. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI.
CONTRACT TERMS AND CONDITIONS*
__________
*   Editors Note: See editor's note at Art. I.
__________
Sec. 28-58. Contract terms and conditions.
All city contracts shall include provisions necessary to define the
responsibilities and rights of the parties to the contract. The director shall
have the authority to establish and modify any such terms and conditions.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07)
Secs. 28-59--28-61. Reserved.
ARTICLE VII.
COST PRINCIPLES*
__________
*   Editors Note: See editor's note at Art. I.
__________
Sec. 28-62. Cost principles.
The director shall adopt rules setting forth cost principles which shall be
used to determine the allowability of incurred costs for the purpose of
reimbursing costs under contract provisions which provide for the reimbursement
of costs.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Sec. 28-63. Cost or pricing data.
The submission of current cost or pricing data may be required in connection
with any award, change order or contract modification.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07)
Secs. 28-64, 28-65. Reserved.
ARTICLE VIII.
MATERIALS MANAGEMENT*
__________
*   Editors Note: See editor's note at Art. I.
__________
Sec. 28-66. Definitions.
In this article, unless the context otherwise requires:
   Sec. 28-66(1). "Property" means assets with a useful life of more than one
(1) year.
   Sec. 28-66(2). "Property transfer" means the transfer of fixed assets
between using agencies or transfer of property to or from the surplus property
program.
   Sec. 28-66(3). "Surplus property" means property no longer needed by using
agencies for their operations, property in poor or non-working condition, or
property that is a by-product (e.g. scrap metal, used tires and oil, etc.).
   Sec. 28-66(4). "Unclaimed, lost and confiscated property" means all property
used as evidence in the courts and remaining unclaimed after final disposition,
property seized by a peace officer as being used unlawfully, and all property
coming into the hands of any city officer or employee as lost or unclaimed.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07)
Sec. 28-67. Materials management guidelines.
The director shall establish guidelines for and shall be responsible for the
management of:
   Sec. 28-67(1). The transfer of surplus property and operation of the surplus
property program.
   Sec. 28-67(2). The sale or disposal of surplus, unclaimed, lost and
confiscated property by competitive sale or other authorized method.
   Sec. 28-67(3). The trade-in of surplus property for purchase of new
equipment.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Sec. 28-68. Inventory management.
The director shall control and supervise all existing and future city
warehouses established for the purpose of purchasing, storing and issuing
supplies. The director shall also be responsible and accountable for all
warehouse materials and maintain a perpetual inventory record thereof. The
director will establish policies and procedures governing the addition or
deletion of items carried in inventory, the sale or other disposal of inventory
items no longer needed, delivery and other services provided to using agencies,
and any policies or procedures required for efficient and effective operation
of the inventory system.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Sec. 28-69. Disposition of surplus property.
   Sec. 28-69(1). The director will operate a surplus property program for the
purpose of receiving, storing, transferring, or selling surplus property no
longer needed by using agencies.
   Sec. 28-69(2). Using agencies shall request department authorization to
transfer fixed assets to another using agency, or to request transfer of
property into or from the surplus property program.
   Sec. 28-69(3). Unless otherwise provided for, surplus property no longer
needed by any using agency shall be offered through competitive sale to the
highest responsible bidder.
   Sec. 28-69(4). Unless otherwise provided, all proceeds from the sale of
surplus property will be deposited into the city’s general fund. Proceeds from
fixed asset sales of enterprise, federal, grant or other special designation
property will be reimbursed, less pro-rated selling expenses, to the
appropriate fund, after completion of each sale.
   Sec. 28-69(5). Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, surplus fire
apparatus and/or related equipment may be disposed of through noncompetitive
sale with public emergency, fire, rescue or medical agencies. Responsibility
for the sale may be delegated by the director to the Tucson Fire Chief. Any
such sale shall be at fair market value and the proceeds shall be restricted
for use by the Tucson Fire Department for the purchase of equipment or
apparatus in accordance with article III.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Sec. 28-70. Disposition of unclaimed, lost, confiscated property.
   Sec. 28-70(1). The Tucson Police Department will deliver to the department
all unclaimed, lost and confiscated property not claimed or taken away by owner
or finder, excluding all firearms, ammunition, knives or other weapons and
excluding any items determined to be of use in special police operations.
   Sec. 28-70(2). After delivery to the department, unclaimed or lost property
may be transferred to using agencies upon submission of a detailed request from
the using agency to the director.
   Sec. 28-70(3). Unless otherwise provided for, all remaining unclaimed, lost
and confiscated property shall be disposed of in accordance with section
28-69(3). Proceeds of the auction, less selling expenses if applicable, will be
deposited to the general fund unless otherwise required.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Sec. 28-71. Donations.
   [Sec. 28-71(1).] Notwithstanding any other provision, surplus, unclaimed, or
lost property not needed by using agencies may be disposed of through a
donation process provided that any such noncompetitive disposition is made
pursuant to a request submitted to the director for review and approval of the
city attorney. The director shall consider the monetary loss to the city and
determine whether such disposition is in the public interest. Any request for
donation with a fair market value exceeding two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00) shall require additional approval by the mayor and council.
   Sec. 28-71(2). Notwithstanding the provisions of [section]
28-71(1), surplus fire apparatus and/or related equipment may be disposed of
through noncompetitive sale with public emergency, fire, rescue or medical
agencies.
   Sec. 28-71(3). Notwithstanding the provisions of [sections]
28-69(3) and
28-69(4), the fire chief and/or his designee may dispose of surplus fire
apparatus and/or related equipment through noncompetitive sale at fair market
value with public emergency, fire, rescue or medical agencies, with the
proceeds of such a sale restricted for use by the fire department for the
purchase of equipment or apparatus in accordance with sections
28-17 or
28-18.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07)
Secs. 28-72--28-74. Reserved.
ARTICLE IX.
LEGAL AND CONTRACTUAL REMEDIES*
__________
*   Editors Note: See editor's note at Art. I.
__________
Sec. 28-75. Definitions.
In this article, unless the context otherwise requires:
   Sec. 28-75(1). "Adequate evidence" means more than mere accusation but less
than substantial evidence. Consideration shall be given to the amount of
credible information available, reasonableness in view of surrounding
circumstances, corroboration, and other inferences that may be drawn from the
existence or absence of affirmative facts.
   Sec. 28-75(2). "Affiliate" means any person whose governing instruments
requires it to be bound by the decision of another person or whose governing
board includes enough voting representatives of the other person to cause or
prevent action, whether or not the power is exercised. It may also include
persons doing business under a variety of names, or where there is a parent-
subsidiary relationship between persons.
   Sec. 28-75(3). "Debarment" means an action taken by the director under this
article to prohibit a person from participating in city procurements.
   Sec. 28-75(4). "Filed" means delivery to the contract officer or to the
director, whichever is applicable. A time and date of receipt shall be
documented in a verifiable manner for purposes of filing.
   Sec. 28-75(5). "Governing instruments" means those legal documents that
establish the existence of an organization and define its powers including
articles of incorporation or association, constitution, charter and by-laws.
   Sec. 28-75(6). "Interested party" means an actual or prospective bidder,
respondent or offeror whose economic interest may be affected substantially and
directly by the issuance of a solicitation, the award of a contract or by the
failure to award a contract. Whether an economic interest exists will depend
upon the circumstances of each case. An interested party does not include a
supplier, subconsultant or subcontractor to an actual or prospective bidder,
respondent or offeror.
   Sec. 28-75(7). "Receipt" means the earlier of actual receipt or the first
attempted delivery by certified mail, or by any other means that provides
evidence of the attempt, to the persons' last known address.
   Sec. 28-75(8). "Substantial evidence" means such relevant evidence as a
reasonable person might accept as sufficient to support a particular
conclusion.
   Sec. 28-75(9). "Suspension" means an action taken by the director under this
article temporarily disqualifying a person from participating in city
procurements.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07)
Sec. 28-76. Authority of the contract officer.
The contract officer shall have the authority to settle and resolve protests
and contract claims. Appeals from the decisions of the contract officer may be
made to the director pursuant to the provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07)
Sec. 28-77. Right to protest.
Any actual interested party who is aggrieved in connection with the
solicitation or award of a contract above the amount specified in section
28-16(1) may protest to the contract officer.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Sec. 28-78. Filing of a protest.
   Content of protest. The protest shall be in writing and shall include the
following information:
   (a)   The name, address, telephone number and email address of the
protestant;
   (b)   The signature of the protestant or its representative;
   (c)   Identification of the solicitation or contract number;
   (d)   A detailed statement of the legal and factual grounds of the protest
including copies of relevant documents; and
   (e)   The form of relief requested.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07)
Sec. 28-79. Time for filing protests.
   Sec. 28-79(1). Protests concerning improprieties in a solicitation. Protests
based upon alleged improprieties in a solicitation that are apparent before the
solicitation due date shall be filed not less than five (5) working days before
the solicitation due date.
   Sec. 28-79(2). In cases other than those covered in subsection (1) of this
section, protests shall be filed within ten (10) days after the aggrieved
person knows or should have known of the facts giving rise thereto; however, in
no event shall the protest be filed later than ten (10) days after issuance of
notice of intent to award or in the absence of a notice of intent to award,
after notification of award.
   Sec. 28-79(3). The contract officer, without waiving the city's right to
dismiss the protest for lack of timeliness, may consider any protest that is
not filed timely.
   Sec. 28-79(4). The contract officer shall give notice of the protest to the
successful contractor if award has been made or, if no award has been made, to
all interested parties. Interested parties have the right to intervene.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Sec. 28-80. Stay of procurements during the legal due process.
Sec. 28-80(1). In the event of a timely protest under section
28-79, the city shall stay the solicitation or award of the contract unless the
director makes a written determination that there is a reasonable probability
that the protest will be denied and that proceeding further with the
solicitation or award of the contract is in the best interests of the city. The
stay shall automatically continue throughout the legal process unless the
director makes a written determination to lift it.
Sec. 28-80(2). In the event of a timely appeal under section
28-84, and in the event that the director has made a written determination to
lift a stay, the city shall stay the solicitation or award of the contract
unless the director makes another written determination that proceeding with
the solicitation or award of the contract is in the best interests of the city.
The stay shall automatically continue throughout the legal process unless the
director makes a written determination to lift it.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Sec. 28-81. Confidential information.
   Sec. 28-81(1). Material submitted by a protestant shall not be withheld from
any interested party except to the extent that the withholding of information
is permitted or required by law or as determined pursuant to section
28-5.
   Sec. 28-81(2). If the protestant believes the protest contains material that
should be withheld, a statement advising the contract officer of this fact
shall accompany the protest submission in accordance with section
28-5.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07)
Sec. 28-82. Decision by the contract officer on a protest.
   Sec. 28-82(1). The contract officer shall issue a written decision within
fourteen (14) days after a protest has been filed pursuant to section
28-78. The decision shall contain an explanation of the basis of the decision.
   Sec. 28-82(2). The contract officer shall furnish a copy of the decision to
the protestant, by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by any other
method that provides evidence of receipt.
   Sec. 28-82(3). The time limit for decisions set forth in subsection (1) of
this section may be extended by the director for a reasonable time not to
exceed thirty (30) days beyond the original fourteen (14) day time period. The
contract officer shall notify the protestant in writing that the time for the
issuance of a decision has been extended and the date by which a decision will
be issued.
   Sec. 28-82(4). If the contract officer fails to issue a decision within the
time limits set forth in subsection (1) or (3) of this section, the protestant
may proceed as if the contract officer had issued an adverse decision.
   Sec. 28-82(5). The contract officer's decision shall contain a statement
regarding the appeals process that is available pursuant to this article.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Sec. 28-83. Remedies for a protest.
   Sec. 28-83(1). If the contract officer sustains the protest in whole or part
and determines that a solicitation, evaluation process, proposed contract
award, or contract award does not comply with the procurement code, the officer
shall implement an appropriate remedy.
   Sec. 28-83(2). In determining an appropriate remedy, the contract officer
shall consider all the circumstances surrounding the procurement or proposed
procurement including, but not limited to:
   (a)   The seriousness of the procurement deficiency;
   (b)   The degree of prejudice to other interested parties or to the
integrity of the procurement process;
   (c)   The good faith of the parties;
   (d)   The extent of performance;
   (e)   Costs to the city;
   (f)   The urgency of the procurement; and
   (g)   The impact of the relief on the using agency's mission.
   Sec. 28-83(3). An appropriate remedy may include one or more of the
following:
   (a)   Reject all bids, responses or proposals;
   (b)   Terminate the contract;
   (c)   Reissue the solicitation;
   (d)   Issue a new solicitation;
   (e)   Award a contract consistent with the procurement code;
   (f)   Such other relief as is determined necessary to ensure compliance with
the Charter and this chapter.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Sec. 28-84. Appeals to the director.
   Sec. 28-84(1). Appeal. An appeal from a decision entered or deemed to be
entered by the contract officer shall be filed with the director within seven
(7) days from the date the decision is issued. The appellant shall also file a
copy of the appeal with the contract officer.
   Sec. 28-84(2). Content of appeal. The appeal shall contain:
   (a)   The information set forth in section
28-78, including the identification of confidential information in the manner
set forth in section
28-81;
   (b)   A copy of the decision of the contract officer; and
   (c)   The precise factual or legal error in the decision of the contract
officer from which an appeal is taken.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Sec. 28-85. Notice of appeal.
   Sec. 28-85(1). The director shall give notice of the appeal to the
successful contractor if award has been made or, if no award has been made, to
interested parties. Such interested parties shall have the right to request
copies of the appeal and to intervene in the proceedings.
   Sec. 28-85(2). The director shall, upon request, furnish copies of the
appeal to those named in subsection (1) of this section subject to the
provisions of section
28-81.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07)
Sec. 28-86. Reserved.
Sec. 28-87. Contract officer report on an appeal.
   Sec. 28-87(1). [Report.] The contract officer shall file a report on the
appeal with the director within seven (7) days from the date the appeal is
filed. At the same time, the contract officer shall furnish a copy of the
report to the appellant by certified mail, return receipt requested or any
other method that provides evidence of receipt, and to any interested parties
who have responded to the notice given pursuant to section
28-85(2). The report shall contain copies of:
   (a)   The appeal;
   (b)   Any other documents that are relevant to the protest; and
   (c)   A statement by the contract officer setting forth findings, actions,
recommendations and any additional evidence or information necessary to
determine the validity of the appeal.
   Sec. 28-87(2). Extension for filing of report.
   (a)   The contract officer may request in writing an extension of the time
period setting forth the reason for extension.
   (b)   The director's determination on the request shall be in writing, state
the reasons for the determination and, if an extension is granted, set forth a
new date for the submission of the report. The director shall notify the
appellant in writing that the time for the submission of the report has been
extended and the date by which the report will be submitted.
   Sec. 28-87(3). Comments on report.
   (a)   The appellant shall file comments on the contract officer's report
with the director within seven (7) days after receipt of the report. Copies of
the comments shall be provided by the appellant to the contract officer and all
other interested parties. The comments must contain a statement or confirmation
as to the appellant's requested form of relief.
   (b)   The director may grant an extension on the time period to file
comments pursuant to a written request made by the appellant within the period
set forth in subsection (3)(a) of this section stating the reason an extension
is necessary. The director's determination on the request shall be in writing,
state the reasons for the determination and, if the extension is granted, set
forth a new date for the filing of comments. The director shall notify the
contract officer of any extension.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Sec. 28-88. Remedies for an appeal of a protest.
The director may affirm the appeal in whole or in part or deny it. If the
appeal is denied in whole or in part and a determination is made that a
solicitation, evaluation process, proposed award, or award does not comply with
the Charter and/or this chapter, a hearing shall be held in accordance with
section
28-113.
(Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Sec. 28-89. Dismissal before hearing.
The director shall dismiss, upon a written determination, an appeal before
scheduling a hearing if:
   Sec. 28-89(1). The appeal does not state a valid basis, including a detailed
statement of the legal and factual grounds, for protest; or
   Sec. 28-89(2). The appeal is untimely pursuant to section
28-84(1).
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Sec. 28-90. Hearing.
Hearings on appeals of protest decisions shall be conducted in accordance with
section
28-113.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Sec. 28-91. Filing of a contract claim.
   Content of claim. The claim shall be in writing and shall include the
following information:
   (a)   The name, address, telephone number and email address of the claimant;
   (b)   The signature of the claimant or its representative;
   (c)   Identification of the solicitation or contract number;
   (d)   A detailed statement of the legal and factual grounds of the claim
including copies of relevant documents; and
   (e)   The form of relief requested.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07)
Sec. 28-92. Contract officer’s decision on a contract claim.
   Sec. 28-92(1). Written decision. If a contract claim cannot be resolved by
mutual agreement, the contract officer shall, upon a written request by the
contractor for a final decision, issue a written decision no more than sixty
(60) days after the request is filed. Before issuing a final decision, the
contract officer shall review the facts pertinent to the contract claim or
controversy and secure any necessary assistance from legal, financial,
procurement, and other advisors.
   Sec. 28-92(2). Final decision. The contract officer shall furnish a copy of
the decision to the contractor, by certified mail, return receipt requested, or
by any other method that provides evidence of receipt. The decision shall
include:
   (a)   A description of the claim;
   (b)   A reference to the pertinent contract provision;
   (c)   A statement of the factual areas of agreement or disagreement;
   (d)   A statement of the contract officer's decision, with supporting
rationale;
   (e)   A statement regarding the appeals process that is available pursuant
to this article.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Sec. 28-93. Issuance of a timely decision on a contract claim.
   Sec. 28-93(1). The time limit for decisions set forth in section
28-92(1) may be extended for good cause. The contract officer shall notify the
contractor in writing that the time for the issuance of a decision has been
extended and the date by which a decision is anticipated.
   Sec. 28-93(2). If the contract officer fails to issue a decision within
sixty (60) days after the request on a claim is filed or within the time
prescribed under subsection (1) of this section, the contractor may proceed as
if the contract officer had issued an adverse decision.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Sec. 28-94. Appeals on a contract claim to the director.
   Sec. 28-94(1). Appeal of final decision. An appeal of a final decision of a
contract officer on a claim shall be filed with the director within five (5)
days from the date the decision is received. The appellant shall also file a
copy of the appeal with the contract officer.
   Sec. 28-94(2). Content of appeal. The appeal shall contain a copy of the
decision of the contract officer and the basis for the precise factual or legal
error in the decision of the contract officer from which an appeal is taken.
   Sec. 28-94(3). Remedies for an appeal on a contract claim. The director may
affirm the contract claim in whole or in part; or may remand the claim to a
hearing in accordance with section
28-96 or to mediation services in accordance with section
28-97 or to arbitration in accordance with section
28-98; or make any other appropriate disposition. If the director sustains the
claim in whole or part, remedies may be implemented in accordance with sections
28-96 through
28-98.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Sec. 28-95. City claims against a contractor.
All contract claims asserted by the city against a contractor that are not
resolved by mutual agreement shall promptly be referred by the contract officer
to the director for a hearing, in accordance with section
28-96, or mediation, in accordance with section
28-97, or arbitration in accordance with section
28-98.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07)
Sec. 28-96. Hearing.
Hearings on appeals of claims decisions shall be conducted in accordance with
section
28-113.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07)
Sec. 28-97. Mediation.
Contract claims may be resolved utilizing mediation services if the director
determines the use of such services is in the best interest of the city.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07)
Sec. 28-98. Arbitration.
Contract claims may be resolved utilizing arbitration if the director
determines the use of arbitration is in the best interest of the city. The
claim shall be settled by arbitration in accordance with the current
construction industry arbitration rules of the American Arbitration Association
or, at the option of the city, in accordance with the provisions of the Arizona
Revised Statutes, Article I, Chapter 9, Title 12.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07)
Sec. 28-99. Authority to debar or suspend.
The director has the sole authority to debar or suspend a person from
participating in city procurements.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07)
Sec. 28-100. Debarment or suspension causes.
   The causes for debarment or suspension shall be limited to the following:
   Sec. 28-100(1). Conviction of any person or any affiliate of any person for
commission of a criminal offense arising out of obtaining or attempting to
obtain a public or private contract or subcontract, or in the performance of
such contract or subcontract.
   Sec. 28-100(2). Conviction of any person or any affiliate of any person
under any statute of the federal government, this state or any other state for
embezzlement, theft, fraudulent schemes and artifices, fraudulent schemes and
practices, bid rigging, perjury, forgery, bribery, falsification or destruction
of records, or receiving stolen property; or any other offense indicating a
lack of business integrity or business honesty which currently, seriously, and
directly affects responsibility as a city contractor and which conviction
arises out of or obtaining or attempting to obtain a public or private contract
or subcontract, or in the performance of such contract or subcontract.
   Sec. 28-100(3). Conviction or civil judgment finding a violation by any
person or affiliate of any person under state or federal antitrust statutes
arising out of the response to a solicitation.
   Sec. 28-100(4). Violations of contract provisions within three (3) years of
current debarment action, as set forth below, of a character which are
reasonably deemed to be so serious as to justify debarment action:
   (a)   Abandonment of a contract without good cause; or
   (b)   Knowingly fails without good cause to perform in accordance with the
specifications or within the time limit provided in the contract;
   (c)   Failure to perform or unsatisfactory performance in accordance with
the terms of one or more contracts, except that failure to perform or
unsatisfactory performance caused by acts beyond the control of the contractor
shall not be considered to be a basis for debarment; or
   (d)   Failure to pay a contractor, subcontractor or material provider as
required by A.R.S. section 32-1129.
   Sec. 28-100(5). A determination by the Arizona Registrar of Contractors that
the contractor has violated the provisions of A.R.S. section 32-1129 or a
finding of responsibility by the municipal court for a violation of Tucson Code
section
11-38.
   Sec. 28-100(6). Any other cause that the director reasonably determines to
be so serious and compelling as to affect responsibility as a city contractor,
including suspension or debarment of such person or any affiliate of such
person by another governmental entity for any cause listed in this section.
   Sec. 28-100(7).  Non-compliance with Article XVI of the Procurement Code as
set forth in provided in section
28-167(B).
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 12066, § 2, 1-9-24)
Sec. 28-101. Matters not proper for debarment or suspension.
Any conviction or judgment dated more than three (3) years prior to the notice
of suspension or notice of debarment shall not be a basis for any debarment or
suspension of a person or an affiliate of a person.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07)
Sec. 28-102. Initiation of debarment.
Upon receipt of information concerning a possible cause for debarment, the
director may investigate the possible cause. If the director has a reasonable
basis to believe that a cause for debarment exists, the director may debar a
person in accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07)
Sec. 28-103. Period of debarment.
   Sec. 28-103(1). The period of time for a debarment shall not exceed three
(3) years from the date of the debarment determination.
   Sec. 28-103(2). If debarment is based solely upon debarment by another
governmental agency, the period of debarment may run concurrently with the
period established by that other debarring agency.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07)
Sec. 28-104. Notice.
If the director implements debarment, the director shall notify the person in
writing within seven (7) days of the debarment action by certified mail, return
receipt requested or by any other method that provides evidence of receipt. The
person may submit a request to the director for an administrative hearing
within fourteen (14) days of issuance of the director's debarment action. If a
hearing is granted, it shall be conducted in accordance with this article.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07)
Sec. 28-105. Notice to affiliates.
   Sec. 28-105(1). If the director proposes to debar an affiliate, the
affiliate shall have a right to appear in any hearing on the proposed debarment
to show mitigating circumstances.
   Sec. 28-105(2). The affiliate shall advise the director within thirty (30)
days of receipt of the notice under section
28-104 of its intention to appear under subsection (1) of this section. Failure
to provide written notice of appearance within the thirty (30) day period shall
be a waiver of the right to appear in the hearing.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Sec. 28-106. Imputed knowledge.
   Sec. 28-106(1). Improper conduct by a person may be imputed to an affiliate
for purposes of debarment where the impropriety occurred in connection with the
affiliate's duties for or on behalf of, or with the knowledge or approval of,
the contractor.
   Sec. 28-106(2). The improper conduct of a person or its affiliate having a
contract with a contractor may be imputed to the contractor for purposes of
debarment where the impropriety occurred in connection with the person's duties
for or on behalf of, or with the knowledge or approval of, the contractor.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07)
Sec. 28-107. Suspension.
   Sec. 28-107(1). The director may suspend a person from receiving any award
in order to protect the city's interests.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07)
Sec. 28-108. Period and scope of suspension.
The period of suspension shall not be more than sixty (60) days unless the
director is informed of compelling reasons to extend the period of suspension.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07)
Sec. 28-109. Suspension notice, hearing, determination and appeal.
   Sec. 28-109(1). The director shall notify the person suspended by certified
mail, return receipt requested or by any other method that provides evidence of
receipt.
   Sec. 28-109(2). The notice of suspension shall state:
   (a)   The basis for suspension;
   (b)   The period, including dates, of the suspension;
   (c)   That bids or proposals shall not be solicited or accepted from the
person and, if received, will not be considered; and
   (d)   That the person may request a hearing on the suspension if the person
files a written request for a hearing with the director within seven (7) days
after receipt of the notice.
   Sec. 28-109(3). If a suspended party requests a hearing, the director may
arrange for a hearing.
   Sec. 28-109(4). In the event a hearing is conducted, it shall occur to the
extent practicable, in accordance with this article.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07)
Sec. 28-110. Reinstatement.
   Sec. 28-110(1). The director may at any time after a final decision on
debarment or suspension reinstate a debarred or suspended person or rescind the
debarment or suspension upon a determination that the cause upon which the
debarment or suspension is based no longer exists.
   Sec. 28-110(2). Any debarred or suspended person may request reinstatement
by submitting a petition to the director supported by documentary evidence
showing that the cause for debarment or suspension no longer exists or has been
substantially mitigated.
   Sec. 28-110(3). The director may require a hearing on the request for
reinstatement.
   Sec. 28-110(4). The decision on reinstatement shall be in writing and
specify the factors on which it is based.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07)
Sec. 28-111. Limited participation.
The director may allow a debarred or suspended person to participate in city
contracts on a limited basis during the debarment or suspension period upon a
written determination that participation is advantageous to the city. The
determination shall specify the factors on which it is based and define the
extent of the limits imposed.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07)
Sec. 28-112. Master list for suspension and debarment.
   Sec. 28-112(1). The director shall maintain a master list of debarments and
suspensions under this article.
   Sec. 28-112(2). The master list shall show as a minimum the following
information:
   (a)   The names of those persons whom the city has debarred or suspended
under this article;
   (b)   The basis for the action;
   (c)   The period of debarment or suspension, including the expiration date;
and
   (d)   The name of the debarring or suspending agency, if the city's
debarment or suspension is based on debarment or suspension by another
governmental agency.
   Sec. 28-112(3). The master list shall include a separate section listing
persons voluntarily excluded from participation in city contracts.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07)
Sec. 28-113. Hearing procedures.
   Sec. 28-113(1). If a hearing is required or permitted under this article,
the director shall appoint a hearing officer.
   Sec. 28-113(2). If a hearing is required or permitted under this article,
the hearing officer shall arrange for a prompt hearing and notify the parties
of the time and place of the hearing.
   Sec. 28-113(3). The hearing shall be conducted in an informal manner without
formal rules of evidence or procedure.
   Sec. 28-113(4). The hearing officer may:
   (a)   Hold pre-hearing conferences to settle, simplify, or identify the
issues in a proceeding, or to consider other matters that may aid in the
expeditious disposition of the proceeding;
   (b)   Require parties to state their positions concerning the various issues
in the proceeding;
   (c)   Require parties to produce for examination those relevant witnesses
and documents under their control;
   (d)   Rule on motions and other procedural items on matters pending before
such officer;
   (e)   Regulate the course of the hearing and conduct of participants;
   (f)   Establish time limits for submission of motions or memoranda;
   (g)   Impose appropriate sanctions against any person failing to obey an
order under these procedures, which may include:
   (i)   Refusing to allow the person to assert or oppose designated claims or
defenses, or prohibiting that person from introducing designated matters in
evidence;
   (ii)   Excluding all testimony of an unresponsive or evasive witness; and
   (iii)   Expelling the person from further participation in the hearing;
   (h)   Take official notice of any material fact not appearing in evidence in
the record, if the fact is among the traditional matters of judicial notice;
   (i)   Administer oaths or affirmations; and
   (j)   Assess or apportion damages or costs associated with the hearing
matter or the proceedings to the parties involved.
   Sec. 28-113(5). A transcribed record of the hearing shall be made available
at cost to the requesting party.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07)
Sec. 28-114. Hearing officer’s decision.
   Sec. 28-114(1). The hearing officer's decision shall be final. The decision
shall be based on the evidence presented and shall include findings of fact and
conclusions of law. The decision shall be sent to all parties by certified
mail, return receipt requested or by any other method that provides evidence of
receipt.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Sec. 28-115. Reserved.
Sec. 28-116. Reserved.
Sec. 28-117. Judicial review of protests, claims, debarments or suspensions.
The decision of the hearing officer in a protest (section
28-77 et seq.), claim (section
28-91 et seq.), debarment (section
28-99 et seq.), or suspension (section
28-99 et seq.) under this chapter is subject to special action review to
superior court by any party to the proceeding. Exhaustion of the procedures set
forth in this Code shall be a condition precedent to seeking judicial review
and the party seeking review shall file the special action within thirty (30)
days of a final decision by the hearing officer.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Sec. 28-118. Exclusive remedy.
Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, this article shall provide the
exclusive procedure for asserting a claim or cause of action against this city
arising in relation to any procurement conducted under this chapter.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07)
Secs. 28-119--28-125. Reserved.
ARTICLE X.
COOPERATIVE PURCHASING*
__________
*   Editors Note: See editor's note at Art. I.
__________
Sec. 28-126. Definitions.
In this article, unless the context otherwise requires:
   Sec. 28-126(1). "Cooperative purchasing" means procurement conducted by, or
on behalf of, more than one public procurement unit.
   Sec. 28-126(2). "Local public procurement unit" means the same as that term
in A.R.S. section 41-2631.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Sec. 28-127. Applicability.
Agreements entered into pursuant to this article shall be limited to the areas
of procurement of materials, services, professional services, construction or
construction services, warehousing or materials management.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Sec. 28-128. Cooperative purchasing agreements required.
The city is not authorized to participate in cooperative purchasing unless a
cooperative purchasing agreement is executed between the parties or the parties
are members of a cooperative purchasing group or authority that permits
cooperative use amongst its membership. All agreements entered into pursuant to
this article shall be approved by the director.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07)
Sec. 28-129. Cooperative purchasing authorized.
The city may participate in, sponsor, conduct, or administer a cooperative
purchasing agreement for the procurement of any materials, services,
professional services, construction or construction services with one or more
eligible procurement units in accordance with an agreement entered into between
the participants. An agreement entered into as provided in this article is
exempt from {'{'}A.R.S.] section 11-952, subsections D, E and F. Parties under
a cooperative purchasing agreement may:
   Sec. 28-129(1). Sponsor, conduct or administer a cooperative agreement for
the procurement or disposal of any materials, services, or construction.
   Sec. 28-129(2). Cooperatively use materials or services.
   Sec. 28-219(3). Commonly use or share warehousing facilities, capital
equipment and other facilities.
   Sec. 28-129(4). Provide personnel, except that the requesting eligible
procurement unit may pay the public procurement unit providing the personnel
the direct and indirect cost of providing the personnel, in accordance with the
agreement.
   Sec. 28-129(5). On request, make available to other eligible public
procurement units informational, technical or other services that may assist in
improving the efficiency or economy of procurement. The public procurement unit
furnishing the informational or technical services has the right to request
reimbursement for the reasonable and necessary costs of providing such
services.
The activities described in paragraphs (1) through (5) do not limit the
activities of parties under a cooperative purchasing agreement.
(Ord. No. 10404, § 1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Secs. 28-130, 28-131. Reserved.
ARTICLE XI.
RESERVED
Secs. 28-132--28-136. Reserved.
ARTICLE XII.
AFFIRMATIVE ACTION BY CITY CONTRACTORS
Sec. 28-137. Definitions.
In this article, unless the context otherwise requires:
   Sec. 28-137(1). Affirmative action program means a written plan, which is
designed to promote employment of minorities and females as specified by
applicable federal, state, and local laws.
   Sec. 28-137(2). Disability means an individual person who has, has a history
of, or is regarded as having a physical or mental impairment, which
substantially limits one (1) or more major life activities.
   Sec. 28-137(3). Minority means a person of the following ethnic groups:
Hispanic, Black, Asian and Native American in accordance with Federal
Regulations section 124.
(Ord. No. 9913, § 1, 11-17-03)
Sec. 28-138. Provision against discrimination required in all city contracts.
   All contracts exceeding the amount provided by section
28-16(1) (small purchases) may provide that the contractor will abide by the
following provisions:
   (a)   The contractor will not discriminate against any employee or applicant
for employment because of race, color, religion, ancestry, sex, age, disability
not related to job performance, national origin, sexual orientation, gender
identity, familial status, and/or marital status. The contractor will take
affirmative action to ensure that applicants are employed, and that employees
are treated during employment, without regard to their race, color, religion,
ancestry, sex, age, disability not related to job performance, national origin,
sexual orientation, gender identity, familial status, and/or marital status.
Such action shall include, but not be limited to the following: employment,
upgrading, demotion, or transfer; recruitment or recruitment advertising;
layoff or termination; rates of pay or other forms of compensation; and
selection for training, including apprenticeship. The contractor agrees to post
in conspicuous places, available to employees and applicants for employment,
notices setting forth the provisions of the nondiscrimination clause.
   (b)   The contractor will, in all solicitations or advertisements for
employees placed by or on behalf of the contractor, state that all qualified
applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race,
color, religion, ancestry, sex, age, disability not related to job performance,
national origin, sexual orientation, gender identity, familial status, and/or
marital status.
   (c)   The contractor will furnish all information and reports required by
the city and will permit access to books, records, and accounts by the city for
purposes of investigation to ascertain compliance with this section.
   (d)   In the event of the contractor's noncompliance with the
nondiscrimination clauses of his contract, the contract may be cancelled,
terminated or suspended in whole or in part and the contractor may be debarred
in accordance with section
28-100.
(Ord. No. 9913, § 1, 11-17-03; Ord. No. 11057, § 3, 3-27-13; Ord. No. 11296, §
1, 8-5-15)
Sec. 28-139. Reporting requirements.
   Sec. 28-139(1). All contractors shall upon request submit annually the
following reports to the Equal Opportunity Programs Division of Human Resources
Department.
   (a)   A copy of the City of Tucson Employment Utilization Report.
   (b)   A completed City of Tucson Affirmative Action Questionnaire.
   (c)   An affirmative action plan, if applicable.
   Sec. 28-139(2). A contractor, upon request, must have the above listed items
(a), (b), and (c) on file prior to the contract. The affirmative action plan,
affirmative action questionnaire and employment utilization report, once
approved by the city will be placed on file for a period of one (1) year;
therefore these affirmative action documents need not be submitted for each
separate contract. A person may renew each affirmative action document prior to
the expiration of the year's time by submitting new documents or revisions.
Submittal of any approved revisions will automatically reactivate the
affirmative action documents for another year. If a person wishes the
previously approved documents to remain unchanged, the contractor must inform
the affirmative action officer of this fact and request in writing that the
documents be reactivated for another year.
(Ord. No. 9913, § 1, 11-17-03; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Sec. 28-140. Duties and requirements of contractors on city contracts;
responsibility for implementation.
   Sec. 28-140(1). A contractor may not be eligible for an award of the city
construction contract unless it has complied with the reporting requirements of
this article.
   Sec. 28-140(2). The hiring goals, if applicable, established by the division
for each contract shall reflect the minority applicant pool available within
Pima County for the specific services provided for under the contract.
   Sec. 28-140(3). Goals and timetables: An affirmative action plan may set
forth, as a minimum, a hiring and promotion plan for minorities and women in
percentages which reflect the minority applicant pool available within Pima
County for the specific services provided for under each contract. Minorities,
for the purpose of this subsection, shall be those groups defined in sections
28-137(2) and (3) and women. Firms which demonstrate good-faith efforts to
reach the stated percentage goals will be deemed to be in compliance with the
city's affirmative action objectives, even though the firm has not met the
staffing utilization goals on a particular contract. Notwithstanding the fact
that a contractor has complied with the goal of women and/or minority
utilization set forth above, the contractor may be required to continue to make
a good-faith effort to hire, when the opportunity arises, women and minorities
of those races and in those trades that are substantially under-represented in
the contractor's work force.
   Sec. 28-140(4). The city’s equal opportunity program division shall be
responsible for administering the provisions of this article. This office may
establish standards to be met by contractors in order to be eligible for award
of contracts. Contractors may be requested to execute such further forms and
submit documentation at such time and as may be required by the division. In
monitoring the employment policies and practices of firms doing business with
the city, the division is authorized to conduct “no notice”, on- site employee
interviews and compliance reviews.
   Sec. 28-140(5). All employees who are not specifically provided for in
subsection (3) of this section shall be covered by this article but shall not
be subject to the percentage goals and timetables established in subsection
(3).
(Ord. No. 9913, § 1, 11-17-03; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Sec. 28-141. Inability or failure to comply with affirmative action
obligations.
A contractor who encounters problems in complying with its affirmative action
obligations may document its good-faith efforts to comply with those
requirements in the manner prescribed by the division. The equal opportunity
office shall consider the validity of the good- faith efforts on the part of
the contractor and may impose such sanctions as are provided in section
28-144 of this article, based upon consideration of the facts in each specific
case. Labor unions are required to make good-faith efforts to cooperate with
the contractors in fulfilling the staffing utilization goals set forth in this
article.
(Ord. No. 9913, § 1, 11-17-03)
Sec. 28-142. Administrative responsibility.
The equal opportunity program division shall be responsible for administering
the provisions of this article by formulating specific affirmative action
procedures which further the policy of the city as set forth herein.
(Ord. No. 9913, § 1, 11-17-03; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Sec. 28-143. Exemptions.
   Sec. 28-143(1). Federally funded contracts shall be exempt from the
provisions of this article.
   Sec. 28-143(2). A contract otherwise subject to the provisions of this
article may be exempt by the equal opportunity office director from compliance
with its provisions in the case of an emergency or when special circumstances
exist which, in the interest of the city, compel such exemption.
(Ord. No. 9913, § 1, 11-17-03)
Sec. 28-144. Sanctions.
Any contractor who knowingly submits a false statement under this article, or
any contractor who fails to comply with the provisions of the affirmative
action plan submitted, or with any other requirements of this article, may be
subject to those sanctions allowed by law, including but not limited to
cancellation, termination, suspension of the contract or debarment in
accordance with section
28-97.
(Ord. No. 9913, § 1, 11-17-03)
Secs. 28-145, 28-146. Reserved.
ARTICLE XIII.
SMALL BUSINESS ENTERPRISE PROGRAM*
__________
*Editor's note – Ord. No. 10993, § 1, adopted June 12, 2012 and effective July
1, 2012, amended Art. XIII in its entirety as set out herein. Former Art. XIII
pertained to the small, minority and women-owned business enterprise program
and derived from Ord. No. 10634, § 1, adopted Feb. 10, 2009, as amended by Ord.
No. 10703, § 1, adopted August 5, 2009.
__________
Sec. 28-147. Definitions.
   The application of definitions specifically included herein is limited to
contracts initiated under the Small Business Enterprise (SBE) program. The
following terms shall have the following meanings for article XIII:
   (1)   Arizona Unified Certification Program (AZUCP) is a reciprocity DBE
certification program and is comprised of the Arizona Department of
Transportation, City of Phoenix, and the City of Tucson as the sole DBE
certifying agencies within Arizona.
   (2)   Certified small business enterprise (SBE) shall mean a local small
business that is an independent and continuing enterprise for profit performing
a commercially useful function, that has completed the application process for
certification, has met the requirements set forth in 49 CFR part 26, and holds
a current City of Tucson business license.
   (3)   Commercially useful function shall mean the performance of real and
actual services in the discharge of any contractual endeavor. An SBE contractor
is performing a commercially useful function when it is responsible for
execution of a distinct element of a contract and carries out its
responsibilities by actually performing, managing, and supervising the work
involved. In determining whether an SBE is performing a commercially useful
function, factors including, but not limited to, the following will be
considered:
   (a)   If a Certified SBE does not perform or exercise responsibility for at
least thirty (30) percent of the total cost of its contract with its own work
force.
   (b)   The type of prime contract;
   (c)   Whether the business has the skill and expertise to perform work for
which it is being/has been certified;
   (d)   Whether the business actually performs, manages and supervises the
work for which it is being or has been certified;
   (e)   Whether the business purchases goods and/or services from a non-SBE
owned business enterprise and resells goods to the city, city contractor, or
other person doing business with the city for the purpose of allowing these
goods to be counted towards the fulfillment of SBE utilization goals; and
   (f)   Standard industry practices.
   (4)   Construction project shall mean a contract that has been awarded in
accordance with A.R.S. title 34 and the Tucson Procurement Code.
   (5)   Construction services project shall mean a contract that has been
awarded using one of the following alternative project delivery methods as
prescribed in A.R.S. title 34:
      (a)    Construction-manager-at-risk;
      (b)   Design-build; or
      (c)   Job-order-contracting.
   (6)   Controlled shall mean the SBE owner(s) possess the legal authority to
manage business assets, goodwill and daily operations of the business and
actively and continuously exercise managerial authority in determining the
policies and in directing the operations of the business.
   (7)   Disadvantaged business enterprise (DBE) shall mean a for-profit
business concern that is at least fifty-one (51) percent owned by one or more
individuals who are both socially and economically disadvantaged consistent
with 49 CFR part 26.
   (8)   Eligible contract for general procurement shall mean any contract for
goods, materials, or services that meets the city's needs for purchases in
accordance with section
28-16(1) (small purchases) except as otherwise provided for in sections
28-21 (sole source procurements),
28-22 (emergency procurements) and
28-23 (special procurements) or contracts with nonprofit agencies..
   (9)   Eligible contract for professional design services shall mean any
contract for professional design services, unless otherwise precluded by law,
estimated above the amount specified in section
28-16(1), except as otherwise provided for in sections
28-21 (sole source procurements),
28-22 (emergency procurements) and
28-23 (special procurements).
   (10)   Eligible construction or construction services project shall mean any
construction or construction services project, unless otherwise precluded by
law, provided that the estimate for construction exceeds the amount specified
in section
28-16(1) except as otherwise provided for in sections
28-21 (sole source procurements),
28-22 (emergency procurements) and
28-23 (special procurements). This term does not include any construction
project in which the estimated value is below the formal solicitation threshold
or projects which require a DBE goal pursuant to federal law.
   (11)   Joint venture shall mean an association of two (2) or more persons,
partnerships, corporations, business enterprises, or any combination of these
entities established to form a single business enterprise but limited in scope
and duration for the purpose of carrying out a business activity. The agreement
establishing the joint venture shall be in writing. The SBE partner(s) must be
responsible for a clearly defined portion of the work performed which is set
forth in detail and separately from the work to be performed by the non-SBE
partner and is assigned a commercially reasonable dollar value. Furthermore,
the SBE interest shall be based on sharing real economic interest in the
venture, include proportionate control over management, and interest in capital
acquired by the joint venture and interest in earnings. Only the portion of
work, supplies, and/or services attributed to the SBE, as a member of the joint
venture, may be counted towards relevant SBE participation goals.
   (12)   Local shall mean that the principal place of business of the
enterprise is physically located within the Tucson/Pima County metropolitan
area.
   (13)   Office shall mean a fixed established place where work of a clerical,
administrative, professional or production nature is carried on and directly
related to the business being certified. A temporary location, movable
property, or location established to oversee a project does not qualify as an
office.
   (14)   Owned, for purposes of determining whether an enterprise is owned by
an SBE, shall mean that the small business owner(s) meet the ownership
requirements in accordance with 49 CFR part 26:
      (a)   Possesses interest in the business, along with the incidents of
ownership;
      (b)   Contributed capital, equipment, and expertise to the business;
      (c)   Acquired the interest with his or her own financial resources or
has put his or her own financial resources at risk in the operation of the
enterprise; and
      (d)   Enjoys the customary incidents of ownership and shall have a risk
in profits commensurate with the ownership interest, as demonstrated by an
examination of the substance, rather than the form, of ownership arrangements.
   (15)   Professional design services contract shall mean a contract that has
been solicited and awarded for architect services, engineer services, landscape
architect services, surveyor services, or assayer services in accordance with
A.R.S. title 34.
   (16)   Small business enterprise (SBE) shall mean a business that meets the
North American Industry Classification System (NAIC) size standard adopted by
the city for purposes of qualifying for SBE certification.
(Ord. No. 10993, § 1, 6-12-12, eff. 7-1-12; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Sec. 28-148. Administrative provisions.
   Sec. 28-148(1). Duties of the director. The director shall implement and
monitor the SBE program. The director shall be the chief administrative officer
for the program and shall have the following duties and authority:
   (1)   The administration and enforcement of this article.
   (2)   Coordination of the development of administrative procedures and
policies with the applicable department(s) to effectuate this article.
   (3)   Coordination of outreach efforts, including increased working
relationships with local community organizations to identify and increase the
availability of SBE firms.
   Sec. 28-148(2). Records retention requirements.
   (1)   The director shall, ensure that data and records are maintained in
order to conduct on-going analysis and evaluation of the SBE program and its
objectives and may make recommendations to the city manager and mayor and
council regarding additional efforts necessary to ensure SBE participation.
   (2)   All city departments shall maintain and retain complete and accurate
records relating to any professional design, construction, or construction
services procurements.
   (3)   The director of the procurement department shall maintain records of
source selection and record of the inclusion of SBEs for awarded procurements.
   Sec. 28-148(3). Administrative provisions for certification. The director
shall be responsible for the certification and verification of program
eligibility. DBE and SBE criteria and definitions shall be applied in
accordance with 49 CFR part 26 to establish eligibility for certification of
local firms as a SBE. Only local firms shall qualify for certification as a
SBE. Firms outside of the Tucson/Pima metropolitan area meeting the eligibility
criteria for DBE certification will qualify only as a DBE and are not eligible
to participate in the local SBE program. The director shall:
   (1)   Maintain a listing of certified SBEs segmented into specified trades
or lines of business to be maintained as public record; and
   (2)   Participate and effectuate reciprocity of DBE certification through
the AZUCP.
   Sec. 28-148(4). Standards for SBE certification. The director shall certify
and monitor contractors, subcontractors, professional services consultants,
professional services subcontractors, vendors, and suppliers as a bona fide SBE
for participation in the SBE program based on the certification criteria and
definitions as set forth in 49 CFR part 26, including, but not limited to, the
following standards:
   (1)   A SBE shall be an independent business enterprise, continuing in
operation for profit, performing a commercially useful function. The ownership
and control shall be real and substantial and be indicated by customary
incidents of ownership, as demonstrated by an examination of the substance
rather than the form of ownership and operating arrangements.
   (2)   A certified SBE shall have a valid City of Tucson business license.
   (3)   A certified SBE shall be a local enterprise as defined by this article
and an active participant within the Tucson/Pima County metropolitan area.
   (4)   The SBE applicant(s) must not exceed the personal net worth standard
as defined in 49 CFR part 26.
   (5)   The SBE applicant is responsible for cooperating and providing all
necessary documentation in support of all eligibility as set forth in 49 CFR
part 26 and this article. A complete certification application is required
along with supportive documents including, but not limited to, three (3) years
of income tax records (personal and business), bank signature card, a current
personal net worth statement, and various other documents confirming ownership,
management, and control of the SBE applicant firm. Additionally, an on-site
audit is required at the firm's place of business.
   Sec. 28-148(5). Certification investigations. In accordance with 49 CFR part
26, the director may investigate SBE ownership, contract transactions, and
other relevant arrangements beyond formal documentation at initial
certification, during certification, during the annual update, or based on a
complaint submitted to the director. To the extent reasonably necessary to
ensure compliance, such investigations may include, but are not limited to, the
following:
   (1)   Personal interviews with persons having knowledge or relevant
information relating to an SBE's eligibility, certification, or
decertification.
   (2)   Personal interviews with bidders, contractors, vendors, and/or
suppliers involved in a contractual relationship with the SBE.
   (3)   Reviewing records pertaining to certification.
   (4)   Conducting random on-site visits, audits, and/or relevant inquiries.
   Sec. 28-148(6). Certification period. In accordance with 49 CFR part 26, the
director shall grant certification to an approved SBE with the requirement for
an annual update affirming there have been no changes in the firm's
circumstances affecting its ability to meet size, ownership, or control
requirements or material changes in the information provided in its application
form. If an SBE is denied certification on the basis of the information
submitted, the entity may not reapply for a period of one (1) year from the
date of the notice of denial provided that such firm shall have the right to
appeal such denial to the director in accordance with the process specified in
section
28-148(9).
   Sec. 28-148(7). Continuing certification. All certified SBEs must annually
re-submit disclosure affidavits and any other required documents.
   Sec. 28-148(8). Decertification. The director may decertify a business
enterprise because of, but not limited to, the following, in accordance with 49
CFR part 26 where applicable, or demonstrates continued poor performance on
contracts as determined by City of Tucson staff:
   (1)   A change in ownership and/or control.
   (2)   A change in management structuring.
   (3)   Exceeding small business administration size limits by industry
designation.
   (4)   Exceeding program standard for owner(s) personal net worth.
   (5)   Fails to comply with annual reporting requirements.
   (6)   Fails to fulfill the requirements of
28-148(4).
   (7)   Fails to cooperate as directed in
28-148(5).
   (8)   Continued poor performance ratings.
   Sec. 28-148(9). Protest procedures for SBE certification and decertification
decisions.
   (1)   SBE certification/decertification decisions. All decisions regarding
certifications and decertifications made by the director shall be made in
writing and shall include the reasons for the decision. The notice shall be
sent to the affected party and the affected party shall have the right to seek
administrative review as provided herein.
   (a)   An aggrieved party may submit protest in writing to the director
within ten (10) days from the date of notice of the adverse decision. The
protest must include the legal and factual basis for the protest along with any
supporting documents.
   (b)   Within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the protest, the director shall
review the protest and all relevant supporting documents and render a decision
notice in writing which includes the basis for the decision.
   (2)   Appeal of director’s certification and decertification decisions. If
the protest is denied, the aggrieved party may request an appeal review through
the director. The request must be in writing and received by the director
within seven (7) days of the aggrieved party’s receipt of the decision notice.
The aggrieved party shall set forth the legal and factual basis for the appeal
of the decision. The director shall retain an independent hearing officer who
will have knowledge of the certification standards/criteria as set forth in 49
CFR part 26, construction and procurement law and the small business enterprise
program.
      (a)   Within seven (7) days of receipt of the notice of appeal from the
aggrieved party, the director shall forward the notice to the independent
hearing officer.
      (b)   The independent hearing officer shall make a decision based solely
on the administrative record.
      (c)   The independent hearing officer shall make a written decision on
the appeal, as soon as practical. The decision may affirm, modify, or reverse
the decision by the director.
      (d)   The independent hearing officer’s decision will be forwarded to the
director for a final decision regarding certification or decertification.
(Ord. No. 10993, § 1, 6-12-12, eff. 7-1-12; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Sec. 28-149. Establishment of SBE Program Goals for Construction and
Construction Services Projects.
   Sec. 28-149(1). Eligible projects for subcontractor SBE participation goals.
   (1)   All eligible projects shall be reviewed by the director or designee
for determination of subcontracting opportunities for SBE participation. Where
there is sufficient availability of SBEs, the director or designee may
establish individual project participation goals.
   (2)   Specific participation SBE goals are to be established on eligible
projects that are estimated above the amount specified in section
28-16(1) and according to the criteria established by the director including,
but not be limited to, the following:
   (a)   The present availability of certified SBEs ready, willing, and able to
provide labor and/or material on a particular project in the profession or
industry/trade classifications relevant to the project.
   (b)   The ability of certified SBE firms to readily expand their capacity to
meet additional demand.
   (c)   The level of participation by such firms in past projects awarded by
the city.
   (d)   The design scope of work, plans, and project specifications.
   (3)   SBE goals for a construction contract must be clearly published as
part of the solicitation requirements issued with each invitation for bid
(IFB).
   (4)   SBE goals or requirements for construction services shall be issued in
the request for qualifications (RFQ).
   (5)   SBE goals shall apply to the initial contract award for construction
contracts and to the individual project or phase awards for construction
services.
(Ord. No. 10993, § 1, 6-12-12, eff. 7-1-12; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Sec. 28-150. SBE Plans for Eligible Projects.
   Sec. 28-150(1). Contractor’s SBE plan for construction projects.
Notwithstanding its compliance with any other requirement, no bidder shall be
awarded a contract for an eligible project, unless the director or designee has
approved the SBE plan or granted a waiver on the project. Such SBE plan shall
be designed to meet the applicable project goals which shall be incorporated
into the contract. Each bidder shall submit a completed and signed SBE plan or
fully documented waiver request with the bid submission.
   Sec. 28-150(2). Contractor’s SBE plan for construction services projects.
Notwithstanding its compliance with any other requirement, respondents shall
receive director or designee approval of the SBE plan or be granted a waiver on
the project in accordance with the requirements set forth in the solicitation.
Such SBE plan shall be designed to meet the applicable project goals, which
shall be incorporated into the contract.
   Sec. 28-150(3). Contractors for eligible projects. Contractors for eligible
projects may meet the SBE project goals through the following methods:
   (1)   Prime contractor participation.
   (a)   Certified SBE prime contractors may use their own participation
towards fulfillment of the project's subcontracting goals.
   (2)   Subcontractor participation.
   (a)   When a contractor utilizes one or more certified SBE subcontractors to
satisfy its SBE participation commitment, the contractor may claim only the
value of the commercially useful function to be performed by such subcontractor
(s) in order to obtain credit toward the satisfaction of the applicable goal.
   (b)   If a certified SBE subcontractor enters into second tier subcontracts
consistent with the standard industry practices, such SBE subcontractor is
performing a commercially useful function. If a SBE subcontractor subcontracts
a significantly greater portion of its work to a non-SBE than would be expected
by standard industry practices, it should be presumed that the SBE is not
performing a commercially useful function
   (3)   Supplier participation. Contractors for construction or construction
services may contract with one or more certified SBE suppliers provided that
the supplier is a regular dealer of the materials supplied to obtain credits
toward SBE goals. The value of the commercially useful function to be performed
by such SBEs and credited toward satisfaction of the applicable SBE goals is as
follows:
   (a)   If a certified SBE supplier manufactures the goods supplied, one
hundred (100) percent of the contract amount is credited towards the applicable
SBE participation goal.
   (b)   If a certified SBE supplier is a wholesaler warehousing the goods
supplied or a manufacturer's representative, then the total contract amount is
credited toward the established SBE goal; however, only twenty-five (25)
percent of the total SBE project goal may be met in this manner.
   (c)   If an extraordinarily large proportion of a contract price is for
equipment or supplies, a lower project goal may be set than otherwise would be
required, the twenty-five (25) percent limit for suppliers may be increased, or
a combination of these two (2) methods may be utilized.
   Sec. 28-150(4). Submission of SBE plan for construction projects.
   (1)   The city shall publish the SBE subcontracting goals in the
solicitation and the specifications. All bidders shall submit the SBE
participation plan or request for good faith waiver with the bid unless
otherwise specified.
   (2)   The completed and signed SBE plan for the project must include a list
of names of the certified SBE prime contractor, SBE subcontractors and/or
suppliers to be used in the project, the type of work or service each business
will perform, and the dollar amount of a certified SBE prime contractor and/or
each certified SBE’s subcontract and/or suppliers of the total project.
   (3)   The bidder shall certify that the SBE plan has met the established SBE
project participation goals, or notwithstanding good faith efforts to meet the
goals, the bidder has been unable to do so and therefore is requesting a good
faith effort waiver in part or in full. If the bidder's certification, the SBE
plan or a fully documented good faith effort waiver (partial or full) is not
submitted with the bid for any reason, the bid shall be deemed non-responsive.
   Sec. 28-150(5). Submission of SBE plan for construction services projects.
   (1)   The solicitation shall contain SBE requirements. All respondents shall
comply with the SBE requirements as set forth in the solicitation.
   (2)   The contractor shall submit an SBE participation plan or request for
good faith waiver for each project awarded under the job order contracts, that
are estimated above the amount specified in section
28-16(1) and has a goal established by the director unless exempted by sections
28-21(sole source procurements),
28-22 (emergency procurements) or
28-23 (special procurements).
   (3)   The contractor shall submit an SBE participation plan or request for
good faith waiver for all construction manager at risk contracts and design
build contracts, in accordance with the solicitation, prior to award or prior
to establishing a guaranteed maximum price (GMP), if applicable.
   (4)   The completed and signed SBE plan for the project shall include a list
of names of the certified SBE prime contractor, SBE subcontractors and/or
suppliers to be used in the eligible project, the type of work or service each
business will perform, and the dollar amount of a certified SBE prime
contractor, and/or each certified SBE's subcontract and/or suppliers of the
total project.
   (5)   The contractor shall certify that the SBE plan has met the established
SBE project participation goals or, notwithstanding good faith efforts to meet
the goals, the contractor has been unable to do so and therefore is requesting
a good faith effort waiver in part or in full.
   Sec. 28-150(6). Review of SBE plans for construction projects.
   (1)   The director shall review and evaluate the apparent low bidder's SBE
goals plan and determine whether the bidder met the project goals for the
contract and approve or reject such plan. The director may clarify information
relative to the SBE plan with the bidder and/or any listed subcontractors.
   (2)   The director may reject the plan and determine that the bid is non-
responsive where the bidder:
   (a)   Failed to provide a completed SBE plan;
   (b)   Failed to identify SBEs by name, the scope of work, and value of work
as a percent of the total bid sufficient to meet the applicable SBE goals for
that project;
   (c)   Failed to achieve the dollar value and/or percentage of credible
participation by certified SBEs necessary to meet the project goals; or
   (d)   Failed to meet the requirements for a waiver of the SBE goals.
   (3)   The director's determination shall be in writing and state the basis
for such decision.
   (4)   The director's determination shall be subject to the remedy provisions
of Tucson Code section
28-153(2).
   (5)   Replacement of an SBE.
   (a)   Notwithstanding the requirements of section
28-48(2) of the Tucson Procurement Code, the Director shall review and approve
the replacement of an SBE from a construction project.
   (b)   Removal of an SBE does not relieve the contractor of responsibility
for meeting the SBE project goal.
   (c)   The contractor shall immediately take adequate good faith efforts to
obtain another certified SBE to perform equal or greater dollar value of the
work or submit a request for a partial or full good faith effort waiver.
   Sec. 28-150(7). Review of SBE plans for construction services projects.
   (1)   The director shall review and evaluate SBE plans and determine whether
the contractor met the project goals, and approve or reject such plan. The
director may clarify information relative to the SBE plan with the respondent
and/or any listed subcontractors.
   (2)   For job order contracts, the director may determine that the plan is
not acceptable where the contractor:
   (a)   Failed to provide a completed SBE plan;
   (b)   Failed to identify SBEs by name, the scope of work, and value of work
as a percent of the total bid sufficient to meet the applicable SBE goals for
that project;
   (c)   Failed to achieve the dollar value of credible participation by
certified SBEs necessary to meet the project goals; or
   (d)   Failed to meet the requirements for a waiver of the SBE goals. In the
event that a plan is found unacceptable, the Director may pursue remedies up to
and including termination of the contract.
   (3)   For all construction manager-at-risk contracts and design build
contracts, the director may determine that the plan is not acceptable where the
respondent:
   (a)   Failed to provide a completed SBE plan;
   (b)   Failed to identify SBEs by name, the scope of work and value of work
of the total bid sufficient to meet the applicable SBE goals for that project;
   (c)   Failed to achieve the dollar value of credible participation by
certified SBEs necessary to meet the project goals; or
   (d)   Failed to meet the requirements for a waiver of the SBE goals. In the
event that a plan is found unacceptable, the director may:
   (i)   If the contract has not been awarded, formally cease negotiations with
the firm and enter into negotiations with the next ranked firm or reject all
submittals; or
   (ii)   If the contract has been awarded, formally terminate the contract for
failure to comply with the SBE provisions.
   (4)   The director's determination shall be in writing and state the basis
for such decision.
   (5)   The director's determination shall be subject to the remedy provisions
of section
28-153(2).
   Sec. 28-150(8). Maintenance of records and reports by construction
contractors. Unless otherwise specified in the solicitation, contractors
awarded eligible contracts shall submit a participation report which summarizes
the number and dollar amount of all subcontract awarded during the contract
term. The participation report must be submitted to the director no later than
one (1) month after the contract has been awarded and with the final payment
request. In addition to the statutory requirement for retention, failure to
submit the one (1) month participation report of all proposed subcontractors
will result in the city withholding an additional ten (10) percent of all
future payments on the eligible contract until it is determined that the
contractor is in compliance. Failure to submit the participation report at the
time of request for final payment shall result in withholding final payment
from the contractor until it is determined that the contractor is in
compliance. For job order contracts, the contractor shall submit subcontractor
utilization reports to the director at the completion of each individual
project.
(Ord. No. 10993, § 1, 6-12-12, eff. 7-1-12; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Sec. 28-151. Establishment of SBE Program Goals for Professional Design
Services.
   Sec. 28-151(1). Eligible projects for professional design services SBE
participation goals.
   (1)   All eligible projects shall be reviewed by the director for
determination of professional design services SBE participation. Where there is
sufficient availability of SBEs, the director may establish individual project
participation goals.
   (2)   Specific participation SBE goals shall be established on eligible
projects estimated above the amount specified in section
28-16(1) and according to the criteria established by the director or designee
including, but not be limited to, the following:
   (a)   The present availability of certified SBEs ready, willing, and able to
provide design services in the profession or industry/trade classifications
relevant to the project.
   (b)   The ability of certified SBE firms to readily expand their capacity to
meet additional demand.
   (c)   The level of participation by such firms in past projects awarded by
the city.
   (d)   The design scope of work, plans, and project specifications.
   (3)   SBE program requirements for a design contract must be clearly
identified in the request for qualifications (RFQ) issued for each applicable
project.
   (4)   SBE program requirements shall apply to the initial contract award for
design contracts and to the individual project or phase awards for design
services.
   Sec. 28-151(2). Professional design services small purchase reserve. Insofar
as practical and where a sufficient number of certified SBE firms exist to
comply with the small purchase requirements set forth in section
28-16(2), the director of procurement may reserve competition for small
purchases for professional design services to certified SBEs. Where
insufficient certified SBEs exist, non-SBEs may be included in the quoting
process for small purchases.
(Ord. No. 10993, § 1, 6-12-12, eff. 7-1-12; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Sec. 28-151.1. SBE Plans for Eligible Design Projects.
   Sec. 28-151.1(1). Prime consultant's SBE plan for design services projects.
Notwithstanding its compliance with any other requirement of the Tucson
Procurement Code, respondents shall receive director approval of the SBE plan
or be granted a waiver on the project in accordance with the requirements set
forth in the solicitation. Such SBE plan shall be designed to meet the
applicable project goals, which shall be incorporated into the resulting
contract.
   Sec. 28-151.1(2). Consultants for eligible projects. Consultants for
eligible projects may meet the SBE project goals through the following methods:
   (1)   Prime consultant participation.
   (a)   Certified SBE prime consultants may use their own participation
towards fulfillment of the project's SBE goals.
   (2)   Subconsultant participation.
   (a)   When a prime consultant utilizes one or more certified SBE
subconsultants to satisfy its SBE participation commitment, the prime
consultant may claim only the value of the commercially useful function to be
performed by such subcontractor(s) in order to obtain credit toward the
satisfaction of the applicable goal.
   (b)   If a certified SBE subconsultant enters into second tier subcontracts
consistent with the standard industry practices, such SBE subconsultant is
performing a commercially useful function. If a SBE subconsultant subcontracts
a significantly greater portion of its work to a non-SBE than would be expected
by standard industry practices, it should be presumed that the SBE is not
performing a commercially useful function.
   Sec. 28-151.1(3). Submission of SBE plan for professional design services
projects.
   (1)   The solicitation shall contain any applicable SBE requirements. All
respondents shall comply with the SBE requirements as set forth in the
solicitation.
   (2)   The prime consultant shall submit an SBE participation plan or request
for good faith waiver for each design project awarded under a request for
qualification (RFQ) estimated above the amount specified in section 28-16(1)
and has a goal established in accordance with the solicitation, prior to award.
Plan(s) shall be submitted during the negotiation stage after the selection
committee has identified the top ranked firm(s).
   (3)   The completed and signed SBE plan for the project shall include a list
of names of the certified SBE prime consultant and SBE subconsultants to be
used in the eligible project, the type of work or service each business will
perform, and the dollar amount of a certified SBE prime consultant, and/or each
certified SBE's subcontract of the total project.
   (4)   The prime consultant shall certify that the SBE plan has met the
established SBE project participation goals or, notwithstanding good faith
efforts to meet the goals, the consultant has been unable to do so and
therefore is requesting a good faith effort waiver in part or in full.
   Sec. 28-151.1(4). Review of SBE plans for professional design services
projects.
   (1)   The Director shall review and evaluate SBE plans and determine whether
the consultant met the project goals, and approve or reject the plan. The
director may clarify information relative to the SBE plan with the respondent
and/or any listed subconsultants.
   (2)   For all professional design services contracts, the director may
determine that the plan is not acceptable where the respondent:
   (a)   Failed to provide a completed SBE plan;
   (b)   Failed to identify SBEs by name, the scope of work and value of work
of the total negotiated fees sufficient to meet the applicable SBE goals for
that project;
   (c)   Failed to achieve the dollar value of credible participation by
certified SBEs necessary to meet the project goals; or
   (d)   Failed to meet the requirements for a waiver of the SBE goals. In the
event that a plan is found unacceptable, the director may:
   (i)   If the contract has not been awarded, formally cease negotiations with
the firm and enter into negotiations with the next ranked firm or reject all
submittals; or
   (ii)   If the contract has been awarded, formally terminate the contract for
failure to comply with the SBE provisions.
   (3)   The director's determination shall be in writing and state the basis
for such decision.
   (4)   The director's determination shall be subject to the remedy provisions
of section
28-151.2(2).
   (5)   Replacement of an SBE:
   (a)   The director shall review and approve the replacement of all
subconsultants, including any SBE firms from a professional design services
project. Approval must be obtained prior to the substitute subconsultant
beginning the work.
   (b)   Removal of an SBE does not relieve the prime consultant of
responsibility for meeting the SBE project goal.
   (c)   The consultant shall immediately take adequate good faith efforts to
obtain another certified SBE to perform equal or greater dollar value of the
work or submit a good faith waiver request, in full or in part.
(Ord. No. 10993, § 1, 6-12-12, eff. 7-1-12; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Sec. 28-151.2. SBE Good Faith Effort.
   Sec. 28-151.2(1). Good faith effort waiver.
   (1)   If the SBE plan does not meet the project goals, the bidder or
respondent may seek a waiver. A request for waiver shall be available only when
certified firms are determined to not be ready, willing, or able to perform.
The application for a waiver shall be in writing and must be fully completed
and submitted in accordance with sections
28-150(4),
28-150(5) and
28-151.1(3). The waiver request shall indicate whether a complete or partial
waiver is sought. If a partial waiver is being sought the scope of such waiver
must be indicated and an SBE plan must also be submitted. When a full waiver is
sought, an SBE plan does not need to be submitted. The bidder or respondent
must provide documented evidence including a narrative statement with
supporting affidavits and/or exhibits verifying the bidder's/respondent's good
faith efforts to meet the goals. Evidence of the bidder's/ respondent's good
faith efforts should include, but is not limited to the following:
   (a)   Documentation of communication with the Department of Procurement
seeking technical/ professional assistance identifying available SBEs.
   (b)   Copies of written notification to certified SBEs regarding
subcontracting opportunities on a project.
   (c)   Documentation of efforts made to select portions of work for SBE
subcontracting in order to increase the likelihood of meeting the SBE goals,
including where appropriate breaking down subcontracts into economically
feasible units in order to facilitate SBE participation.
   (d)   Documentation of efforts to assist and negotiate with SBEs for
specific sub-bids and reasons for rejection of any such offered, including the
names, addresses, and telephone numbers of SBEs who were contacted and reason
for the rejection.
   (e)   As to each SBE contacted which the bidder/respondent considered not to
be qualified, a written statement of the reasons for the bidder’s/respondent’s
conclusion.
   (f)   Written quotes or records of verbal quotes solicited from all SBEs
seeking subcontract work with prime contractors at the time of the solicitation
submittal.
   (g)   Verification that the contractor/prime consultant rejected available
SBEs because they submitted bids/proposals which were unreasonably high, or
they were not qualified. Such verification shall include a statement of the
amounts of all bids received from potential subcontractors/subconsultants and
all relevant dates.
   (2)   A project goal may be waived, at least in part, if the bid or
proposals received by the bidder/respondent requesting a waiver from all SBEs
in one trade area exceeds the quote or proposal of the lowest non SBE competing
for the same work by the lesser of fifteen (15) percent or two hundred fifty
thousand dollars ($250,000.00), and no other trade area is available to meet
the established SBE goal. A bidder may not compare self-performed costs against
an SBE subcontractor proposal as justification for the rejection of a bid.
   (3)   If after consultation with certified SBE firms and/or appropriate city
employees, the director determines that SBE availability is less than
projected, the director may waive or reduce established project goals. In such
circumstances, the director shall certify that SBEs are not available.
   (4)   If the director determines that SBE availability is sufficient to
support the established project goals the director shall deny the good faith
waiver request. All decisions regarding the denial of good faith waiver
requests or plan decisions made by the director shall be made in writing and
shall include the reasons for the decision. The notice shall be sent to the
affected party and the affected party shall have the right to seek
administrative review pursuant to Tucson Code section
28-151.2(2).
   (a)   Waiver denial for construction. If the apparent low bidder is denied a
waiver the director shall determine the bid is non-responsive. The
determination shall be subject to Tucson Code section
28-151.2 (2).
   (b)   Waiver denial for construction services. If the waiver is denied, the
director’s determination shall be subject to Tucson Code section
28-151.2 (2).
   (c)   Waiver denial for professional design services. If the waiver is
denied, the director’s determination shall be subject to Tucson Code section
28-151.2 (2).
   Sec. 28-151.2(2). Right to appeal good faith effort waiver or plan decision.
An aggrieved party has a right to protest a good faith waiver request or plan
decision made by the director as follows:
   (1)   An aggrieved party may submit a protest in writing to the director
within five (5) days from the date of notice of the adverse decision notice.
The protest must include the legal and factual basis for the protest along with
any supporting documents.
   (2)   Within five (5) days of receipt of the protest, the OEOP director
shall review the protest and all relevant supporting documents and render a
decision notice in writing which includes the basis for the decision.
   The decision of the director is final and not appealable.
(Ord. No. 10993, § 1, 6-12-12, eff. 7-1-12; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Sec. 28-151.3. Applicability to Procurement of Goods, Materials, and Services.
   Sec. 28-151.3(1). Price preference for small purchases. Insofar as is
practical and where a sufficient number of certified SBE firms exist to comply
with the small purchase requirements set forth in section
28-16(1), the director may reserve competition for small purchases for goods
and services to certified SBEs. Where insufficient certified SBEs exist, non-
SBEs may be included in the quoting process for small purchases. When certified
SBEs compete against non-SBEs, the price of a quote received from a certified
SBE shall be adjusted by seven (7) percent for purposes of evaluating price.
Where no certified SBEs exist for a good or service, this section shall not
apply and the purchase shall be governed solely by section
28-16(1).
   Sec. 28-151.3(2). Reducing size, scope, or terms of certain contracts. To
the extent practicable, the procurement director may evaluate large purchases
of certain commodities and services for purchase through smaller, shorter-term
contracts that are more accessible to and enhance participation of local SBEs.
(Ord. No. 10993, § 1, 6-12-12, eff. 7-1-12; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Sec. 28-151.4. Program Compliance.
   Sec. 28-151.4(1) Complaints, investigations of compliance, non-retaliation.
The director may receive and investigate any complaints and allegations. All
parties shall cooperate fully with an investigation conducted by the director.
Retaliation against anyone who initiates or assists in an investigation is
strictly prohibited. Any contractor who engages in retaliatory conduct will be
subject to sanctions up to and including debarment. Any city employee who
engages in retaliatory actions will be subject to discipline. Complaints filed
with the director may include, but are not limited to the following:
   (1)   Discriminatory treatment of SBEs on a project or work sites.
   (2)   Bid-shopping by prime contractors which has an adverse effect on SBE
participation.
   (3)   Failure to make prompt payment to SBE contractors.
   (4)   Failure to utilize SBE contractors and consultants once the contract
has been awarded.
   (5)   Substitution of subcontractor issues.
   (6)   Allegations of non-performance by SBE sub-contractors.
(Ord. No. 10993, § 1, 6-12-12, eff. 7-1-12; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Sec. 28-151.5. Additional Terms.
   Sec. 28-151.5(1). Non-interference. The process of determining and appealing
eligibility, certification, continuing certification or decertification of the
SBE status of enterprises shall not be subject to interference, influence, or
coercion of any sort by parties including departmental and elected officials.
   Sec. 28-151.5(2). Authority. The director shall promulgate rules and
regulations, consistent with the provisions of article XIII, for implementation
of the SBE program.
   Sec. 28-151.5(3). Termination. The SBE program may be terminated by the
mayor and council.
(Ord. No. 10993, § 1, 6-12-12, eff. 7-1-12; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
ARTICLE XIV.
LIVING WAGE
Sec. 28-152. Conditions for use.
Employees of city contractors and sub-contractors providing services to the
city shall be paid a living wage by said contractors and sub-contractors for
the hours expended providing services to the city, and shall also be offered
health insurance or compensated as provided under section
28-157(c).
(Ord. No. 9913, § 1, 11-17-03; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Sec. 28-153 Eligible contract.
   An eligible contract shall be any contract awarded by the city pursuant to
section
28-17 or section
28-18.
(Ord. No. 9913, § 1, 11-17-03; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Sec. 28-154. Ineligible contracts.
An ineligible contract shall include:
   (a)   Contracts under which federal or state regulations preclude the
applicability of a living wage;
   (b)   Contracts which involve programs where the city shares management
authority with other jurisdictions, and intergovernmental and cooperative
agreements;
   (c)   Contracts that are impacted by bond covenants, grant restrictions,
governmental regulations;
   (d)   Contracts which involve programs that do not primarily provide direct
services to the city but have a franchise or contract to provide services to
the residents or property owners of the city;
   (e)   Job training and youth or summer employment programs;
   (f)   Contracts that would otherwise be eligible, in which all eligible
employees are compensated at or above the living wage rates required;
   (g)   Contracts awarded to contractors with no employees.
   (h)   Contracts awarded for goods.
   (i)   Contracts awarded for construction, constructions services, or
professional design services pursuant to Article V.
(Ord. No. 9913, § 1, 11-17-03; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15)
Sec. 28-155. Eligible employee.
Any person employed by a contractor holding an eligible contract with the city
who:
   (a)   Is not a person who provides volunteer services that are uncompensated
except for reimbursement of expenses such as meals, parking or transportation;
   (b)   Expends chargeable time providing services to the city and on city
property;
   (c)   Is at least sixteen (16) years of age.
(Ord. No. 9913, § 1, 11-17-03)
Sec. 28-156. Reserved.
Sec. 28-157. Wages.
   (a)   If health insurance benefits are offered, a wage of no less than
$15.00 per hour.
   (b)   If health benefits are offered, an eligible contractor shall pay no
less than fifty (50) percent of the eligible employee’s health benefits
premium.
   (c)   If health insurance benefits are not offered, a wage of no less than
$16.50 per hour.
   (d)   On January 1, 2023, and on each January 1 thereafter, all hourly wage
amounts shall be adjusted by the rate of the City of Tucson inflation
multiplied by the minimum wage on December 31 of the previous year rounded to
the nearest multiple of five cents ($0.05).
   (e)   If the contract is subject to a prevailing wage requirement or union
agreement, the higher wage shall apply.
   (f)   If health benefits are offered to an eligible employee under an
eligible contract, proof of said benefits shall be provided at the time of bid
or proposal submission or, as the city may require, in accordance with
notification by the city of its intent to award a contract.
(Ord. No. 9913, § 1, 11-17-03; Ord. No. 11296, § 1, 8-5-15; Ord. No. 11903, §
1, 1-25-22)
Sec. 28-158. Compliance.
The city's director of procurement shall monitor compliance, including the
investigation of claimed violations, and may promulgate administrative rules
and regulations to implement and enforce this article. In the event of any
violation of the provisions set forth in this article, the contractor and any
subcontractor responsible therefor shall be liable for the unpaid wages and
shall pay the eligible employee any amounts underpaid. The city's director of
procurement is additionally authorized to take any one (1) or more of the
following remedies in the event of a written determination of noncompliance:
   (a)   Liquidated damages paid to the city in the amount of fifty dollars
($50.00) for each incidence of noncompliance for each day of non-compliance
and/or each day it continues;
   (b)   Suspension of further payments on the contract until the violation has
ceased;
   (c)   Suspend and/or terminate the contract for cause; and/or
   (d)   Debar or suspend the contractor or subcontractor from future city
contracts pursuant to article IX.
Protests or appeals of the director's remedies for noncompliance shall be in
accordance with article IX.
(Ord. No. 9913, § 1, 11-17-03)
Sec. 28-159. Records.
   (a)   The contractor or subcontractor shall make the records required
available for inspection, copying, or transcription by authorized
representatives of the city's director of procurement, and shall permit such
representatives to interview employees during working hours on the job. If the
contractor or subcontractor fails to submit the required records or make them
available, the director may, after written notice to the contractor, take such
action as may be necessary to cause the suspension of any further payment,
advance, or guarantee of funds. Furthermore, failure to submit the required
records upon request or to make such records available may be grounds for
debarment action pursuant to article IX.
   (b)   Payrolls and basic records relating thereto shall be maintained by the
contractor during the course of the work and preserved for a period for three
(3) years thereafter for all eligible employees. Such records shall contain the
name, address, and social security number of each such worker, his or her
correct classification, hourly rates of wages paid, daily and weekly number of
hours worked, deductions made, and actual wages paid.
(Ord. No. 9913, § 1, 11-17-03)
ARTICLE XV. CONTRACT REQUIREMENTS FOR THE MITIGATION OF
HEAT- RELATED ILLNESSES AND INJURIES IN THE WORKPLACE
Sec. 28-160.   Definitions.
   In this article, unless the context otherwise requires:
   Sec. 28-160(1). “City” means the City of Tucson.
   Sec. 28-160(2). “City Contractor” means any person or entity, other than
another government entity, that is performing work for the city other under a
city contract.
   Sec. 28-160(3). “Outdoor environment” means a location where work activities
are conducted outside. The term also includes locations such as sheds, tents,
greenhouses, or other structures including, but not limited to, confined
spaces, vaults, pipes, wells, and pump houses, where work activities are
conducted inside but the temperature is not managed by devices that reduce heat
exposure and aid in cooling, such as air-conditioning systems.
   Sec. 28-160(4). “Subcontractor” means an entity or individual with a direct
contract with a city contractor for all or any portion of the work that is the
subject of the city contract.
(Ord. No. 12100, § 1, 6-4-24)
Sec. 28-161.   Contract requirements.
   The following clause is required to appear in all contracts between the city
and a city contractor and contracts between the city contractor and its
subcontractors:
   (a)   If contractor's employees or contract workers will perform work under
this contract in an outdoor environment, contractor must have and implement a
written plan listing the preventative and proactive measures that contractor
will take to protect those employees and contract workers from heat hazards
(the "Heat Safety Plan") while performing that work. The city may request a
copy of this Heat Safety Plan and documentation of all heat safety and
mitigation efforts currently implemented by contractor to prevent heat-related
illnesses and injuries for work done under this contract. The Heat Safety Plan
must also be posted where it is accessible to employees. At a minimum, the Heat
Safety Plan must include each of the following elements as it relates to heat
safety:
      (1)   Availability of sanitized cool drinking water free of charge at
locations that are accessible to all employees and contract workers.
      (2)   Ability to take regular and necessary breaks as needed and
additional breaks for hydration.
      (3)   Access to shaded areas and/or air conditioning.
      (4)   Access to air conditioning in vehicles with enclosed cabs.
      (5)   Effective acclimatization practices to promote the physiological
adaptation of employees or contract workers newly assigned or reassigned to
work in an outside environment.
      (6)   Training of employees and contract workers, no later than one week
prior to being deployed to work in an outdoor environment, on heat illness and
injury that focuses on environmental and personal risk factors, prevention, how
to recognize and report signs and symptoms of heat illness and injury, how to
administer appropriate first aid measures, and how to report heat illness and
injury to emergency medical personnel.
      (7)   The posting of signage at the job site that contains information,
in both English and Spanish, explaining how to (a) recognize and report signs
and symptoms of heat illness and injury; (b) administer appropriate first aid
measures, and (c) report heat-related illness and injury to emergency medical
personnel. The signage must also include a phone number for reporting heat
violations to OSHA/ADOSH.
      (8)   Providing written notification to all employees and contract
workers regarding their new worker protections under this provision. This
notification shall be provided to existing employees and during the onboarding
process for new employees. The notification shall be provided to each worker in
the language preferred by that worker and must be posted in the workplace.
   (b)   Contractor will incorporate this section in all subcontracts with
subcontractors or other entities or individuals who may perform work under this
contract, including the requirement that those subcontractors impose the same
obligations under any sub-subcontractors. It is the obligation of contractor to
ensure compliance with this provision by its subcontractors. City may terminate
this contract for failure to comply with this provision.
(Ord. No. 12100, § 1, 6-4-24)
Sec. 28-162.   Administrative responsibility.
   City departments shall include the requirements of this article in all
solicitations and contracts. If the department primarily responsible for
managing any contract covered by this article learns that the contractor has
violated the above provision, the department must notify the procurement
director regarding the non-compliance. If the contractor, after being advised
of the noncompliance, does not demonstrate that it has taken appropriate
corrective action for the breach, the procurement director will notify OSHA/
ADOSH and may take other action as permitted by the procurement code and the
contract, including termination of the contract.
(Ord. No. 12100, § 1, 6-4-24)
ARTICLE XVI. PREVAILING WAGE
Sec. 28-163.   Definitions.
   In this article, unless the context otherwise requires:
   Sec. 28-163(1). “Affordable housing” means residential or mixed-use
development that provides low-to-moderate-income housing to at least fifty (50)
percent of the dwelling units at a site committed for a minimum term through
covenants or restrictions to households with incomes at eighty (80) percent or
less of the area median income as defined by the United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development.
   Sec. 28-163(2). “City” means the City of Tucson and any related city agency,
department or authority.
   Sec. 28-163(3). “Construction” has the meaning as set forth in section 34-
101(3) of Title 34, Chapter 1, Article 1 of the Arizona Revised Statutes. For
the purposes of this article, construction does not include work performed by
employees of the city.
   Sec. 28-163(4). “Covered contractor” means any contractor or subcontractor
performing work on a covered project.
   Sec. 28-163(5). “Covered project” means a city construction project on city-
owned or leased property where the city is the "owner" of the project, the
solicitation and award of contract(s) for the construction of the project is
subject to the Procurement Code as well as Title 34 of the Arizona Revised
Statutes, and the engineer's estimate of the total project cost is no less than
two million ($2,000,000) dollars, with the exception of the following:
   (a)   Projects subject to federal prevailing wage law.
   (b)   Projects for which contracts are solicited before July 1, 2024,
including any renewals.
   (c)   Projects funded in whole or in part by revenues generated from ballot
measures approved by voters prior to January 1, 2024.
   (d)   Any projects to be constructed under a job order contract (JOC).
   (e)   Any affordable housing project.
   (f)   Any project where the contract solicitation is being re-advertised
because the initial solicitation received less than three (3) responsive
qualifying bids.
   (g)   Public infrastructure projects built by private developers regardless
of whether the city is providing any form of cost reimbursement.
   Sec. 28-163(6). “Prevailing wage rate” means the rate, amount, or level of
wages, salaries, benefits, and other remuneration prevailing for the
corresponding class of mechanics, laborers, or workers employed for the same
work in the same trade or occupation in the locality in which the construction
takes place, as determined by the director on the basis of applicable
prevailing wage rate determinations made by the U.S. Secretary of Labor under
the provisions of the Davis-Bacon Act, 40 U.S.C. § 3142 et seq., as amended.
   Sec. 28-163(7). “Willfully” means any act that is intentional, deliberate,
conscious or voluntary and designed to achieve a particular result.
(Ord. No. 12066, § 1, 1-9-24)
Sec. 28-164.   Payment of prevailing wages.
   (a)   Required. Every mechanic, laborer or other worker employed by any
contractor or subcontractor performing work on a covered project shall be paid
not less than the prevailing wage rate for the same class and kind of work in
the Tucson metropolitan area. This section shall not apply to any participant
in a youth employment program where the participant is employed in non-
construction work.
   (b)   Apprenticeship programs. Any covered contractor may support employee
apprenticeship participation by contributing an amount to an apprenticeship
program approved by the U.S. Department of Labor that is equivalent to and
consistent with the appropriate Prevailing Wage Rate as determined by the U.S.
Department of Labor and is registered with the State of Arizona.
   (c)   Contract specifications. Every construction contract entered into by
the city for a covered project shall contain a provision: (i) stating that the
minimum wages to be paid for every class of mechanic, laborer and worker
performing construction work on the project shall be not less than the
prevailing wage rate for that class of worker; (ii) requiring the contractor to
pay every mechanic, laborer or other worker at least once a week the full
amount of wages accrued at the time of payment at the applicable prevailing
wage rate; (iii) mandating that the contractor comply with the recordkeeping
and notice posting requirements in section 28-165; (iv) stating that the
contractor may not misclassify any mechanic, laborer or other worker as an
independent contractor, as defined in CFR 541; (v) requiring compliance with
this article; and (vi) requiring the contractor impose these same requirements
on all subcontractors. A mechanic, laborer or other worker shall be classified
as an independent contractor only if their work relationship satisfies the
legal definition of an independent contractor under the Fair Labor Standards
Act, 29 U.S.C. § 201 et seq., as amended.
(Ord. No. 12066, § 1, 1-9-24)
Sec. 28-165.   Required recordkeeping and notice posting.
   (a)   Every covered contractor shall keep certified payroll records showing
the name, address, job classification, wages and benefits paid or provided, and
the number of hours worked for each employee. These records shall be preserved
for four (4) years from the date of an employee's final payment for work done
on the covered project and shall be considered public records under Arizona
Public Records Law, A.R.S. section 39-101 et seq. Every covered contractor
shall file weekly Federal Form WH-347 or its equivalent which shall specify for
each employee the employee's name, address, employee ID#/last four digits of
the Social Security Number, job classification, hourly wage rate paid, the
number of hours worked each week, all deductions made from gross pay, and net
weekly pay, with the director. Every covered contractor shall file a statement
weekly with the director certifying that (i) all its employees performing work
on the covered project have been paid no less than the wage required by this
article, or if any wages remain unpaid, setting forth the amount of wages due
and owing to each worker respectively; and (ii) the job classification for each
employee conforms with the work performed. Social Security Numbers and other
personal identifying information shall be kept confidential by the city, unless
otherwise required by law.
   (b)   The director must notify in writing all covered contractors at least
once every twelve (12) months of their obligation to file weekly the Federal
Form WH-347 or its equivalent. The notification must include a copy of the
Federal Form WH-347 with instructions for completing the form, the dates that
the completed form is due throughout the subsequent twelve (12) months, contact
information for an employee within the director's office where questions can be
referred, and a notice of the penalties that can be assessed if the covered
contractor becomes non-compliant. In addition, the notice shall include a
letter that provides the name, address and telephone number of the director,
the applicable prevailing wages for the job classifications at the covered
contractor, and a statement advising workers that if they have been paid less
than the prevailing wage rate they may notify the director and request an
investigation. The city's failure to provide the previously described written
notification to covered employers does not relieve covered contractors of their
obligations under this article.
   (c)   Every covered contractor shall post the letter with the related
information referenced in subsection (c) above at the job site in an area
easily accessible by all employees.
(Ord. No. 12066, § 1, 1-9-24)
Sec. 28-166   Enforcement.
   (a)   Complaint procedure. The director shall provide a complaint form on
the official city website. Any affected individual or organization representing
such individual(s) may file a complaint with the director for any violation of
this article.
   (b)   Review and investigation. The director shall review and investigate
the complaint and shall make a finding of compliance or noncompliance within
sixty (60) days of the complaint being filed, including a determination of
whether an employer is covered by this article. The covered contractor shall
permit authorized agents of the director to observe the work being performed on
the work site, to interview employees, and examine the books and records
relating to the payrolls being investigated to determine whether or not the
covered contractor is in compliance with this article. Failure of the director
to issue a finding of compliance or noncompliance does not relieve the covered
contractor of their obligations under this article.
   (c)   Finding of noncompliance. If at any time the director, upon
investigation of a complaint or upon independent investigation, finds that a
violation of this article has occurred it shall issue a finding of
noncompliance and notice of corrective action to the covered contractor. The
finding of noncompliance shall specify the areas of noncompliance, indicate
such corrective action as may be necessary to achieve compliance, and impose
deadlines for achieving compliance.
   (d)   Dispute of finding of noncompliance. A covered contractor may dispute
a finding of noncompliance and notice of corrective action by requesting a
review within thirty (30) days of the date of the finding. The director shall
appoint a hearing officer, who shall affirm or reverse the finding of
noncompliance based upon evidence presented by the applicable city department
and the covered contractor. Where the finding of noncompliance and notice of
corrective action requires wage restitution, the covered contractor must, as a
precondition to a request for review, provide evidence that such wages have
either been paid or placed into an escrow account and will be paid from the
escrow account directly to employees if the hearing officer affirms the
director's finding. A covered contractor who does not timely request review or
appeal, or who fails to pay or escrow wages as provided herein, waives the
right to dispute a finding of noncompliance. A finding of noncompliance and
notice of corrective action shall become final if either the covered contractor
fails to request review within thirty (30) days as provided in this paragraph,
or the hearing officer affirms such finding after a review.
   (e)   A violation by a subcontractor of a covered contractor shall be deemed
a violation by the covered contractor.
(Ord. No. 12066, § 1, 1-9-24)
Sec. 28-167   Sanctions.
   (a)   If (i) the director or hearing officer determines that a covered
contractor has failed to take corrective action for more than sixty (60) days
after a notice of corrective action has become final; or (ii) the hearing
officer determines that any portion of a covered contractor's dispute of a
finding of noncompliance is frivolous or was brought for the purpose of
delaying compliance, the director shall impose penalties, which may include any
or all of the following: (1) wage restitution for the affected employee(s); (2)
liquidated damages in the amount of three (3) times the wages owed; (3) a
directive to the applicable city department to withhold any payments due the
covered contractor, and to apply such payments to the payment of fines or the
restitution of wages; or (4) rescission of the contract under which the
violation occurred.
   (b)   In the event that the director or hearing officer determines that a
covered contractor has willfully or more than twice in a three-year period
failed to comply with this article, the director or hearing officer, in
addition to the sanctions that may be imposed pursuant to subsection (a) above,
may order debarment of the contractor pursuant to sections 28-99 through 28-106
of the Tucson City Code.
(Ord. No. 12066, § 1, 1-9-24)
Sec. 28-168   Regulation.
   The Director may issue regulations to implement the provisions of this
article.
(Ord. No. 12066, § 1, 1-9-24)
Chapter 29
ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENT
Art. I.   General Provisions, §§ 29-1, 29-2
Art. II.   Definitions, §§ 29-3, 29-4
Art. III.   Department of Transportation as Lead Agency, § 29-5
Art. IV.   Applicability, §§ 29-6, 29-7
Art. V.   Requirements, § 29-8
Art. VI.   Variances and Appeals, §§ 29-9, 29-10
Art. VII.   Enforcement, § 11
Art. VIII.   Watercourse Amenities, Safety, and Habitat, §§ 29-12--29-19
Art. IX.   Development Regulations and Public Notice in the Proximity of
Designated Landfills, §§ 29-20--29-29
Article I. General Provisions
Sec.
29-1.   Short title.
Sec.
29-2.   Purpose.
Article II. Definitions
Sec.
29-3.   Definitions.
Sec.
29-4.   Abbreviations.
Article III. Department of Transportation as Lead Agency
Sec.
29-5.   Powers and duties.
Article IV. Applicability
Sec.
29-6.   Applicability to major employers.
Sec.
29-7.   Voluntary participation.
Article V. Requirements for Employees
Sec.
29-8.   Requirements for major employers.
Article VI. Variances and Appeals
Sec.
29-9.   Variances.
Sec.
29-10.   Appeals.
Article VII. Enforcement
Sec.
29-11.   Violations.
Article VIII. Watercourse Amenities, Safety, and Habitat
Sec.
29-12.   Purpose and intent.
Sec.
29-13.   Definitions
Sec.
29-14.   Applicability.
Sec.
29-15.   Development in the study area.
Sec.
29-16.   Development requirements for resource areas.
Sec.
29-17.   Review and approval.
Sec.
29-18.   Violation declared a civil infraction.
Sec.
29-19.   Appeals and variances.
Article IX. Development Regulations and Public Notice in the Proximity of
Designated Landfills
Sec.
29-20.   Purpose.
Sec.
29-21.   Definitions.
Sec.
29-22.   Scope of application.
Sec.
29-23.   Development on or within one hundred (100) feet of a landfill.
Sec.
29-24.   Development between one hundred (100) and five hundred (500) feet from
a landfill.
Sec.
29-25.   Reporting obligations.
Sec.
29-26.   Public notice.
Sec.
29-27.   Cooperation of landfill owners and operators.
Sec.
29-28.   City access.
Sec.
29-29.   Violation declared a civil infraction.
ARTICLE I.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 29-1. Short title.
Articles I through VII of this chapter shall be known at the "Travel Reduction
Ordinance."
(Ord. No. 6914, § 1, 3-28-88)
Sec. 29-2. Purpose.
The purpose of articles I through VII of this chapter, recognizing that motor
vehicles are the single greatest contributor to air pollution, is to improve
air quality and reduce traffic congestion in the city, county by increasing
alternate mode usage and reducing overall motor vehicle travel for commute
trips. This chapter shall establish a basis for a cooperative effort of the
local jurisdictions to achieve a uniform program for reduction of work related
trips by employees working for major employers subject to this regulation.
(Ord. No. 6914, § 1, 3-28-88)
ARTICLE II.
DEFINITIONS
Sec. 29-3. Definitions.
   Airshed means that area delineated on the map immediately following this
section [not printed herein].
   Alternate mode means any mode of commute transportation other than the
single- occupancy motor vehicle.
   Approvable travel reduction plan means a plan submitted by a major employer
that meets the requirements as set forth in article V of this chapter.
   Carpool or vanpool means two (2) or more persons traveling in a light-duty
vehicle (car, truck or van) to or from work.
   Commute trip means a trip taken by a employee to or from work within the
airshed.
   Commuter matching service means any system, whether it uses computer or
manual methods, which assists in matching employees for the purpose of sharing
rides to reduce drive- alone travel.
   Employer means a sole proprietor, partnership, corporation, unincorporated
association, cooperative, joint venture, agency, department, district or other
individual or entity, either public or private, that employs workers. See also
"major employer" and "voluntary employer."
   Full-time equivalent (FTE) employees means the number of employees an
employer would have if the employer's work needs were satisfied by employees
working forty-hour workweeks. The number of full-time equivalent employees for
any employer is calculated by dividing the total number of annual work hours
paid by the employer by 2080.
   Local jurisdictions includes Pima County, City of Tucson, Town of Marana,
Town of Oro Valley and City of South Tucson.
   Major employer means an employer who employs one hundred (100) or more full-
time equivalent employees at a work site during a twenty-four-hour period for
at least six (6) months during the year.
   Mode means the type of conveyance used in transportation, including single-
occupancy motor vehicle, rideshare vehicle (carpool or vanpool), transit,
bicycle, and walking.
   Motor vehicle means any vehicle propelled by a motor, including car, van,
bus, motorcycle, and all other motorized vehicles.
   Public agency means any political subdivision of this state and any board,
commission or agency thereof.
   Public interest group means any nonprofit group whose purpose is to further
the welfare of the community.
   Regional program means the combination of all implemented plans within the
airshed combination.
   Ridesharing means transportation of more than one (1) person for commute
purposes, in a motor vehicle, with or without the assistance of a commuter
matching service.
   Transit means a bus or other public conveyance system.
   Transportation coordinator means a person designated by an employer,
property manager or transportation management association as the lead person in
developing and implementing a travel reduction plan.
   Transportation management association (TMA) means a group of employers or
associations formally organized to seek solutions for transportation problems
experienced by the group.
   Travel reduction plan means a written report outlining travel reduction
measures which will be submitted annually by each major employer.
   Travel reduction program means a program, implementing a travel reduction
plan by an employer, designed to achieve a predetermined level of travel
reduction through various incentives and disincentives.
   Travel reduction program regional task force means that task force
established pursuant to the intergovernmental agreement entered into by the
local jurisdictions in March, 1988.
   Vanpool: See "Carpool."
   Vehicle miles traveled (VMT) means the number of miles traveled by motor
vehicle for commute trips.
   Vehicle occupancy means the number of occupants in a motor vehicle,
including the driver.
   Work site means a building or any grouping of buildings located within the
city which are on physically contiguous parcels of land or on parcels separated
solely by private or public roadways or rights-of-way, and which are owned or
operated by the same employer.
(Ord. No. 6914, § 1, 3-28-88)
Sec. 29-4. Abbreviations.
As utilized in articles I through VII of this chapter, the following
abbreviations shall have the indicated meanings:
   PAG: Pima Association of Governments
   TMA: Transportation Management Association
   TRO: Travel Reduction Ordinance
   TRP: Travel Reduction Program
   VMT: Vehicle Miles Traveled
(Ord. No. 6914, § 1, 3-28-88)
ARTICLE III.
DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION AS LEAD AGENCY
Sec. 29-5. Powers and duties.
   (a)   The department of transportation, as lead agency for the city, shall
evaluate major employers' TRP plans received from the TRP task force. The
department of transportation shall have thirty (30) days to object to any such
plan received, otherwise the plan is automatically approved. Any such objection
shall be based upon the criteria set forth in article V of this chapter. If the
department of transportation objects, the plan is not approved and shall be
returned to the TRP task force with appropriate comments for review and
revision in consultation with the employer.
   (b)   The department of transportation shall receive recommendations for
enforcement from the TRP task force. The department of transportation shall
determine when enforcement action is appropriate and shall take such action as
it deems necessary.
(Ord. No. 6914, § 1, 3-28-88)
ARTICLE IV.
APPLICABILITY
Sec. 29-6. Applicability to major employers.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all major employers.
(Ord. No. 6914, § 1, 3-28-88)
Sec. 29-7. Voluntary participation.
Employers or groups of employers with less than one hundred (100) full-time
equivalent employees at a single work site are encouraged to participate in
data collection and information dissemination efforts and in the preparation of
their own travel reduction plans on a voluntary basis. These groups shall be
assisted by the TRP task force, the TRP technical advisory committee and TRP
staff, and shall be eligible for participation in all programs and services.
Groups of employers are encouraged to form transportation management
associations.
(Ord. No. 6914, § 1, 3-28-88)
ARTICLE V.
REQUIREMENTS FOR EMPLOYERS
Sec. 29-8. Requirements for major employers.
In each year of the regional program, each major employer shall:
   (a)   Provide each regular employee with information on alternate mode
options and travel reduction measures, including but not limited to Sun Tran
bus routes and schedules, the RideShare program, and bicycle routes. This
information shall also be provided to new employees at the time of hiring.
   (b)   Participate in a survey and reporting effort as directed by the TRP
task force and as scheduled by TRP staff. The results of this survey shall form
a baseline against which attainment of the targets in paragraph (e) of this
section shall be measured, as follows:
   (1)   The baseline for participating in alternative modes of transportation
shall be based on the total number of employees.
   (2)   The baseline for VMT shall be the average VMT per employee for
employees not residing on the work site.
   (c)   Prepare a travel reduction plan for submittal to TRP staff and
presentation to the TRP task force. TRP staff will assist in preparing the
plan. Major employers shall submit plans within nine (9) weeks after they
receive survey data results. The plan shall contain the following elements:
   (1)   The name of the designated transportation coordinator.
   (2)   A description of employee information programs and other travel
reduction measures which have been completed in the previous year.
   (3)   A description of travel reduction measures to be undertaken by the
major employer in the coming year. The following measures may be included:
   a.   A commuter matching service, in addition to or coordinated with PAG's
RideShare program, to facilitate employee ridesharing for work trips.
   b.   Provisions of vans for vanpooling.
   c.   Subsidized carpooling or vanpooling which may include payment for fuel,
insurance or parking.
   d.   Use of company vehicles for carpooling.
   e.   Provision of preferential parking for carpool or vanpool users which
may include close-in parking or covered parking facilities.
   f.   Cooperation with Sun Tran or other transportation providers to provide
additional regular or express service buses to the work site.
   g.   Subsidized bus fares.
   h.   Construction of special loading and unloading facilities for transit
and carpool and vanpool users.
   i.   Cooperation with local jurisdictions to construct walkways or bicycle
routes to the work site.
   j.   Provision of bicycle racks, lockers and showers for employees who walk
or bicycle to and from work.
   k.   Provision of a special information center where information on
alternate modes and other travel reduction measures will be available.
   l.   Establishment of a work-at-home program, full- or part-time, for
employees.
   m.   Establishment of a program of adjusted work hours which may include
compressed work weeks and employee-selected starting and stopping hours. Work
hour adjustments should not interfere with or discourage the use of ridesharing
and transit.
   n.   Establishment of a program of parking incentives and disincentives;
such as a fee for parking and/or a "rebate" for employees who do not use the
parking facility.
   o.   Incentives to encourage employees to live closer to work.
   p.   Implementation of other measures designed to reduce commute trips such
as the provision of day care facilities or emergency taxi services.
   (d)   An approvable travel reduction plan shall meet all the following
criteria:
   (1)   The plan shall designate a transportation coordinator.
   (2)   The plan shall describe a mechanism for regular distribution of
alternate mode transportation information to employees.
   (3)   For employers who in any year meet or exceed annual regional targets
for travel reduction, the plan shall accurately and completely describe current
and planned travel reduction measures.
   (4)   For employers who, in any year, fall below the regional targets for
travel reduction, the plan shall include commitments to implement:
   a.   At least two (2) specific travel reduction measures (such as those
described in subsection (c)(3)) in the first year of the regional program.
   b.   At least three (3) specific alternate modes incentive programs (such as
those described in subsection (c)(3)) in the second year of the regional
program.
   (5)   After the second year, the travel reduction task force shall review
the travel reduction programs for employers not meeting regional targets and
may recommend additional measures.
   (e)   Employers shall implement all travel reduction measures considered
necessary to attain the following target employee par-ticipation in alternate
modes or commuter trips VMT reductions per regulated work site:
   (1)   Fifteen (15) percent of the total employee pool in the first year of
the regional program;
   (2)   Twenty (20) percent of the total employee pool in the second year of
the regional program;
   (3)   Twenty-five (25) percent of the total employee pool in the third year
of the regional program.
   (f)   After the third year of the regional program, either:
   (1)   An increase in employee participation in alternate modes of one (1)
percent per year for each subsequent year until forty (40) percent of all
commute trips are made by alternate modes; or
   (2)   Alternatively, a reduction in average annual VMT per employee of one
and one half (1 1/2) percent per year can be selected by a major employer after
a twenty-five (25) percent alternate mode or commuter trips VMT reduction usage
is achieved.
(Ord. No. 6914, § 1, 3-28-88)
ARTICLE VI.
VARIANCES AND APPEALS
Sec. 29-9. Variances.
   (a)   The TRP task force shall serve as a hearing board for major employers
requesting variances from all or part of TRP ordinance requirements and/or
travel reduction plan scheduling.
   (b)   Any major employer wishing a variance from any of the requirements of
this chapter shall make written application to the TRP task force which will
determine whether to recommend the variance. The recommendation will be
forwarded to the department of transportation which will or will not authorize
the variance. Request for variances shall be finally approved or disapproved
within ninety (90) days of the filing of a request by an employer.
(Ord. No. 6914, § 1, 3-28-88)
Sec. 29-10. Appeals.
   (a)   Any major employer or other interested person may appeal a decision of
the department of transportation to authorize or withhold variances or a
decision of the department of transportation regarding enforcement or other
provisions of this ordinance [articles I--VII of this chapter].
   (b)   The mayor and council will hear and decide the appeal. If their
decision is to disapprove the plan, the plan shall be returned to the TRP task
force for review and revision or to the department of transportation for
appropriate action.
(Ord. No. 6914, § 1, 3-28-88)
ARTICLE VII.
ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 29-11. Violations.
   (a)   The department of transportation, upon determining a substantial
violation of this ordinance [articles I--VII of this chapter], shall request
the city attorney to take appropriate legal action.
   (b)   Violations of any of the following requirements may subject a major
employer to increased civil penalties:
   (1)   Failure to collect or supply information requested by the TRP task
force.
   (2)   Failure to disseminate information on alternate modes and other travel
reduction measures as specified herein.
   (3)   Failure to designate a transportation coordinator.
   (4)   Failure to submit an approvable travel reduction plan.
   (5)   Failure to implement an approved plan within the time schedule
provided or failure to perform a revision of a plan as required by the TRP task
force.
   (c)   Failure by a major employer to meet travel reduction goals as defined
in section
29-8(e) shall not constitute a violation provided that the major employer is
attempting in good faith to meet the goals.
   (d)   Except as provided above any violation of the requirements of this
chapter shall be a civil infraction.
(Ord. No. 6914, § 1, 3-28-88)
ARTICLE VIII.
WATERCOURSE AMENITIES, SAFETY AND HABITAT
Sec. 29-12. Purpose and intent.
Washes within the urbanized areas of the city in which existing vegetation is
maintained are valuable nature resources that contribute to the health and
well-being of the residents of the city. Such washes assist in groundwater
recharge, support wildlife habitat, and provide natural open space areas. These
regulations are specifically intended to accomplish the following:
   (a)   Maximize opportunities for groundwater recharge through the
preservation of specific washes with earthen channels and banks.
   (b)   Protect existing vegetation found within and near specific washes.
   (c)   Provide for the restoration of vegetation disturbed as a result of
development in and adjacent to specific washes.
   (d)   Assist in the reduction of the urban heat island effect by retaining
existing vegetation and minimizing structural improvement of urban washes.
(Ord. No. 7579, § 1, 3-25-91)
Sec. 29-13. Definitions.
   Bank means a mild to steep rise of land which borders and confines the flow
of stormwaters or floodwaters and conveys them to some downstream discharge
point.
   Basin management plan means a site-specific plan for a watershed or balanced
or critical basin which has been approved by the city engineer and which
provides a conceptual plan for orderly development of flood control measures
within the basin.
   Compound channel means a constructed or modified watercourse which contains
and conveys a significant portion of the floodwater within a stabilized lower
channel with mild terraces on each side of the low-flow channel, so that the
higher watercourse areas can be vegetated to provide for open space and
wildlife habitat.
   Development means any human alteration to the natural state of land,
including its vegetation, soil, geology, or hydrology for any residential,
commercial, industrial, utility, or other uses, including all areas used for
vehicular access, circulation, and parking.
   DSD director means the director of the development services department or
his designee.
   Gabions means a form of watercourse stabilization wherein the banks and/or
bed of the watercourse are protected against erosion and scour from flowing
waters. The stabilization consists of rock-filled, rectangular, wire baskets.
   Habitat means the place or type of site where a plant, or animal, or bird
naturally or normally grows and lives.
   Native vegetation means vegetation which is indigenous to the specific site
or to areas contiguous to the parcel being developed.
   Retention means an engineering/structural method of storing surface runoff
water and stopping its downstream progress by employing schemes of containment.
No flow is discharged directly into a downstream watercourse from a retention
facility. The stored water may infiltrate into the subsurface ground layers.
   Riprap means large, angular rock used to armor or protect the bed and/or
banks of a watercourse in a thick layer or blanket of rock material.
   Rock veneer means a blanket of riprap made up of usually small, angular rock
used to stabilize the bed and/or banks of a watercourse with a layer of
concrete, soil cement, or other similar material to secure the rock in place.
   Site means the land area consisting of a lot or contiguous lots (not
including dedicated public property) designed for development as a single
entity and exclusive of any abutting public right-of-way.
   Soil cement means an engineering/structural method of stabilizing the bed
and banks of a watercourse with a material comprised of a mixture of sands,
gravel, and portland cement to produce a natural appearing surface.
(Ord. No. 7579, § 1, 3-25-91; Ord. No. 9967, § 11, 5-17-04)
Sec. 29-14. Applicability.
   (a)   These regulations apply to all lots or parcels of land existing as of
April 25, 1991, that are adjacent to the washes listed in table 1.
   (b)   These regulations do not apply to the following:
   (1)   A lot or parcel existing on April 25, 1991, to be developed with one
(1) single- family residence or single-family residence accessory structure.
   (2)   A subdivision plat, development plan, or site plan approved prior to
April 25, 1991, provided that construction occurs within five (5) years of the
effective date of this article [April 24, 1991].
   (c)   The term "city limit line," as used in Table 1, means the city limits
as existing on the effective date of an ordinance, adopted subsequent to an
annexation, which specifically extends the applicability of these regulations
to the newly annexed wash reaches. Notice and hearing for adoption of an
ordinance establishing the applicability of these regulations to annexed areas
shall be in the same manner as for adoption of an ordinance establishing
original zoning boundaries for newly annexed areas.
TABLE 1
   Washes Subject to the Watercourse Amenities, Safety, Habitat Regulations 
      Airport Wash, Santa Cruz River to city limit line
      Alamo Wash, city limit line to Escalante Road
      Arcadia Wash, Glenn Street to 22nd Street
      Arroyo Chico, Park Avenue to Alvernon Way
      Arroyo Chico, 10th Street to First Avenue
      Atterbury Wash, Pantano Wash to Irvington Road
      Atterbury Wash, between Irvington Road and city limit line.
      Cholla Wash, West Branch Santa Cruz River to City limit line
      Christmas Wash, Rillito Creek to Tucson Boulevard
      Citation Wash, Arroyo Chico to Alvernon Way
      Civano Wash, Pantano Wash to city limit line
      Earp Wash, Julian Wash to city limit line
      Este Wash, Tanque Verde Wash to Broadway Boulevard
      Fahringer Wash, between Sabino Creek and Tanque Verde Road
      Globeberry Wash, Silvercroft Wash to Headwaters
      Hidden Hills Wash, Tanque Verde Creek to city limit line
      High School Wash, Tucson Arroyo to Plumer Avenue
      Julian Wash, Tucson Diversion Channel to city limit line
      Kinnison Wash, Atterbury Wash to Irvington Road
      Maxwell Wash, Silvercroft Wash to Anklam Road
      Naylor Wash, Arroyo Chico to Columbus Boulevard
      Nebraska Wash (East), Airport Wash to 12th Avenue
      Pima Wash, Rillito Creek to Oracle Road
      Powderhorn Wash, Anklam Road to Tumamoc Hill
      Racetrack Wash, Rillito Creek to River Road
      Railroad Wash, Arroyo Chico to Country Club Road
      Robb Wash, Tanque Verde to about one thousand (1,000) feet east to
Bonanza Avenue
      Rodeo Wash, Santa Cruz River to Alvernon Way
      Rolling Hills Wash, Pantano Wash to Harrison Road
      Rose Hill Wash, Pantano Wash to 22nd Street
      Sabino Creek, Tanque Verde Creek to city limit line
      Sentinel Wash, Cedar Street to Sentinel Peak
      Spanish Trail Wash, Pantano Wash to Houghton Road
      Tucson Park Wash, Silvercroft Wash to Greasewood Road
      Valencia Wash (East), Santa Cruz River to I-19
      West Branch of Santa Cruz River, Santa Cruz River to Valencia Road
      Wyoming Wash, Santa Cruz River to 17th Avenue
(Ord. No. 7579, § 1, 3-25-91; Ord. No. 7944, § 1, 3-15-93; Ord. No. 8310, § 1,
6-20-94; Ord. No. 8779, § 1, 12-2-96; Ord. No. 9427, § 1, 7-10-00; Ord. No.
9489, § 1, 11-20-00; Ord. No. 9501, § 1, 1-22-01)
Sec. 29-15. Development in the study area.
   (a)   Study area established. A study area consisting of the channel, the
banks, and the land area extending fifty (50) feet from the banks of the washes
listed in table 1, is hereby established.
   (b)   Required study area information. If alterations to the study area are
proposed, the following information shall be submitted to the city engineer
prior to the issuance of a permit for development in the study area:
   (1)   Hydrology/hydraulic study. A study of the wash and its hydrology and
hydraulics is required. In addition to the information required by Chapter
26, Floodplain and Erosion Hazard Area Regulations, the hydrology/hydraulics
study shall contain the following elements:
   a.   The location of the 100-year floodplain on, adjacent to, and a minimum
of two hundred (200) feet upstream and downstream of the proposed development.
   b.   Soil conditions in and adjacent to the watercourse, and the erosion
potential.
   c.   Existing rights-of-way or easement dedication along the wash for a
distance of five hundred (500) feet upstream and downstream of the proposed
development.
   d.   The existing and proposed ownership of any drainageway facilities on or
adjacent to the site and identification of the persons responsible for the
maintenance of such facilities.
   e.   Previous hydraulic/hydrology studies or maps prepared for the
watershed.
   f.   Groundwater recharge potential at this location.
   g.   Sediment transport characteristics along the watercourse centered on
this location.
   h.   Existing and proposed utilities to and across the site.
   i.   Any other elements that may be characteristic of the watercourses on or
adjacent to the site.
   (2)   Plant/habitat inventory. All development proposals shall be
accompanied by an inventory of the existing vegetation and wildlife habitats
within the study area.
   (3)   A copy of the plant/habitat inventory shall be submitted to the
development services department for review.
   (c)   Basin management plan. Development on a lot or parcel which is located
within the boundaries of an approved basin management plan shall be in
conformance with the plan.
(Ord. No. 7579, § 1, 3-25-91; Ord. No. 9967, § 11, 5-17-04)
Sec. 29-16. Development requirements for resource areas.
   (a)   Resource area. The resource area consists of the channel and banks of
a wash, and those portions of the study area containing vegetative resources
and wildlife habitat areas. Where alteration to any portion of the resource
area is proposed, the applicant for a development permit is required to
demonstrate why the resource area cannot be left in its natural condition.
   (b)   Alteration of resource area. No development, including grubbing,
grading, removal of vegetation, channelization, or other type of alteration of
the land, shall occur in the resource area unless a mitigation plan, which
includes a plan for the proposed wash treatment and a preservation/revegetation
plan, is submitted to the development services department director and approved
as provided for in section
29-17 below.
   (1)   Mitigation plan. The mitigation plan must demonstrate that the loss of
existing vegetation and wildlife habitat as a result of development in the
resource area is minimized, and that lost vegetation and wildlife habitat are
restored or recreated through the specific wash treatment and the preservation/
revegetation plan. If a vegetated area is altered, the site must be revegetated
to the same or greater density, diversity, and volume of vegetation as existed
prior to the alteration. The mitigation plan shall demonstrate the following:
   a.   Wash treatment. The treatment of the watercourse must be done in a
manner which maintains the existing appearance or predevelopment condition of
the resource area by using one (1) or a combination of the following methods,
in order of priority. Alternative structural solutions consistent with the
intent of these regulations are encouraged and may be proposed by the owner.
   1.   Earthen channel.
   2.   Retention of stormwater runoff to reduce the impact on an earthen
channel.
   3.   Structural materials conducive to retaining existing vegetation or
revegetation, including any use of a soil filter blanket.
   4.   Compound channels.
   5.   Riprap, whether exposed or buried.
   6.   Gabions.
   b.   The following wash treatments may be used only if the city engineer
determines that an existing safety hazard warrants such treatment, and the wash
treatment method is approved by the mayor and council.
   1.   Rock veneer.
   2.   Soil cement.
   3.   Reinforced concrete, including textured, tinted, or colored concrete.
   c.   Preservation/revegetation plan. The preservation/revegetation plan must
demonstrate that any vegetation removed from the resource area is replaced as
closely as possible to the predisturbance condition in terms of plant type,
density, and diversity. Plant types not currently existing on the site may be
included in the preservation/revegetation plan if they are listed on the low
water use/drought tolerant plant list in development standard 2-16. The
preservation/revegetation plan shall contain the following information:
   1.   A preservation plan for native vegetation in the resource area.
   2.   The proposed location of vegetation after development, including the
location of salvaged materials.
   3.   An access plan and maintenance schedule for the vegetation in the
resource area.
   (2)   A copy of the preservation /revegetation plan shall be submitted to
the development services department for review.
(Ord. No. 7579, § 1, 3-25-91; Ord. No. 9967, § 11, 5-17-04)
Sec. 29-17. Review and approval.
   (a)   Plant, habitat and preservation review. The PDSD director shall review
the plant/habitat inventory and the preservation/revegetation plan in
accordance with
Chapter 23B, Unified Development Code (UDC), Section 3.3.3, PDSD Director
Approval Procedure, or, when the applicant who was the landowner of record
prior to the effective date of the UDC (i.e. January 2, 2013) chooses to be
governed by the provisions of the Land Use Code (LUC), Development Compliance
Code,
Chapter 23A, Section
23A-51, PDSD Full Notice Procedure. Applications under this subsection shall be
reviewed by the stormwater advisory commission (SAC), which shall make
recommendations on the application to the PDSD director.
   In making a decision, the PDSD director will consider the preservation/
revegetation plan as it relates to the following:
   1.   The existing condition of the site.
   2.   The existing character of vegetation upstream and downstream in the
channel, on the banks, and fifty (50) feet from the banks of any parcels
immediately adjacent to the site.
   3.   The amount, type, and characteristics of the vegetation upstream and
downstream of the site, any proposed open space linkages or facilities
recommended by parks, recreation, open space, and trails plan, and any
applicable findings of the critical and sensitive wildlife habitat map and
study.
   4.   The density, diversity, location, and selection of plan materials.
   5.   Other landscaping required by the UDC or the LUC, whichever is
applicable as described above.
   (b)   Hydrology/hydraulic review. The PDSD director shall review the
hydrology/hydraulic study and the preservation/mitigation plan showing the
proposed treatment of the resource area in accordance with Unified Development
Code (UDC) Section 3.3.3, PDSD Director Approval Procedure, or, when the
applicant who was the landowner of record prior to the effective date of the
UDC (i.e. January 2, 2013) chooses to be governed by the provisions of the Land
Use Code, Development Compliance Review,
Chapter 23A, Section
23A-51, PDSD Full Notice Procedure.
   In making decisions on the type and manner in which drainage improvements or
other uses may be located in the resource area, the PDSD director shall
consider the following:
   1.   Whether drainage improvements are necessary to prevent erosion or
flooding hazards.
   2.   Whether reasonable alternative locations for utility lines and roadway
improvements are available.
   3.   Whether erosion setbacks greater than the resource area are required by
Chapter 26, Floodplain, Stormwater, and Erosion Hazard Management, if the
resource area is left unimproved.
   4.   Whether the development proposed within the resource area is compatible
with the purpose and intent of these regulations.
   5.   Whether the resource area is restored as closely as possible to its
predisturbance condition.
(Ord. No. 7579, § 1, 3-25-91; Ord. No. 9967, § 11, 5-17-04; Ord. No. 11173, §
1, 5-20-14, eff. 6-20-14)
Sec. 29-18. Violation declared a civil infraction.
   It shall be a civil infraction for any person, firm or corporation to
violate, disobey, omit, neglect or refuse to comply with, or to resist the
enforcement of any of the provisions of this article.
   If any property or improvement thereon is used in violation of the
provisions of this article, the city attorney, in addition to other remedies,
may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to restrain, correct or
abate such violation.
   The Planning and Development Services Department Director shall either
proceed to issue a citation for violation of this article pursuant to
Chapter 23B, Unified Development Code (UDC) Article 10, Enforcement and
Penalties, or
Chapter 23, Land Use Code (LUC) Section 5.5, Compliance and Enforcement,
whichever is applicable, or report such violations to the city attorney.
Violations for which citations are issued shall be heard under the procedures
set forth in the aforementioned section of the UDC or LUC, whichever is
applicable.
(Ord. No. 7579, § 1, 3-25-91; Ord. No. 9967, § 11, 5-17-04; Ord. No. 11173, §
2, 5-20-14, eff. 6-20-14)
Sec. 29-19. Appeals and variances.
   (a)   Appeals. The decision of the director may be appealed to the Mayor and
Council in accordance with Unified Development Code (UDC) Section 3.9.2, Mayor
and Council Appeal Procedure, or, when the applicant who was the landowner of
record prior to the effective date of the UDC (i.e. January 2, 2013) chooses to
be governed by the provisions of the Land Use Code, Development Compliance
Review,
Chapter 23A, Section
23A-62, Mayor and Council Appeal Procedure. Appeals must be filed with the City
Clerk no later than fourteen (14) days after the date of the decision. A copy
of the appeal shall be filed with the director.
   (b)   Variances. A request for a variance from the provisions of this
Article shall be reviewed and considered for approval by the Board of
Adjustment in accordance with Unified Development Code (UDC) Section 3.10.1 and
3.10.3, Board of Adjustment Variance Procedure, or, when the applicant who was
the landowner of record prior to the effective date of the UDC (i.e. January 2,
2013) chooses to be governed by the provisions of the Land Use Code (LUC),
Development Compliance Review,
Chapter 23A, Section
23A-52, Board of Adjustment Full Notice Procedure. The variance must comply
with the findings for granting a variance in accordance with UDC Section
3.10.3.K or LUC Section 5.1.7.3.B, whichever is applicable.
   (c)   Stormwater technical advisory committee (STAC). STAC may make
recommendations to the director of the department of transportation to be
forwarded to the mayor and council on technical issues and questions raised by
appeals and variance requests and proposed amendments to these regulations.
   (d)   Stormwater advisory committee (SAC). The SAC may review all proposed
amendments to the Tucson Code,
Chapter 29, Article VIII, and may provide written conclusions and
recommendations to the director of the department of transportation to be
forwarded to the mayor and council and, as applicable, to the planning
commission, prior to a public hearing on the proposed amendments.
(Ord. No. 11173, § 3, 5-20-14, eff. 6-20-14)
TABLE 1
WASHES SUBJECT TO THE WATERCOURSE AMENITIES, SAFETY, AND HABITAT REGULATIONS
      Airport Wash, Santa Cruz River to Los Reales Road
      Alamo Wash, Ft. Lowell Road to Escalante Road
      Arcadia Wash, Glenn Street to 22nd Street
      Arroyo Chico, Park Avenue to Alvernon Way
      Arroyo Chico, 10th Street to First Avenue
      Atterbury Wash, Pantano Wash to Irvington Road
      Cholla Wash, West Branch Santa Cruz River to city limits
      Christmas Wash, Rillito Creek to Tucson Boulevard
      Citation Wash, Arroyo Chico to Alvernon Way
      Civano Wash, Pantano Wash to Poorman Road
      Earp Wash, Julian Wash to Valencia Road
      Este Wash, Tanque Verde Wash to Broadway Boulevard
      Fahringer Wash, between Sabino Creek and Tanque Verde Road
      Globeberry Wash, Silvercroft Wash to headwaters
      Hidden Hills Wash, Tanque Verde Creek to Houghton Road
      High School Wash, Tucson Arroyo to Plumer Avenue
      Julian Wash, Tucson Diversion Channel to Country Club Road
      Kinnison Wash, Atterbury Wash to Irvington Road
      Maxwell Wash, Silvercroft Wash to Anklam Road
      Naylor Wash, Arroyo Chico to Columbus Boulevard
      Nebraska Wash, Airport Wash to 12th Avenue
      Pima Wash, Rillito Creek to Oracle Road
      Powerhorn Wash, Anklam Road to Tumamoc Hill
      Racetrack Wash, Rillito Creek to River Road
      Railroad Wash, Arroyo Chico to County Club Road
      Robb Wash, Tanque Verde to about one thousand (1,000) feet east to
Bonanza Avenue
      Rodeo Wash, Santa Cruz River to Alvernon Way
      Rolling Hills Wash, Pantano Wash to Harrison Road
      Rose Hill Wash, Pantano Wash to 22nd Street
      Sabino Creek, Tanque Verde Creek to city limits
      Sentinel Wash, Cedar Street to Sentinel Peak
      Spanish Trail Wash, Pantano Wash to Houghton Road
      Tucson Park Wash, Silvercroft Wash to Greasewood Road
      Valencia Wash, Santa Cruz River to I-19
      West branch of Santa Cruz River, Santa Cruz River to Valencia Road
      Wyoming Wash, Santa Cruz River to 17th Avenue
(Ord. No. 8310, § 1, 6-20-94; Ord. No. 8303, § 1, 9-26-94; Ord. No. 8779, § 1,
12-2-96; Ord. No. 9427, § 1, 7-10-00; Ord. No. 9582, §§ 6--8, 8-6-01; Ord. No.
9967, § 11, 5-17-04)
ARTICLE IX.
DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS AND PUBLIC NOTICE IN THE PROXIMITY OF DESIGNATED
LANDFILLS*
__________
*   Editors Note: Ord. No. 10037, § 1, adopted Sept. 13, 2004, amended Art. IX
in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. IX, §§
29-20--29-27, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No.
8852, §§ 1, 2, adopted April 7, 1997.
__________
Sec. 29-20. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide reasonable measures to protect the
public's health and safety from potential adverse effects of methane gas.
(Ord. No. 10037, § 1, 9-13-04)
Sec. 29-21. Definitions.
   A.   "Landfill" means either:
   1.   Any area designated by the director of utility services (director) to
be a known landfill; or
   2.   Any area outside the boundaries designated in section
29-21.A.1. known or discovered to contain significant sub-surface biodegradable
solid waste.
Maps showing the boundaries of the landfills designated in section
29-21.A.1. shall be maintained at utility services and a legal description
shall be recorded with the Pima County Recorder. The director may modify
designated landfill boundaries whenever the director determines that the facts
warrant modifications. Whenever the director modifies the boundaries of a
designated landfill, notice shall be given to owners of affected properties by
first class mail and a modified legal description shall be recorded.
   B.   "Developer" means the person(s) or entities responsible for development
subject to this section, including but not limited to, the owner of the
property being developed, the lessee of the property being developed, the
manager of the property being developed and the builder.
   C.   "Responsible party" means any natural person, corporation, trust,
partnership, or other entity that leases the property at issue or holds legal
title, beneficial title, equitable title, or that controls any entity that
holds such title to the property at issue. Control of an entity means the right
to determine without resort to any other, the decisions and actions of the
entity.
   D.   "Development" means any activity that triggers the obligation to obtain
a permit under the City of Tucson Building Code. Development also includes
public works projects, development by utility companies, and placement of
manufactured housing.
   E.   "Satisfactory operating conditions" means that the landfill gas control
system is capable of operating as designed per the current engineering design,
at full capacity with all barriers, probes, pipes, collector wells and blowers
intact and functional.
   F.   "Director" means the director of utility services or the director' s
authorized designee.
(Ord. No. 10037, § 1, 9-13-04)
Sec. 29-22. Scope of application.
This article shall apply to any landfill within the city limits, whether
privately or publicly owned or operated.
   Existing development exception. The development regulations set forth in
section
29-24 shall not apply to any addition to a building.
(Ord. No. 10037, § 1, 9-13-04)
Sec. 29-23. Development on or within one hundred (100) feet of a landfill.
   A.   [Landfill methane development plan.] All proposed development, on or
within one hundred (100) feet from a landfill, shall receive the necessary
building permit only after approval of a landfill methane development plan. The
plan shall meet the following criteria to the extent applicable:
   1.   Site assessment. The plan shall indicate the location of the landfill
or landfills; (more than one (1) landfill may affect the site). The developer
is responsible for defining the waste boundary as needed to prepare the plan.
Additionally, the plan shall describe the following information: operators of
the landfill and dates of operation, the depth to groundwater, groundwater test
results, landfill depth, type of landfill waste, floodplain designations, gas
data, gas monitoring system information, gas extraction system information
including a diagram showing system layout, recent and historical aerial
photographs and landfill history. Any previously unidentified buried waste
encountered after initial approval of the development plan shall be reported to
the director within seven (7) working days.
   2.   Methane production, migration and monitoring. The landfill methane
development plan shall describe existing methane conditions within the proposed
plan area. The developer may be required to take measures to protect the safety
of the proposed development which may include, but not be limited to,
installation of monitoring devices and establishment of mechanisms for regular
monitoring for a duration of time appropriate to the scope of the landfill
activity. The landfill methane plan shall demonstrate, in a manner approved by
the city, that any potential migration of methane to the surface or adjoining
areas will not endanger any future occupant or user of the proposed
development. The plan must be approved by the director. Monitoring for methane
migration may be required pre and post construction.
   3.   Methane control. Where required by the city, due to the presence or
proximity of methane, the landfill methane development plan shall include
design and installation of an approved system for the control, prevention,
extraction or mitigation of methane in order to ensure protection of the
proposed development.
   4.   Construction specifications. The landfill methane development plan
shall specify the special steps to be taken in the construction of the
development to accommodate the special characteristics of the landfill
including, but not limited to, provisions for control of methane migration into
structures, properly engineered drainage, protection against subsidence and
other necessary requirements.
   5.   Professional certification for the development plan. Development plans
submitted to the city pursuant to this section shall be sealed by a
professional engineer or geologist, registered with the Arizona Board of
Technical Registration, who is knowledgeable regarding landfills, methane gas
and the health and safety issues that arise when developing on or in the
vicinity of landfills.
   B.   Waiver. One (1) or more of the requirements of this section may be
waived or satisfied by the city based upon documented evidence presented by the
applicant regarding the site to the director. The waiver may be granted upon
the determination by the director that there are substantial mitigating factors
justifying such a waiver and that there is no substantial risk to the public in
the granting of such a waiver. Even if a waiver is granted under this section,
the responsible party or developer shall comply with the public notice
requirements.
   C.   Monitoring time requirements. Upon request of the developer or
responsible party, modifications to the monitoring schedule may be approved by
the Tucson Fire Chief or his designee upon a showing that there is no
significant risk to public health due to methane activity.
   D.   Approval authority. The approvals and determinations on behalf of the
city as set forth in this section, unless otherwise specified, shall be made by
the director.
   E.   Appeals. Any person aggrieved by a decision of any city representatives
under this section shall have the right to appeal that decision to the board of
appeals which is established by chapter
6, article II of the Tucson Code, section
6-12 et seq., and the procedures established thereunder.
(Ord. No. 10037, § 1, 9-13-04)
Sec. 29-24. Development between one hundred (100) and five hundred (500) feet
from a landfill.
Any proposed development which is to be located between one hundred (100) and
five hundred (500) feet from a landfill, shall receive the necessary building
permits only after city approval of a self-certification statement. The
certification statement form must state that the following factors, which may
affect development, have been considered and appropriate steps have been taken
to prevent any adverse impact from the landfill(s):
   A.   Site assessment. The developer shall identify and review, from
available information, the location of the landfill, the operators of the
landfill, dates of operation, depth to groundwater, groundwater test results,
landfill depth, type of landfill waste, floodplain designations, gas data, gas
monitoring system information, gas extraction system information, recent and
historical aerial photographs and landfill history.
   B.   Methane condition and monitoring. The developer shall identify and
review, from available information, any existing methane condition within the
landfill area and any potential migration of methane to the surface or
adjoining areas that may endanger any future occupant or user of the proposed
development.
   C.   Methane limitation or extraction system. The developer shall identify
and review from available information any existing systems for the extraction
or mitigation of methane if appropriate to the proposed development.
   D.   Construction specifications. The developer shall identify and review,
from available information, the special steps that may be taken in the
construction of the development to accommodate the special characteristics of
the landfill including provisions for control of methane migration within
structures.
   E.   Submitting self-certification statements. The self-certification
statement form shall be submitted to the director and is subject to review and
approval by the director. The self- certification statement shall be submitted
on a standardized form provided by the director.
(Ord. No. 10037, § 1, 9-13-04)
Sec. 29-25. Reporting obligations.
   A.   The developer of any property, on which any type of landfill gas
monitoring system or landfill gas collection or control system has been
installed, shall provide the Tucson Fire Department with a report, the
frequency of which is to be determined by the Tucson Fire Department. The
report shall contain readings of percentages of methane, oxygen and carbon
dioxide gases, gas analyzer used and calibration information. The report shall
also contain a verification statement stating "This system is in satisfactory
operating condition as defined in section
29-21E. of the Tucson Code", or shall describe the deficiencies and provide a
repair timetable. The developer of the subject property shall further be
required to designate to the city a person or entity that will take
responsibility for the operation, maintenance and repair of the system as well
as conduct, certify, document and report future methane monitoring.
   B.   The responsible party of any property where methane monitoring,
prevention, mitigation or extraction equipment or systems have been installed
to meet any requirement under city, state or federal agreement, order,
regulation or law shall maintain the equipment or systems in satisfactory
operating condition. The responsible party shall provide the Tucson Fire
Department with a report, the frequency of which is to be determined by the
Tucson Fire Department. The report shall contain readings of percentages of
methane, oxygen and carbon dioxide gases, gas analyzer used and calibration
information. The report shall also contain a verification statement stating,
"This system is in satisfactory operating condition as defined in section
29-21E. of the Tucson Code", or shall describe the deficiencies and provide a
repair timetable schedule.
   C.   The city may set repair completion time limitations for equipment in
less than satisfactory operating condition. If the repair does not meet the
original design, a new plan must be submitted to the director. If, after notice
and time to make repairs the equipment remains in violation of this section,
the city may enter the property and make repairs as needed to bring the
equipment to satisfactory operating condition and charge the developer or
responsible party the cost of such repairs.
   D.   Methane gas detected through monitoring pursuant to this article, in
concentrations of five (5) percent or more by volume in subsurface probes at
the property boundary or one and one-quarter (1.25) percent or more by volume
within structures, shall be immediately reported by the developer or
responsible party to: (1) the Tucson Fire Department, (2) the Arizona
Department of Environmental Quality and (3) the owner or operator of any
adjacent landfill. In addition, this exceedence shall be reported within seven
(7) calendar days to all owners and occupants of property wholly or partially
within one hundred (100) feet of the detected methane.
   E.   Any monitoring or maintenance required by this section may be
terminated pursuant to section
29-23C.
   F.   The developer or responsible party shall notify the director forty-
eight (48) hours before methane control systems are to be installed.
   G.   The city may inspect any system undergoing installation or any
equipment subject to 29-25B. upon twenty-four (24) hours notice and may require
that the equipment be activated to demonstrate its operational status.
   H.   Failure to meet the requirements of this section, including refusal to
allow access pursuant to
29-25G., shall be a separate violation for each day the non-complying condition
persists after the city provides written notice of the violation and penalties
shall be imposed per diem. A citation for a violation of this section shall
constitute notice of the non-complying condition.
(Ord. No. 10037, § 1, 9-13-04)
Sec. 29-26. Public notice.
The developer of any new or existing structure which is partially or entirely
within five hundred (500) feet of, or on, a landfill shall provide to any new
tenant or any purchaser of the property a notice that the property is subject
to this article and identification of the location where the information
required herein may be obtained. A similar notice shall also be recorded with
the title for each individual lot upon sale by a subdivider of property to the
initial owner/occupant. The notice required under this section shall include:
   1.   A statement that the residence is located within five hundred (500)
feet of a landfill;
   2.   Identification of public jurisdictional agencies such as the Tucson
Fire Department, Environmental Services and the Arizona Department of
Environmental Quality, that can provide further information regarding the
landfill and regulation of the landfill, including the appropriate agencies for
any complaints regarding methane gases;
   3.   The self-certification statement form required under section
29-24 and
   4.   The responsible party's obligations as set forth in section
29-25B.
(Ord. No. 10037, § 1, 9-13-04)
Sec. 29-27. Cooperation of landfill owners and operators.
The responsible party for a property containing a landfill, in whole or in
part, shall cooperate with the city where necessary to characterize the
landfill, or to install methane monitoring or control mechanisms. Owners and
operators and former owners and operators of landfills are required to provide,
within a reasonable period of time, all information in their possession or
control, which is reasonably required by developer or responsible party to
comply with this article.
(Ord. No. 10037, § 1, 9-13-04)
Sec. 29-28. City access.
   A.   The responsible party for a property within the city on which a
landfill is located, in whole or in part, shall allow access to city
representatives to such property for purposes of investigating and remediating
methane conditions or contamination of the air, soil, surface water or
groundwater under the following terms:
   1.   Unless public health or safety is in immediate danger, the city shall
give seven (7) days notice in advance of its intent to enter the property.
The notice shall specify:
   a.   The date of entry;
   b.   The location of entry;
   c.   The purpose of entry;
   d.   The equipment and personnel that may be involved;
   e.   The duration of entry;
   f.   The type of equipment that may be installed;
   g.   The location and duration of installation, if any; and
   h.   The person to contact with questions.
   B.   Unless public health and safety is in immediate danger, the city will
attempt to accommodate future development plans before installation of
equipment if requested by responsible party. Prior to any such installation,
the city shall notify the responsible party of the provisions of
29-28C.
   C.   The city will accommodate one (1) request for relocation of installed
equipment at city expense, to the extent allowed by any remediation plan, upon
a showing of reasonable necessity providing there were no building plans,
including concept plans, at the time equipment was installed.
(Ord. No. 10037, § 1, 9-13-04)
Sec. 29-29. Violation declared a civil infraction.
   A.   It shall be a civil infraction for any person to violate, disobey,
omit, neglect, refuse to comply with, or to resist the enforcement of any
provisions of this article.
   B.   If any property or improvement thereon is used in violation of the
provisions of this article, the city attorney in addition to other remedies,
may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to restrain, correct or
abate such violations.
   C.   The director shall report violations of section
29-23,
29-24,
29-27 and
29-28 to the city attorney. The fire chief or his designee shall either proceed
to issue a citation for violation of section
29-25 or report such violation to the city attorney. Violations for which
citations are issued shall be heard under the procedures set forth in the
Tucson Code. The issuance of any citation shall stay all building permits,
pending resolution of the matter.
(Ord. No. 10037, § 1, 9-13-04)
Chapter 30
DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION*
__________
*   Cross References: Administration, ch.
2; motor vehicles and traffic, ch.
20.
__________
Art. I.   In General, §§ 30-1 – 30-4
Art. II.   General Provisions Relating to City Transit System, §§ 30-5 – 30-10
Article I. In General
Sec.
30-1.   Department of transportation established.
Sec.
30-2.   Powers and duties of the department of transportation.
Sec.
30-3.   Functional units established under the department of transportation.
Sec.
30-4.   Environmental property access privilege program (EPAPP); fees; monitor
wells.
Article II. General Provisions Relating to City Transit System
Sec.
30-5.   Definitions.
Sec.
30-6.   Powers and duties of enforcement agents.
Sec.
30-7.   Specified unlawful activities.
Sec.
30-8.   Use restrictions.
Sec.
30-9.   Violation declared a civil infraction; penalties.
Sec.
30-10.   Impeding a transit vehicle; towing.
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 30-1. Department of transportation established.
There is hereby established a department of transportation, the head of which
shall be the director of transportation. The director's appointment and removal
shall be in accordance with sections
2,
6 and
11 of Chapter V of the Charter.
(Ord. No. 8070, § 2, 6-21-93)
Sec. 30-2. Powers and duties of the department of transportation.
The department of transportation shall perform such work and duties as the city
manager may designate, and the director of transportation shall carry out such
assigned duties and functions, including the supervision of functional units
established within the department of transportation, as deemed advisable.
(Ord. No. 8070, § 2, 6-21-93)
Sec. 30-3. Functional units established under the department of transportation.
   (a)   The following functional units are hereby established under the
department of transportation:
      Management Services
      Engineering
      Transit Services
      Streets Maintenance
      Traffic Engineering
      Transportation Planning
      Park Tucson
   (b)   Such units shall have such functions and duties as may be assigned to
them by the director of transportation, together with such additional
functions, powers, duties and organizational framework as may be designated by
the city manager.
(Ord. No. 8070, § 2, 6-21-93; Ord. No. 10578, § 2, 9-23-08, eff. 7-1-08; Ord.
No. 11400, § 4, 9-20-16)
Sec. 30-4. Environmental property access privilege program (EPAPP); fees;
monitor wells.
   (a)   Upon application, the department of transportation may allow a private
party to use public rights-of-way and/or city property for purposes of
characterizing and ameliorating subsurface environmental contamination
originating from the applicant's property. That use shall be limited to soil
borings in the public right-of-way and soil borings and monitor wells on city
property.
   (b)   Fees for soil borings in the public right-of-way and on city property
are as follows:
   Public rights-of-way: 
      Application fee . . . . . $200.00
      Boring fee (per borehole) . . . . . $100.00
      Permit fee . . . . . $10.00
   City property: 
      Application fee . . . . . $200.00
      Boring fee (per borehole) . . . . . $100.00
      Right-of-entry permit fee (minimum) . . . . . $250.00
   (c)   Monitor wells may be located on city property if the requested
property is available for sale and the applicant agrees to purchase that
property through the city's remnant sales program.
(Ord. No. 8695, § 1, 5-6-96)
ARTICLE II. GENERAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO CITY TRANSIT SYSTEM
Sec. 30-5. Definitions.
   Fare: A fee established by the City to ride on public transit as specified
in section
2-18 of this Code.
   Identification: Any government issued document that contains a photograph,
date of birth, and physical description.
   Overhead catenary system (OCS): A system of poles, overhead wires including
contact wire, which supply traction power to the Sun Link streetcar system.
   Paid zone: The inside of a transit vehicle or other areas as designated by
appropriate signage or markings.
   Passenger: Any person occupying, riding or using any transit vehicle,
boarding or alighting from such a vehicle, or waiting within a designated paid
zone area.
   Proof of fare payment: A valid pass or transit fare media valid for the time
and day of use.
   Sun Link: The streetcar transit system.
   Sun Link operational right-of-way (SLROW): The area including all tracks
(single and double) and the space extending four (4) feet beyond the outer edge
of the streetcar tracks, and ten (10) feet from the overhead catenary system
(OCS). The SLROW also includes the substations and the poles and wires that
make up the OCS.
   Sun Shuttle: The public neighborhood circulator connecting to Sun Tran's
fixed route or express service.
   Sun Tran: The public fixed route and express bus system.
   Sun Van: The public Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) paratransit
system.
   Transit enforcement agent: A person authorized by the city manager or the
manager's designee to enforce all or part of the provisions of this article.
The city manager or the manager's designee may designate an employee of the
city or an employee of a private entity that has entered into a contract with
either the city or the city's transit provider as a transit enforcement agent.
   Transit facility: Any real property used for, or in connection with, the
provision of transit services, including transit stops and centers.
   Transit stop: An area designated for boarding and alighting from any transit
vehicle, including a bus stop, bus shelter, streetcar stop, or platform.
   Transit vehicle: A streetcar, public bus, public van or shuttle, or other
vehicle used to transport passengers in public transportation service.
(Ord. No. 11174, § 1, 5-20-14)
Sec. 30-6. Powers and duties of enforcement agents.
   Sec. 30-6(1). A peace officer or transit enforcement agent as designated by
the director of transportation is authorized to enforce all or part of the
provisions of this article.
   Sec. 30-6(2). The presentment of any citation to the violator shall be
considered sufficient and appropriate service.
   Sec. 30-6 (3). Nothing in this article is intended to limit the authority of
the city or its peace officers from enforcing concurrently, or in the
alternative, other remedies applicable at law, including those related to the
crimes of theft of services and/or trespass.
   Sec. 30-6 (4). A person who refuses to provide proof of fare payment when
required, or otherwise violates any lawful regulation of this article, may be
removed from the transit vehicle or transit facility by a transit enforcement
agent at any transit stop or usual stopping place.
(Ord. No. 11174, § 1, 5-20-14)
Sec. 30-7. Specified unlawful activities.
   It is unlawful for any person to:
   Sec. 30-7(1). Fare violations.
   (a)   Occupy or ride in any transit vehicle that requires a fare without
payment of the applicable fare;
   (b)   Fail to exhibit proof of fare payment upon request of a transit
enforcement agent when occupying or disembarking from a transit vehicle;
   (c)   Refuse to disembark a transit vehicle or transit facility upon demand
of a transit enforcement agent;
   (d)   Fail to provide his or her true name and address or identification to
a transit enforcement agent when being served with a citation, or;
   (e)   Fail to exhibit proof of fare payment upon request of a transit
enforcement agent while waiting in a designated paid zone area;
   (f)   Possess or sell stolen or counterfeit proof of fare payment.
   Sec. 30-7(2). Conduct violations.
   (a)   Transport any item that blocks the aisle or the areas of the transit
vehicle reserved for passengers in mobility devices or who use mobility aids;
   (b)   Possess an open container of alcohol or consume an alcoholic beverage
in a transit vehicle or transit facility;
   (c)   Carry onto or aboard a transit vehicle or transit facility any
flammable or explosive substance or hazardous materials;
   (d)   Hang onto or attach his or her body in any manner to any exterior part
of a transit vehicle or touch a moving transit vehicle;
   (e)   Walk between coupled transit vehicles;
   (f)   Enter upon, occupy or remain upon the SLROW except as necessary to
lawfully travel the roadway or sidewalk or board or alight a transit vehicle
unless authorized by a valid permit;
   (g)   Climb the OCS poles or throw items at or attempt to touch the OCS
wires;
   (h)   Throw an object at or from any transit vehicle or at any person or
thing on or in any transit vehicle, or on any transit facility;
   (i)   Except for pedestrians and persons in wheelchairs, travel in any mode,
including but not limited to, motor vehicle, bicycle, equestrian, skateboard,
roller skate, rollerblade, upon or across any transit stop;
   (j)   Place any object on any portion of the SLROW;
   (k)   Interfere with the operation of a transit vehicle, transit facility or
ticket vending machine;
   (l)   Interfere with the ingress or egress of any passenger on a transit
vehicle or transit facility;
   (m)   Use tobacco products, or carry any burning or smoldering substance, in
any form, including an electronic cigarette, aboard a transit vehicle or within
any space where posted signage prohibits smoking;
   (n)   Operate a sound-emitting device, unless the only sound produced by
such item is emitted by a personal-listening attachment (earphone or headphone)
audible only to the person carrying the device producing the sound, except a
peace officer, firefighter, transit employee, or emergency response
professional, in the course of employment;
   (o)   Light a flashlight, scope light, laser light or object that projects a
flashing light or beams of light while inside a transit vehicle or towards a
transit vehicle, except in an emergency;
   (p)   Place feet on or lie down on the seat of a transit vehicle or place
any article on the seat which would leave grease, oil, paint, dirt, blood,
feces, urine or any other substance on the seat;
   (q)   Expectorate, defecate, urinate in or upon a transit vehicle or transit
facility except in a designated restroom;
   (r)   Discard litter in or upon a transit vehicle or transit facility, other
than in a designated receptacle;
   (s)   Light or detonate sparklers, firecrackers or other types of
pyrotechnic devices in or upon a transit vehicle, or transit facility;
   (t)   Injure, mutilate, deface, alter, change, displace, remove or destroy
any sign, notice or advertisement on or in any transit vehicle or transit
facility;
   (u)   Disobey the instructions of any traffic signal, security notice, sign
or marker unless otherwise directed by a transit enforcement agent or peace
officer;
   (v)   Recklessly damage, deface, mutilate or tamper with a transit vehicle
or transit facility so as to impair its function or value;
   (w)   Post signs, notices or drawings or inscribe a message, slogan, sign,
mark or symbol on a transit vehicle or transit facility without written
permission from the transit company, or;
   (x)   Activate an emergency stop device or mechanism, except in an
emergency;
   (y)   Knowingly abandon any type of package or container on a transit
vehicle or transit facility where the abandonment of such package or container
is likely to cause suspicion or alarm about the contents, or require the
dispatch of emergency response personnel to remove and inspect;
   (z)   Remain at a transit stop or within a designated paid zone for more
than one (1) hour.
   (aa)   Engage in loud, raucous, unruly, harmful, or harassing behavior that
disturbs the peace, comfort, or repose of a reasonable person of normal
sensibilities; or engage in conduct not described in subsections (a) through
(z) which is inconsistent with the intended use and purpose of a transit
vehicle or transit facility and refuse to obey the lawful command(s) of a
transit enforcement agent or peace officer to cease such conduct.
   Sec. 30-7(3). No person shall transport animals in a transit vehicle unless:
   (a)   The animal is a guide or service animal as defined by law, including a
service animal in training, that has been specially trained to assist persons
with disabilities, or;
   (b)   The animal is in a completely enclosed and secured cage or carrying
case that is small enough to fit on the passenger's lap, and the animal does
not otherwise endanger or disturb the comfort or health of other passengers.
   Sec. 30-7(4). Parking and boarding.
   (a)   A person shall not park a vehicle in an area designated for vehicle
parking unless the person complies with posted parking regulations.
   (b)   If intending to pick up or drop off a transit passenger, a person
shall park in the area designated for vehicle parking or briefly stop his or
her vehicle in areas designated for passenger loading or unloading, while
remaining with the vehicle, and then remove the vehicle from the transit stop
without delay after the transit passenger is dropped off or picked up.
   (c)   No person shall stop or park a vehicle at a transit parking facility
in a manner that blocks access to a marked pedestrian walkway, designated
traffic lane, parking space, fire lane, boarding zone or SLROW.
   (d)   No person shall park a vehicle so that any part of the vehicle
including any equipment or apparatus in or on the vehicle, extends beyond the
vertical plane of the marked parking space on the SLROW.
(Ord. No. 11174, § 1, 5-20-14)
Sec. 30-8. Use restrictions.
   (a)   Any person adjudicated responsible for violating any provision of this
article resulting in a fine may be prohibited from riding a transit vehicle
until the sanction is fully paid.
   (b)   Any person adjudicated responsible for violating any provision of this
article more than two (2) times within a twelve (12) month period may be
prohibited from riding a transit vehicle or entering upon a transit facility
for ninety (90) calendar days.
   (c)   Any person who poses a serious continuing risk to the public or
transit facility may be immediately removed from a transit vehicle or transit
facility and the person may be prohibited from using transit vehicles or
entering upon a transit facility for a period not to exceed ninety (90)
calendar days.
   (d)   Any person guilty of assaulting a transit enforcement agent or transit
employee acting in the scope of his or her employment may be prohibited from
using a transit vehicle for a minimum of one (1) year.
   (e)   A person shall not ride a transit vehicle in violation of a court
order or finding that the person may be prohibited from riding a transit
vehicle.
(Ord. No. 11174, § 1, 5-20-14)
Sec. 30-9. Violation declared a civil infraction; penalties.
   (a)   Violations of this article shall be a civil infraction. A person found
responsible for a civil violation or civil infraction for the first time shall
be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than twenty-five
hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per civil violation or civil infraction. A person
found responsible for the same civil violation or civil infraction for a second
time within a one (1) year period shall be fined not less than two hundred
dollars ($200.00) nor more than twenty-five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per
civil violation or civil infraction. A person found responsible for the same
civil violation or civil infraction for a third or subsequent time within a one
(1) year period of the first offense shall be fined not less than three hundred
dollars ($300.00) nor more than twenty-five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per
civil violation or civil infraction. The imposition of a fine for civil
violations or civil infractions shall not be suspended.
   (b)   Violations of Sec.
30-7(4) shall be subject to fines under
Chapter 20, Article VII, Division 6, which regulates the time, place or method
of parking a vehicle.
   (c)   In addition to any fines imposed by this article, a city magistrate or
a civil hearing officer may issue an abatement order prohibiting a person from
riding a transit vehicle for a specified period of time not to exceed twelve
(12) months.
(Ord. No. 11174, § 1, 5-20-14)
Sec. 30-10. Impeding a transit vehicle; towing.
   A transit enforcement agent may order a vehicle towed when the vehicle is
impeding the operation of a transit vehicle or is otherwise parked in violation
of any provision of this article or
Chapter 20, Article VII.
(Ord. No. 11174, § 1, 5-20-14)
DISPOSITION TABLE - 1953 CODE
This table is available in PDF: Disposition_Table
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE
This table is incomplete. Ordinances prior to this can be found in the printed
copy of the Tucson, AZ Code or in PDF, click here.
Ordinance Number Date Section Disposition
Ordinance Number       Date  Section        Disposition
7397                   4-16- 1              1-19
                       90
7398                   4-16- 1              22-36(c)(5)
                       90
                           2              22-36(note)
7399                   4-16- 1              23-21
                       90
                           2Rpld          23-341--23-351
                           3Added         23-341--23-349
                           4              23-475(Intro. ¶)
                           5              23-505.C
7405                   5-7-  1              21-25.1
                       90
                           2              21-25.3
                           3              21-25.6
7407                   6-25- 1              23-461.3
                       90
                           2              23-471.6.C
                           3Rpld          23-463--23-470.7
                           4              Ch. 26 (title)
                           5              26-1--
                                            26-16
7408                   5-14- 1              23-455.1.F
                       90
                           2              23-455.17
7411                   5-14- 1              23-21
                       90
                           2              23-201.C
                           3              23-217.D
                           4              23-231.D
                           5              23-253.D
                           6              23-281.D
                           7              23-311.A(3)
                           8              23-322.B(16)
                           9              23-369
7414                   5-21- 1              7-207--
                       90                   7-218
7416                   6-4-  1              21-25.3
                       90
                           2, 3           21-25.6,
                                            21-25.7
7418                   6-4-  1, 2           20-141(note)
                       90
7419                   6-4-  1, 2           20-142(note)
                       90
7420                   6-4-  1, 2           20-230(note)
                       90
7421                   6-4-  1, 2           20-234(note)
                       90
7423                   6-4-  1              21-29
                       90
7424                   6-4-  1              6-1(note)
                       90
7425                   6-4-  1              6-36(note)
                       90
7426                   6-4-  1              6-164(note)
                       90
7429                   6-11- 1              22-36(c)(5)a, b
                       90
                           2              22-36(note)
7430                   6-11- 1              6-1(note)
                       90
7433                   6-18- 1, 2           15-32,
                       90                   15-33
                           3--5           15-33.1--
                                            15-33.3
7434                   6-18- 1--3           7-3--
                       90                   7-5
                           4Rpld          7-12--7-15
                           5              7-16
7435                   6-18- 1              19-28(12)
                       90
7436                   6-18- 1              19-405(a)
                       90
7439                   6-25- 1              10-31(note)
                       90
                           2Rpld          Reg.
                                            19-405.1
7440                   7-2-  1, 2           20-140(note)
                       90
7441                   7-2-  1, 2           22-141(note)
                       90
7442                   7-2-  1, 2           20-179
                       90
7443                   7-2-  1, 2           20-230(note)
                       90
7444                   7-2-  1, 2           20-232(note)
                       90
7445                   7-2-  1              13-3
                       90
7446                   7-2-  2.1            19-100
                       90
                           2.2            19-310(j)
                           2.3            19-290
                           2.4            19-415(c)
                           2.5            Reg.
                                            19-415.1
                           2.6            19-416(b)
                           2.7            19-444
                           2.8            19-445(f), (j), (k)
                           2.9            Reg.
                                            19-445.1(a)
                           2.10           19-452
                           2.11 Rpld      19-485
                           2.12           19-530(c)
                           2.13           19-550(a)
                           2.14           19-570(c)
                           2.15           Reg.
                                            19-110.1(a)
                           2.16           Reg.
                                            19-300.2
7450                   7-3-  1              23-472--23-472.9
                       90
                           2              23.22(ERZ)
                           3              23-510.3.E
7455                   8-6-  1              3-14(b)(16)
                       90
                           2              3-27(a)(3)
                           3              3-43
                           4Rpld          3-32, 3-44
                           5Added         3-32
                           6              3-59(p)
                           7              3-77(b), (h), (l)
7465                   8-6-  1              6-36(note)
                       90
7466                   8-6-  1              10-31(note)
                       90
7467                   8-6-  1              2-48(3)
                       90
                           2              2-49
7469                   9-4-  1              10A-101
                       90
7470                   9-4-  1              15-16
                       90
7475                   9-10- 1              25-62(note)
                       90
7476                   9-10- 1              25-62(note)
                       90
7477                   9-10- 1              25-62(note)
                       90
7478                   9-10- 1              25-62(note)
                       90
7479                   9-10- 1              25-62(note)
                       90
7480                   9-10- 1              25-62(note)
                       90
7481                   9-10- 1              25-62(note)
                       90
7482                   9-17- 1, 2           20-142(note)
                       90
7483                   9-17- 1, 2           20-143(note)
                       90
7484                   9-17- 1, 2           20-179
                       90
7485                   9-17- 1              20-195.1
                       90
7486                   9-17- 1              20-209
                       90
                           2              20-218
7487                   9-17- 1, 2           20-230(note)
                       90
7488                   9-17- 1, 2           20-234(note)
                       90
7489                   9-17- 1, 2           20-232(note)
                       90
7490                   9-17- 1, 2           20-233.1
                       90
7491                   9-17- 1, 2           20-251(note)
                       90
7497                   9-17- 1              10-31(note)
                       90
7502                   9-24- 1              23-367--23-367.4
                       90
7503                   9-24- 1              23-388, 23-393.E,
                       90
                                         23-393.1.B
                           2              23-404
                           3, 4           23-601.C
7504                   9-24- 1              6-84(note)
                       90
7506                   10-8- 1              6-1(note)
                       90
7512                   11-5- 1              20-260
                       90
7513                   11-   1--3           8-2.1--
                       19-90                8-2.3
                           4              8-4
7515                   11-   1              25-62(note)
                       19-90
7516                   11-   1              25-62(note)
                       19-90
7518                   11-   1              10-31(note)
                       19-90
7522                   12-   1              23-21
                       17-90
                           2              23-111.A(10)
                           3              23-124.2(4),
                                         23-124.5(10)--(12)
                           4              23-125.5(9), (10), (13)
                           5              23-146.A(24)11, 12
                           6              23-173.C
                           7 Rpld         23-173.D, E
                           8 Rnbd         23-173.F--M as D--K
                           Rpld           23-173.N
                           Rnbd           23-173.O as L
                           8              23-217.D, F.F(14), (15)
                           9              23-231.D,
                                         23-232.1(14), (15)
                           10             23-253.D,
                                         23-254.1(14), (15)
                           11             23-281.D
                           12             23-302(m), 23-303.I
                           13             23-366
                           14             23-389
                           15             23-425.B, (C3),
                                         23-429(Intro ¶), A, B
                           16 Rpld        23-329.C, F
                           17 Rnbd        23-429.D, E
                                         as C, D
                           18             23-455.8
                           19             23-458(c)
                           20             23-461.5.A.4, G.3.a
                           21 Rpld        23-461.5.G.3.c
                           22 Rnbd        23-461.5.G.3.d as c
                           23             23-471.4.A, B
                           24 Rpld        23-471.4.C--E
                           25             23-471.7,
                                         23-471.8
                           26             23-531.3.B(2)
                           27             23-611
                           28             23-620(6)(c)
                           29             23-655--23-657
                           30             23-670--23-678
7523                   2-25- 1              8-2.2
                       91
7530                   12-   1              21-8
                       17-90
7539                   1-7-  1, 2           20-234(note)
                       91
7540                   1-7-  1, 2           20-232(note)
                       91
7541                   1-7-  1, 2           20-230(note)
                       91
7542                   1-7-  1, 2           20-179
                       91
7543                   1-7-  1, 2           20-140(note)
                       91
7547                   1-7-  1              27-13
                       91
                           2              27-15
                           3              27-16.1
7549                   1-14- 1              10-31(note)
                       91
7551                   1-14- 1              23-201.2
                       91
                           2              23-217.1, 23-217.2
                           3              23-231.D, 23-231.2
                           4              23-253.D, 23-253.2
                           5              23-281.D, 23-281.2
                           6              23-302.2
                           7              23-311.A.3, 23-311.1,
                                         23-311.2
                           8              23-322.B.12, 23-322.2
7555                   1-28- 1              22-37(f)
                       91
7556                   1-28- 1              18-1(b)
                       91
7558                   1-28- 1              19-28(49)
                       91
7560                   2-4-  1, 2           23-21
                       91
                           3 Rpld         23-30.A(11)--(13)
                           Added          23-30.A(11)
                           4 Rpld         23-36.A(11)--(13)
                           Added          23-36.A(11)
                           5 Rpld         23-47.A(8)--(10)
                           Added          23-47.A(8)
                           6 Rpld         23-58.A(8)--(10)
                           Added          23-58.A(8)
                           7 Rpld         23-71.A(7)--(9), (11)
                           Rnbd           23-71.A (10) as (8)
                           Added          23-71.A(7)
                           8 Rpld         23-97.A(23), (24), (26), (27)
                           Rnbd           23-97.A(25) as (24)
                           Added          23-97.A(3)
                           9 Rpld         23-111.A(12), (13)
                           Added          23-111.A(12)
                           10             23-124.3(7)
                           11             23-125.3(3)f.3
                           12 Rpld        23-131.A(25)--(28)
                           Added          23-131.A(4)
                           13 Rpld        23-146.A(29)--(32)
                           Amd            23-146.A(14.5)
                           Added          23-146.A(29)
                           14             23-164
                           15 Rpld        23-201.A(20), (21)
                           Added          23-201.A(20)
                           16             23-201.C
                           17 Rpld        23-217.A(20), (21)
                           Added          23-217.A(20)
                           18             23-217.C
                           19 Rpld        23-231.A(19), (20)
                           Added          23-231.A(19)
                           20             23-231.C
                           21 Rpld        23-253.A(19), (20)
                           Added          23-253.A(19)
                           22             23-253.C
                           23 Rpld        23-281.A(19), (20)
                           Added          23-281.A(19)
                           24             23-281.C
                           25             23-302(l)(8), (9)
                           26             23-311.A(2)
                           27             23-322.A(14), (15)
                           28             23-405
                           29 Rpld        23-506(g), (h)
                           Added          23-506(g)
                           Rnbd           23-506(i), (j)
                                         as (h), (i)
                           30 Rpld        23-506(b)(3)
                           31             23-519.D
                           Rpld           23-519.G
7563                   2-11- 1              6-1(note)
                       91
7566                   2-25- 1              10-31(note)
                       91
7569                   2-25- 1              6-183(note)
                       91
7570                   2-25- 1              23-311.1
                       91
                           2 Rpld         23-312
7572                   2-25- 1              23-601.A
                       91
                           2              23-620(4)
7573                   2-25- 1              22-35(a)(2)
                       91
                           2              22-38(c)
7579                   3-25- 1              29-12--
                       91                   29-19
7582                   3-18- 1              23-510.3.F
                       91
7585                   3-18- 1, 2           20-230(note)
                       91
7586                   3-18- 1, 2           20-231(note)
                       91
7587                   3-18- 1, 2           20-234(note)
                       91
7588                   3-18- 1, 2           20-251(note)
                       91
7599                   4-1-  1, 2           10-31(note)
                       91
7602                   4-15- 1              6-191--6-193
                       91
7604                   4-15- 1              6-36(note)
                       91
7605                   4-15- 1, 2           10-31(note)
                       91
7607                   4-15- 1              27-33(1), (2)
                       91
                           2              27-35(1)
                           3              27-33(note),
                                         27-35(note)
7612                   4-22- 1              23-21
                       91
                           2              23-30.B(6), (7)
                           3              23-36.B(6), (7)
                           4              23-47.B(5), (6)
                           5              23-58.B(5), (6)
                           6              23-71.B(1), (6)
                           7              23-97.A(23), (25)
                           8              23-97.B(1), (6)
                           9              23-111.B(1), (6)
                           10             23-124.3(8)
                           11             23-131.A(25), (26)
                           12             23-131.B(1), (6)
                           13             23-146.A(30), (31)
                           14             23-146.B(1), (6)
                           15             23-201.B(5)
                           16             23-217.A(21)
                           17             23-217.B(5)
                           18             23-231.A(20)
                           19             23-231.B(5)
                           20             23-253.A(20)
                           21             23-253.B(5)
                           22             23-281.A(20)
                           23             23-281.B(5)
                           24             23-407--23-407.4
7613                   5-6-  1, 2           20-141(note)
                       91
7614                   5-6-  1, 2           20-142(note)
                       91
7615                   5-6-  1              20-218
                       91
7616                   5-6-  1, 2           20-230(note)
                       91
7617                   5-6-  1, 2           20-231(note)
                       91
7618                   5-6-  1, 2           20-232(note)
                       91
7619                   5-6-  1, 2           20-234(note)
                       91
7620                   5-6-  1, 2           20-235(note)
                       91
7621                   5-6-  1, 2           20-251(note)
                       91
7627                   5-6-  1              1-8(1)
                       91
                           2              11-2
                           3              28-4(1)
                           4              28-5(1)
                           5              28-12(a)(1)
7631                   5-13- 1              13-5(note)
                       91
7641                   6-17- 1, 2           20-140(note)
                       91
7642                   6-17- 1, 2           20-141(note)
                       91
7643                   6-17- 1, 2           20-142(note)
                       91
7644                   6-17- 1, 2           20-143(note)
                       91
7645                   6-17- 1              20-155(4)
                       91
7646                   6-17- 1, 2           20-230(note)
                       91
7647                   6-17- 1, 2           20-232(note)
                       91
7648                   6-17- 1, 2           20-256, 20-256.1
                       91
7652                   6-24- 1              15-36
                       91
                           2              15-36(note)
7653                   6-24- 1, 2           10-31(note)
                       91
                           3              10-31(4)
                           4 Rpld         10-37.1
7659                   7-1-  1              12-2,
                       91                   12-3
                           2 Rnbd         12-29 as
                                            12-8
                           3              12-18--
                                            12-28
7660                   7-1-  1              20-241--20-241.6
                       91
7667                   8-5-  1, 2           20-230(note)
                       91
7668                   8-5-  1, 2           20-232(note)
                       91
7669                   8-5-  1, 2           20-235(note)
                       91
7670                   8-5-  1, 2           20-251(note)
                       91
7671                   8-5-  1              20-11.9,
                       91                   20-11.10
                           2              20-274
7674                   8-5-  1              23-21
                       91
                           2              23-366
7687                   9-9-  1              23-21
                       91
                           2              23-461.5.A.4
                           3 Rpld         23-611.1
                           4              23-670--23-670.2
                           5              23-671--23-671.9, 23-673.1-- 23-673.5, 23-
                                            674--23-674.3, 23-675
                           6              23-676.2, 23-677
7688                   9-9-  1              22-85
                       91
7691                   9-16- 1, 2           10-31(note)
                       91
7692                   9-23- 1              23-146.C(3)
                       91
7698 (repealed by      10-7- 1              21-14.2
12114)                 91
7699                   10-7- 1              11-57
                       91
7704                   10-   1              21-25.3(6)
                       28-91
7707                   11-4- 1              25-62(note)
                       91
7710                   11-   1              20-146.2
                       18-91
7711                   11-   1, 2           20-230(note)
                       18-91
7712                   11-   1, 2           20-232(note)
                       18-91
7713                   11-   1, 2           20-234(note)
                       18-91
7714                   11-   1, 2           20-232(note)
                       18-91
7715                   11-   1, 2           20-251
                       18-91
7716                   11-   1              20-256.1
                       18-91
7717                   11-   1              11-28(1)
                       25-91
                           2              11-28.1
7724                   11-   1              18-9
                       25-91
7731                   12-9- 1              20-157
                       91
7733                   12-9- 1Rpld          8-2.2,
                       91                   8-2.3,
                                         8-4,
                                            8-4.1
                           2, 3Amd        8-2,
                                            8-3
                           4Rnbd          8-5 as
                                            8-4
                           Amd            8-4
                           5Rnbd          8-11 as
                                            8-10
                           Amd            8-10
                           6Rnbd          8-13 as
                                            8-12
                           Amd            8-12
                           7Rnbd          8-6--
                                            8-10 as
                                         8-5--
                                            8-9
                           Rnbd           8-12 as
                                            8-11
                           Rnbd           8-14--8-16 as
                                         8-13--
                                            8-15
                           10             Ch. 8, art. I(note)
7736                   12-9- 1              19-28(1)--(6),
                       91
                                         (8)--(162)
7737                   12-9- 1              6-1(note)
                       91
7738                   12-9- 1              19-28(7)
                       91
7750                   1-13- 1, 2           20-179(note)
                       92
7751                   1-13- 1, 2           20-230(note)
                       92
7752                   1-13- 1, 2           20-232(note)
                       92
7756                   1-13- 1              Ch. 8, art. I(note)
                       92
7757                   1-27- 1Added         20-1(e), (13), (14)
                       92
                           Rnbd           20-1(3)--(11) as
                                         (4)--(12)
                           Rnbd           20-1(13)--(15) as
                                         (15)--(17)
                           2              20-15
                           3              20-15.1,
                                            20-15.2
                           4Rpld          29-196
                           5              20-197
7769                   2-24- 1, 2           20-143(note)
                       92
7770                   2-24- 1, 2           20-230(note)
                       92
7771                   2-24- 1, 2           20-232(note)
                       92
7772                   2-24- 1, 2           20-234(note)
                       92
7773                   2-24- 1, 2           20-251(note)
                       92
7768                   4-6-  1              3-9(a)
                       92
                           2              3-14(b)(4)
                           3              3-14(b)(17)
                           4              3-14(c)(2)
                           5              3-14(c)(5)
                           6              3-27(a)(3)e
                           7              3-32(d)(1)
                           8 Rpld         3-33, 3-40
                           9              3-39
                           10 Rnbd        3-34--3-39
                           as             3-33--3-38
                           Rnbd           3-41--3-43
                           as             3-40--3-42
                           11             3-34(c)
                           12             3-37(a)(3), 3-37(b)(3)
                                         3-40(b), 3-41(a)(2)
                                         3-41(b)(2)
                           13             3-40
                           14             3-40(d)
                           Rnbd           3-40(d--g)
                           as             3-40(e--h)
                           15             3-59(d), 3-59(f)
                           Rnbd           3-59(f--p)
                           as             3-59(g--q)
                           17             3-60(e)
                           18             3-60(b)
                           19             3-60(c)
                           20             3-67
                           21             3-73(7)
                           22 Rpld        3-77(b),(h),(k)
                           Rnbd           3-77(c--l)
                           as             3-77(b--i)
                           23             3-95
                           24             3-99
                           25             3-114(b)
                           26             3-118
7780                   3-16- 1              10-31
                       92
7781                   3-16- 1              1-8(4)
                       92
7784                   3-16- 1, 2           20-141
                       92
7785                   3-16- 1, 2           20-140
                       92
7791                   4-13- 1              6-1
                       92
                           2              6-14
7792                   4-13- 1              6-34
                       92
                           2              6-37
7793                   4-13- 1              6-66
                       92
7794                   4-13- 1              6-71
                       92
7795                   4-13- 1              6-164
                       92
7796                   4-13- 1              6-124
                       92
7797                   4-13- 2              27-35(1)
                       92
7798                   4-20- 1              25-62(note)
                       92
7799                   4-20- 1              25-62(note)
                       92
7800                   4-27- 1              10-31(note)
                       92
7804                   4-20- 1              27-33(2), (4)
                       92
7805                   4-27- 1--3           23-342
                       92
                           4              23-343
                           5              23-349
7810                   5-4-  1, 2           20-142(note)
                       92
7811                   5-4-  1, 2           20-143(note)
                       92
7812                   5-4-  1, 2           20-230(note)
                       92
7813                   5-4-  1, 2           20-234(note)
                       92
7814                   5-4-  1, 2           20-232(note)
                       92
7820                   5-18- 1              10A-77
                       92
7824                   6-1-  1              2-18
                       92
                           2              2-22
7831                   6-1-  1              7-350--
                       92                   7-365
7837                   6-15- 1              25-62(note)
                       92
7838                   6-15- 1              25-62(note)
                       92
7844                   6-22- 1, 2           6-1(note)
                       92
7845                   6-22- Rpld           10A-51--10A-64
                       92
7847                   7-6-  1, 2           20-232(note)
                       92
7848                   7-6-  1              20-112
                       92
7849                   7-6-  1, 2           20-230(note)
                       92
7850                   7-6-  1, 2           20-235(note)
                       92
7858                   7-6-  1              23-21
                       92
                           2              23-21.1, 23-21.2
                           3              23-111A.(9),(10)
                                         23-115, 23-120
                                         23-121
                           4 Rpld         23-124.1(1)
                           Rnbd           23-124.1(2--5)
                           as             23-124.1(1--4)
                           5              23-124.4, 23-124.5
                           6              23-1 et seq.
                           7              ch. 23, art I, div 10B
                           8              23-162
                           9              23-201C
                           10             23-217D(2)
                           11             23-231D(2)
                           12             23-253D(2), 23-257
                           13             23-281D(2)
                           14 Rpld        23-532(9), (10)
                           15             23-600--23-607
                           16 Rpld        23-671.3, 23-671.4
                           17             23-700--23-792
7859 (repealed by      7-6-  1--4           21-10--
12114)                 92                   21-13
                           5              21-14.2
                           6              21-51
7860                   7-6-  1              21-13.2
                       92
7862                   7-6-  2--7           21-25.1--
                       92                   21-25.3
7864                   7-6-  1, 2           15-32,
                       92                   15-33
                           3, 4           15-33.1,
                                            15-33.2
7875                   8-3-  1              1-19
                       92
7876                   8-3-  1              25-62(note)
                       92
7883                   8-3-  1              23-30B(7), 23-36B(7)
                       92
                                         23-47B(6), 23-58B(6)
                                         23-71B(6), 23-97B(6)
                                         23-111B(6), 23-131B(6)
                                         23-146B(6)
7884                   8-3-  1              11A-1 et seq.
                       92
                           3 Rpld         11A-1,
                                            11A-2
                           4 Rnbd         11A-3, 11A-4
                           as             11A-1,
                                            11A-2
                           5 Rnbd         11A-5
                           as             11A-3
                           6              15-2
                           7              15-4
                           8              15-8(b)(2)
                           9              15-10
                           10             15-17
                           11             15-32
                           12             15-33.3
                           13             15-34
                           14             15-51(b)(7)
7885                   8-3-  1 Rpld         19-1--19-38.3
                       92
                           2              19-1--19-58
                           3              7-202.1
                           4              7-311--
                                            7-319
7887                   8-3-  1 Rpld         28-1--
                       92                   28-20
                           2              8-1
                           3              8-2.2
                           4              8-2.3
                           5              8-6
                           6              8-6.1
                           7              8-7
                           8              8-8
                           9              20-272
                           10             20-275
                           11             20-276
7891                   8-3-  1              22-35(a)(9)
                       92
7903                   9-14- 2              20-179
                       92
7904                   9-14- 2              25-62
                       92
7906                   9-14- 1              10-31
                       92
7914                   10-5- 2              20-179
                       92
7915                   10-5- 1              12-7
                       92
                           2              12-54,
                                            12-56,
                                         12-58
7916                   10-5- 1              12-91,
                       92                   12-93
                           2              12-94--12-99
7917                   10-5- 1, 2           10-31
                       92
7919                   10-5- 1              15-16
                       92
7921                   10-   1              6-1
                       12-92
7923                   10-   1              22-43(b)(1)
                       19-92
7927                   10-   2              25-62
                       26-92
7928                   10-   2              25-62
                       26-92
7929                   10-   1              21-25.7
                       26-92
7932                   10-   1              7-300(a)
                       26-92
7933                   10-   2              11-55
                       26-92
7935                   11-2- 1              10A-89
                       92
7937                   10-   1              10-33
                       26-92
7944                   3-15- 1              29-14
                       93
7946                   11-   1              22-40(b)(2)--(4)
                       16-92
                           2              22-41(a)
7951                   11-   1              6-84(note)
                       23-92
7952                   11-   1              17-15(a), (e)
                       23-92
7953                   11-   1, 2           23-505(1)
                       16-92
7954                   11-   1              20-230(note)
                       23-92
7959                   12-   1              7-401
                       14-92
7970                   1-4-  1              10-31(note)
                       93
7972                   1-11- 1, 2           20-179(note)
                       93
7973                   1-25- 1Rpld          2-45--2-87
                       93
                           2Rnbd          2-49.4
                           as             2-23
                           3Rpld          17-21--17-24,
                                         17-30--17-49
                           4              Ch. 28
7974                   2-1-  1              25-62(note)
                       93
7975                   2-1-  1              25-62(note)
                       93
7976                   2-1-  1, 2           20-141(note)
                       93
7977                   2-1-  1, 2           20-142(note)
                       93
7978                   2-1-  1, 2           20-143(note)
                       93
7979                   2-1-  1, 2           20-179(note)
                       93
7980                   2-1-  1, 2           20-230(note)
                       93
7981                   2-1-  1, 2           20-232(note)
                       93
7982                   2-1-  1, 2           20-234(note)
                       93
7991                   2-1-  1              11-93
                       93
7994                   2-22- 1              25-62(note)
                       93
7998                   6-7-  1              4-82
                       93
                           2              4-82.1,
                                            4-82.2
                                            4-71(8),
                           3              4-82.3,
                                            4-82.4
                           4              4-78,
                                            4-95,
                                         4-99(3)--(5)
8011                   3-22- 1, 2           7-80--
                       93                   7-89
8022                   4-12- 1              10-31(note)
                       93
8023                   4-12- 1              10A-137
                       93
                           2              10A-138
8024                   4-12- 1--4           27-31--
                       93                   27-33
8028                   4-19- 1              4-28
                       93
                           2              15-1
                           3              15-6
                           4              15-16(4)
8031                   4-26- 1              13-3
                       93
8037                   5-3-  1              22-37(f)
                       93
8040                   5-3-  1              7-350
                       93
8043                   5-10- 1              6-84
                       93
8045                   5-10- 1              15-36,
                       93                   15-36(1)
                           2Rpld          15-36(2)
                           3Rnbd          15-36(3)
                           as             15-36(2)
                           4              15-36(3)--(5)
8046                   5-10- 1, 2           21-14
                       93
8047                   5-3-  1Rnbd          22-35(b)(4)
                       93
                           as             22-35(b)(5)
                           2              22-35(b)(4)
8051                   5-17- 1              20-70
                       93
                           2              20-300--
                                            20-309
8054                   5-24- 1              15-1
                       93
                           2--8           15-32--
                                            15-33.3
8064                   6-14- 1              21-25.1
                       93
8065                   6-14- 1              21-12(3)
                       93
8066                   6-14- 1              7-410--
                       93                   7-414
8067                   6-21- 1. 2           10-31(note)
                       93
8070                   6-21- 1              11B-1,
                       93                   11B-2
                           2              30-1--
                                            30-3
                           3              11A-3
8071                   6-21- 1              19-41
                       93
8072                   6-21- 1              6-1(note)
                       93
8076                   9-21- 1, 2           20-140
                       93
8077                   6-28- 1, 2           20-143
                       93
8078                   6-28- 1, 2           20-230
                       93
8079                   6-28- 1, 2           20-232
                       93
8080                   6-28- 1, 2           20-142
                       93
8081                   6-28- 1              23-21
                       93
                           2              23-30A(12), (13); B(7)
                           3              23-36A(12), (13); B(7)
                           4              23-47A(9), (10); B(6)
                           5              23-58A(9), (10); B(6)
                           6              23-71A(3), (9), (10); B(6)
                           7              23-97A(5), (6), (8); B(6);
                                         23-73C.
                           8              23-111A(3), (11); B(6)
                           9              23-131A(6), (7), (10); B(6); C.
                           10             23-146A(6), (7), (10); B(6);
                                         C(1), (2)
                           11             23-410
                           12             23-506(b), (j)
                           13             23-671.5B.1.
                           14             23-714
                           15             23-728
8089                   7-6-  1              6-183
                       93
8090                   7-6-  1              10-31(note)
                       93
8092                   8-2-  1              10-31(note)
                       93
8099                   8-2-  1              12-58
                       93
8105                   8-2-  1              22-43(b)(4)
                       93
8110                   9-7-  1              6-1(note)
                       93
8120                   9-7-  1              27-31(15)
                       93
                           2              27-31(16)
                           3              27-33(1)
8121                   9-7-  1              27-31(17)
                       93
                           2              27-35(8)
                           3              27-38
8126                   9-20- 1              17-67
                       93
8128                   9-27- 1              19-1
                       93
                           2              19-6
                           3              19-28(a)
                           4              19-40,
                                            19-41
                           5              19-51
                           6              19-67
8129                   9-27- 1              7-26--
                       93                   7-34
                           2              7-35--7-40
                           3              20-202,
                                            20-203(a)
8130                   10-4- 1              7-119(c)
                       93
                           2              7-136
                           3              7-210(c)
                           4              7-352(b)
8131                   10-4- 1              7-425
                       93
8139                   10-   1              20-400--
                       11-93                20-405
8142                   10-   1              25-62(note)
                       18-93
8143                   10-   1              25-62(note)
                       18-93
8145                   10-   1              6-84
                       25-93
8146                   10-   1              6-1
                       25-93
8147                   10-   1              6-71
                       25-93
8149                   11-1- 1              10-31(note)
                       93
8153                   11-1- 1              7A-20
                       93
8154                   11-8- 1              1-8(2)
                       93
                           2              8-6.1
                           3              11-122
8158                   11-   1, 2           20-141(note)
                       15-93
8159                   11-   1, 2           20-142(note)
                       15-93
8160                   11-   1              20-157
                       15-93
8161                   11-   1, 2           20-235
                       15-93
8162                   11-   1              25-62(note)
                       22-93
8163                   11-   1              25-62(note)
                       22-93
8164                   11-   1              11-55
                       15-93
8166                   11-   1              10-31(note)
                       22-93
8167                   11-   1              20-29
                       22-93
8170                   12-6- 1              4-26(1), (2)
                       93
                           2              4-28(1)
8174                   12-   1              4-28(1), (4), (5)
                       13-93
                           2              4-30
                           3              15-1
                           4              15-16(4)
8176                   12-   1              7-98
                       13-93
8179                   1-3-  1              8-2.3
                       94
8182                   1-3-  1              15-20
                       94
                           2              15-19
                           3Dltd          15-36(4)
                           4Rnbd          15-36(5)
                           as             15-36(4)
                           5              15-36
8183                   2-7-  1              27-61(c)
                       94
                           2Dltd          27-61(e), (f)
8188                   2-7-  1              22-35(a)(9)
                       94
8189                   2-7-  1              8-2.1(e)
                       94
8191                   1-24- 1              23-30B(7)
                       94
                           2              23-36B(7)
                           3              23-47B(6)
                           4              23-58B(6)
                           5              23-71B(6)
                           6              23-97B(6)
                           7              23-111B(6)
                           8              23-124.3B
                           9              23-125.3(8)
                           10             23-131B(6)
                           11             23-146B(6)
                           12             23-164A.
                           13             23-201.2
                           14             23-217.2
                           15             23-231.2
                           16             23-253.2
                           17             23-281.2
                           18             23-302.2
                           19             23-311.2
                           20             23-322(12)
                           Dltd           23-322.2
                           21             23-383
8195                   1-24- 1              7-37,
                       94                   7-38
8196                   1-24- 1              6-17(1)
                       94
8198                   2-7-  1              12-9
                       94
8202                   2-7-  1              27-83(3)
                       94
8206                   2-7-  1              10-31(note)
                       94
                           2              10-31(4)
8210                   3-21- 1              6-101
                       94
8213                   2-28- 1, 2           20-140
                       94
8214                   2-28- 1, 2           20-230
                       94
8215                   2-28- 1, 2           20-232
                       94
8216                   2-28- 1, 2           20-234
                       94
8218                   2-28- 1              2-24
                       94
8238                   5-16- 1              11-130--11-134
                       94
8240                   4-4-  1              25-62
                       94
8241                   4-4-  1              25-62
                       94
8245                   4-11- 1              23-21
                       94
                           2              23-146A(23)(24)
                           3Rpld          23-165
                           4Dltd          23-217FF(17)
                           5Dltd          23-232.1(17)
                           6Dltd          23-254.1(17)
                           7              23-409
8246                   4-11- 1              7-207
                       94
                           2, 3           7-209,
                                            7-210
                           4              7-211,
                                            7-213,
                                         7-214,
                                            7-215
                           5              7-217,
                                            7-218
8249                   4-11- 1              23-6
                       94
                           2              23-21
                           3              23-368
                           4              23-380
                           5Dltd          23-392
                           6              23-461.4B.6.
                           7              23-461.5A.1, .3
                           8              23-461.7C.
                           9              23-461.8
                           10             23-461.9A., C.
                           11             23-462.4A., B.
                           12             23-462.9A.1
                           13             23-472B(1)
                           14             23-472.9
                           15             23-508
                           16             23-532--23-538
                           17Rnbd         23-542, 23-543
                           as             23-539, 23-540
                           18             23-546--23-550
8254                   4-25- 1              8-2.1
                       94
8262                   4-25- 1              27-61(h)
                       94
8263                   5-2-  1              25-62
                       94
8269                   5-9-  1              23-21
                       94
                           2              23-21.3
                           3              23-22
                           4Dltd          23-30B(3)(4),
                                         23-47B(2)(3),
                                         23-58B(2)(3)
                           5Dltd          23-71B(4)(5)
                           6Dltd          23-97A(14), B(4)(5)
                           7              23-99A.
                           8Dltd          23-11B(4)(5)
                           9Dltd          23-124.1, 23-124.6
                           10Dltd         23-131A(16), B(4)(5)
                           11             23-133, 23-138
                           12Dltd         23-146A(17), B(4)(5)
                           Amnd           23-146A(24)13a
                           13             23-148
                           14Dltd         23-162
                           15Dltd         23-201A(14), B(3)(4)
                           16             23-202B(2)
                           17Dltd         23-202.1
                           18             23-207
                           19Dltd         23-217A(14), B(3)(4),
                           Amnd           23-217FF(16)a
                           20Dltd         23-231A(14), B(3)(4)
                           21             23-232.1(16)a
                           22Dltd         23-252
                           23Dltd         23-253A(14), B(3)(4)
                           24             23-254, 23-254.1(16)a
                           25Dltd         23-255--23-257
                           26Dltd         23-281A(14), B(3)(4)
                           27             23-284
                           28             23-303O.
                           29Dltd         23-304
                           30             23-323K.
                           31Dltd         23-324
                           32             23-347.5
                           33             23-349
                           34Dltd         23-267.2, 23-278,
                                         23-390
                           35             23-391A.
                           36Dltd         23-394B., 23-399,
                                         23-402, 23-406,
                                         23-455.1, 23-461.3,
                                         23-471, 23-471.3,
                           Amnd           23-471.10C.
                           37Dltd         23-472.9, 23-518
8276                   5-23- 1              15-36(1)
                       94
8281                   6-6-  1              3-27
                       94
8284                   5-23- 1, 2           2-18,
                       94                   2-19
                           3, 4           2-21,
                                            2-22
8290                   6-6-  1              15-31.1,
                       94                   15-31.2
                           2, 3           15-32,
                                            15-33
                           4--7           15-33.1--15-33.4
8294                   6-6-  1, 2           20-141
                       94
8302                   6-13- 1 Rpld         21-14
                       94
                           2 Added        21-14
8307                   6-13- 1              17-1
                       94
                           2              17-11(a)
8303                   9-26- 1              29-19
                       94
8308                   9-26- 1              23-472.5(5)
                       94
                           2              23-472.8
8309                   9-26- 1              26-12
                       94
8310                   6-20- 1              29-14(Table I),
                       94                   29-19(Table I)
8316                   7-5-  1              10-31(5), (note)
                       94
8318                   7-5-  1              23-6A.
                       94
                           2              23-368
                           3              23-533.1(6)
                           4              23-553--23-556
8319                   7-5-  1              21-51(a)
                       94
8321                   7-5-  1              23-21
                       94
                           2 Rnbd         Div. 3
                           as             Div. 2A
                           3 Added        23-27--23-31.6
                           4 Rnbd         23-30--23-33
                           as             23-40--23-40.3
                           5 Rnbd         23-36--23-40
                           as             23-41--23-41.3
                           6              23-146C.
                           7              23-201.1
                           8              23-231.1
                           9              23-253.1
                           10             23-281.1
                           11             23-302.1
                           12             23-311.1
                           13             23-322.1
                           14             23-412B.2.b.
                           15             23-451--23-454.1
                           16 Added       23-455.18
                           17             23-485.18
                           18             23-497A., B(1)(c)
                           19 Added       23-510.3G., H.
                           20             23-531--23-531.7
8322                   7-5-  1              7-350--
                       94                   7-365
8325                   7-5-  1              25-62(note)
                       94
8327                   7-5-  1--4           25-52.1--
                       94                   25-55
8330                   7-5-  1              25-62(note)
                       94
8338                   8-1-  1              21-12(7), (8)
                       94
8340                   8-1-  1, 2           20-141(note)
                       94
8341                   8-1-  1              20-157
                       94
8342                   8-1-  2              20-179(1)--(39)
                       94
8343                   8-1-  1              20-219(2)
                       94
8344                   8-1-  1, 2           20-230(note)
                       94
8345                   8-1-  1, 2           20-234(note)
                       94
8346                   8-1-  1, 2           20-235(note)
                       94
8347                   8-1-  1, 2           20-251(note)
                       94
8348                   8-1-  1              20-275
                       94
8350                   8-1-  1              23-463--23-463.13
                       94
8351                   8-1-  1              6-36(note)
                       94
8352                   9-26- 1              6-71
                       94
8355                   9-12- 1              25-62(note)
                       94
8367                   9-12- 1              10-31(note)
                       94
8378                   10-   1              10-31(note)
                       17-94
8270                   11-   1              20-1
                       21-94
                           2              20-15.1
                           3              20-16
8403                   11-   1              25-62(note)
                       21-94
8415                   12-5- 1              27-37
                       94
8425                   12-   1              7-401(a)
                       12-94
8429                   1-23- 1, 2           20-230(note)
                       95
8431                   1-23- 1, 2           20-233.1
                       95
8432                   1-23- 1, 2           20-234(note)
                       95
8433                   1-23- 1, 2           20-235(note)
                       95
8439                   1-23- 1 Added        10-39
                       95
                           2              10-31(note)
8440                   1-23- 1              19-100
                       95
                           2              19-110
                           3              19-120
                           4              19-240
                           5 Added        19-265
                           6 Added        19-266
                           7              19-300
                           8              19-410
                           9              19-415
                           10             19-425
                           11 Added       19-427
                           12             19-430
                           13 Added       19-432
                           14             19-445
                           15             19-450
                           16             19-465
                           17             19-500
                           18             19-530
                           19             19-555
                           20             19-590
                           21 Rpld        Reg.
                                            19-110.1
                           22 Rpld        Reg.
                                            19-110.2
                           23             Reg.
                                            19-200.1
                           24             Reg.
                                            19-415.2
                           25             Reg.
                                            19-416.1  (rpld by Ord. 11936)
                           26             Reg.
                                            19-416.2  (rpld by Ord. 11936)
                           27             Reg.
                                            19-445.1
                           28 Rpld        Reg.
                                            19-445.2
                           29             Reg.
                                            19-445.3
                           30             Reg.
                                            19-465.3
                           31             Reg.
                                            19-465.4
8441                   1-23- 1              23-21
                       95
                           2              23-455--23-455.17
                           3 Rnbd         23-455.18
                           as             23-455.17
                           4 Rnbd         10A-1(i)
                           as             10A-1(j)
                           Added          10A-1(i)
                           5 Rnbd         10A-3()--(9)
                           as             10A-3(9)--(11)
                                         10A-3(5), (6)
                           Added          10A-3(7), (8)
8410                   4-10- 2              7-130--
                       95                   7-151
8444                   2-6-  1              10-31(note)
                       95
8446                   2-13- 1              27-30
                       95
                           2              27-35
                           3              27-43
                           4              27-86
8458                   3-6-  1 Dltd         27-19
                       95
8461                   3-20- 1 Added        27-90--
                       95                   27-99
8464                   3-20- 1 Added        20-1(4),
                       95                   20-1(11)
                           2              20-12
                           3              20-14
                           4 Added        20-277
                           5              20-276
8465                   3-20- 1, 2           20-140(note)
                       95
8466                   3-20- 1, 2           20-230(note)
                       95
8467                   3-20- 1, 2           20-232(note)
                       95
8468                   3-20- 1, 2           20-234(note)
                       95
8469                   3-20- 1, 2           20-235(note)
                       95
8470                   3-20- 1, 2           20-251(note)
                       95
8474                   3-27- 1              20-28
                       95
8480                   4-10- 1              27-33(2)
                       95
8483                   5-15- 1              27-31(16)
                       95
                           2              27-33(2)
8489                   4-17- 1              28-69(3)
                       95
                           2              28-70(3)
                           3 Added        28-71(1)
8491                   4-17- 1 Added        2-25
                       95
8493                   4-24- 1              15-1
                       95
                           2              15-2(1)
                           3              15-34
                           4              15-36
8494                   5-1-  1 Rpld         21-14
                       95
                           2 Added        21-14
8500                   5-15- 1              20-222(c)
                       95
                           2 Added        20-222(e)
                           3 Added        20-222.1
                           4 Added        20-239(c)
                           5 Added        20-239.1
8506                   5-22- 1, 2 Added     11-30,
                       95                   11-30.1
8509                   5-22- 1--15          Ch. 25, Adopting ord., p.xvi.i
                       95
8511                   6-5-                2-25(c)
                       95
8512                   6-5-                25-62(note)
                       95
8513                   6-5-  1              22-37(f)
                       95
8514                   6-5-  1 Dltd         22-36(b)(1)
                       95
                           Rnbd           22-36(b)(2)--(4)
                           as             22-36(b)(1)--(3)
                                         22-36(c)(1)
                                         22-37(b)
                           2              22-43(b)(1), (4)
                           Added          22-43(b)(9)
                           3              22-35(b)(4)b.
                           4 Added        22-42(i)
8517                   6-12- 1              10A-26(1)
                       95
8519                   6-12- 1, 2           10-31
                       95
                           3              10-31(4)
                           4 Rpld         10-37
                           5 Added        10-37
                           6, 7 Added     10-37.1,
                                            10-37.2
                           8              10-38
                           9              10-39
8521                   6-12- 1 Added        8-5.2
                       95
8522                   6-12- 1 Added        7B-1--
                       95                   7B-35
8528                   6-26- 1              12-19
                       95
                           2              12-20(1)
                           3 Added        12-29
8531                   7-10- 1              15-36(6),
                       95                   15-36(7)
8545                   7-10- 1              7B-2
                       95
                           2              7B-4(b)
                           3              7B-14(c)(1)
                           4              7B-15
                           5              7B-17
                           6              7B-19(a)
                           7              7B-221(a)
                           8--10          7B-24--
                                            7B-26
                           11             7B-27(d)
                           12             7B-29(g), (h)
                           13             7B-31
                           14             7B-35
8550                   8-7-  1, 2           20-140(note)
                       95
8551                   8-7-  1, 2           20-141(note)
                       95
8552                   8-7-  1, 2           20-230(note)
                       95
8553                   8-7-  1, 2           20-235(note)
                       95
8554                   8-7-  1, 2           20-251(note)
                       95
8557                   8-7-  1 Added        8-6.3--8.6-5
                       95
                           2 Added        1-8(5)
8564                   8-7-  2 Added        27-100--
                       95                   27-103
8569                   9-5-  1              8-2.1(d)
                       95
8574                   9-5-  1              27-100--
                       95                   27-103
8575                   9-18- 1              7-401(a)
                       95
                           2              7-401(d)
                           3              7-401(e)
8578                   10-2- 1              21-16(3)
                       95
8588                   10-   1              20-28(a)
                       23-95
8590                   10-   1              7-135(5)
                       23-95
                           2              7-137(7)
                           3              7-151(f)
8598                   11-   1 Added        27-19
                       13-95
8604                   11-   1              6-124
                       20-95
8605                   11-   1              6-164
                       20-95
8606                   11-   1              6-1
                       20-95
8607                   1-2-  1              6-34
                       96
8609                   1-2-  1              13-1,
                       96                   13-3
                           2 Dltd         13-2
8617                   12-   1              10-37
                       18-95
8619                   1-2-  1              10-31(note)
                       96
8621                   12-   1              10A-1(a)
                       18-95
                           2              10A-2(b)
8626                   1-8-  1, 2           20-142(note)
                       96
8627                   1-8-  1, 2           20-143(note)
                       96
8628                   1-8-  1, 2           20-230(note)
                       96
8629                   1-8-  1, 2           20-231(note)
                       96
8630                   1-8-  1, 2           20-232(note)
                       96
8631                   1-8-  1, 2           20-234(note)
                       96
8632                   1-8-  1, 2           20-235(note)
                       96
8633                   1-8-  1, 2           20-251(note)
                       96
8634                   1-8-  1              3-59(a)
                       96
8635                   1-8-  1              3-32(d)(1)
                       96
8643                   1-22- 1 Added        11-46.1
                       96
                           2              11-47
8661                   3-18- 1              22-36(e)(2), (5)
                       96
                           2              22-36(e)(4)
                           3 Rpld         22-36(a)(8)
8669                   4-8-  1              18-9
                       96
8670                   4-8-  1              11-65(5)
                       96
                                         11-65(8)
8671                   4-8-  1--3           25-54--
                       96                   25-56
8672                   4-8-  1              8-6.1
                       96
8674                   4-8-  1 Dltd         11-33
                       96
                           2 Added        11-33--
                                            11-33.2
8679                   4-22- 1 Added        22-35(b)(6)
                       96
8680                   4-22- 1 Added        7-101(c)--(g)
                       96
                           2              7-102(1), (4)--(6)
                           3--12 Added    7-104--
                                            7-113
8683                   5-6-  1 Added        11-140--11-145
                       96
8684                   5-6-  1, 2           2-141(note)
                       96
8685                   5-6-  1, 2           20-143(note)
                       96
8686                   5-6-  1, 2           20-144(note)
                       96
8687                   5-6-  2              20-179
                       96
8688                   5-6-  1, 2           20-230(note)
                       96
8689                   5-6-  1, 2           20-232(note)
                       96
8690                   5-6-  1, 2           20-234(note)
                       96
8691                   5-6-  1, 2           20-235(note)
                       96
8692                   5-6-  1, 2           20-251(note)
                       96
8695                   5-6-  1 Added        30-4
                       96
8701                   5-13- 1              21-22(1)
                       96
                           2              21-23
                           3              21-23.1
                           4--6           21-25.1--
                                            21-25.3
                           7 Rpld         21-25.4
                           8 Added        21-25.4
                           9--11          21-25.5--
                                            21-25.7
8708                   6-3-  1              18-9
                       96
8709                   6-3-  1              21-25.7
                       96
8711                   6-10- 1              15-36
                       96
                           3              15-37(1)
8712                   6-10- 1              10-31(5)
                       96
                           2              10-31(note)
                           3 Rpld         10-37--
                                            10-37.2
                           4              10-39
8713                   6-10- 1              4-3(2)(e)
                       96
                           2              4-12(2)
                           3              4-71(1)
                           4              4-97(2)
8715                   6-17- 1, 2           20-141(note)
                       96
8716                   6-17- 1, 2           20-143(note)
                       96
8721                   6-24- 1              15-32(3)
                       96
                           2              15-33(6)
                           3              15-33.2
8729                   7-1-  1 Added        8-6.6
                       96
8727                   9-9-  1              25-4
                       96
                           2 Dltd         25-19,
                                            25-32
                           3 Dltd         Ch. 25, Div. 1--3 titles
8741                   8-5-  1 Added        28-145--28-151
                       95
8743                   8-5-  1, 2           20-230(note)
                       96
8744                   8-5-  1, 2           20-232(note)
                       96
8745                   8-5-  1, 2           20-234(note)
                       96
8746                   8-5-  1, 2           20-251(note)
                       96
8747                   8-5-  1 Added        12A-7
                       96
                           2 Dltd         27-35(10)
                           3              15-33.4
8749                   8-5-  1              6-181
                       96
8750                   8-5-  1              6-84
                       96
8753                   8-5-  1              2-13(1)(2)
                       96
                           2              10-31(note)
8756                   9-16- 1 Added        29-20--
                       96                   29-27
8761                   10-7- 1, 2           20-11.7
                       96
                           3              20-11.8
8762                   10-   1 Added        2-25.1
                       14-96
8766                   10-   1              Reg.
                       21-96                19-415.2(d)
                           2 Added        Reg.
                                            19-415.2(e)
                           3              Reg.
                                            19-460.1(e)
                           4 Added        Reg.
                                            19-460.1(f)
8767                   10-   1              8-2.1(a)
                       21-96
8768                   10-   1              27-31(2), (9), (10)
                       28-96
                           2 Dltd         27-31(17)
                           3              27-33
                           4              27-35
8770                   11-4- 1 Added        11-160--11-160.3
                       96
8777                   11-   1 Rpld         15-32(2)
                       25-96
                           2 Rnbd         15-32(3)
                           as             15-32(2)
8778                   11-   1, 2           2-18,
                       25-96                2-19
                           3              2-22
8779                   12-2- 1              29-14(c)
                       96
                           2              29-19(e)
8780                   11-   1              15-51
                       25-96
                           2              15-54
                           3              15-58
                           4, 5           15-63, 15-64
8781                   11-   1, 2           2-18,
                       25-96                2-19
                           3              2-22
8783                   12-2- 1 Rpld         19-470(e)
                       96
8784                   12-2- 1              19-100
                       96
                           2, 3           19-230,
                                            19-240
                           4              19-260
                           5              19-350
                           6, 7           19-460,
                                            19-465
                           8              19-480
                           9              19-500
                           10--12 Added   19-515--
                                            19-517
                           13             19-540
                           14 Added       19-541
                           15 Added       19-546
                           16             19-550
                           17             19-555
                           18 Added       19-556
                           19             19-560
                           20             19-565
                           21 Dltd        19-567
                           22             19-570
                           23 Added       19-572
                           24             19-575
                           25 Added       19-578
                           26, 27 Added   19-596,
                                            19-597
                           28             Reg.
                                            19-416.2
                           29             Reg.
                                            19-450.2
                           30             Reg.
                                            19-450.5
                           31 Added       19-465.2
8788                   12-   1, 2           20-179
                       16-96
8791                   1-6-  1              10-31(note)
                       97
8793                   1-6-  1              19-100
                       97
                           2 Added        Reg
                                            19-100.5
8794                   1-6-  1              19-100
                       97
                           2 Rpld         Reg.
                                            19-100.5
                           3 Added        Reg.
                                            19-415.2(f)
8804                   1-13- 1              6-73(note)
                       97
8806                   1-13- 1, 2           20-232(note)
                       97
8816                   2-10- 1, 2           20-230(note)
                       97
8817                   2-10- 1, 2           20-232(note)
                       97
8825                   2-24- 1              29-27
                       97
8835                   3-3-  1              8-2.2(b)
                       97
8836                   3-3-  1 Added        7-426--7-437
                       97
8837                   3-17- 1 Dltd         22-37(a)(1)(A)
                       97
                           Dltd           22-37(a)(3)(A)
                           2 Dltd         22-38(d)(1)(B)
                           Rnbd           22-38(d)(1)(C)
                           as             22-38(d)(1)(B)
                                         22-38(c), (d), (d)(1), (e), (e)(1), (e)(2)
                           3 Added        22-47
8838                   3-17- 1              27-37(3)
                       97
8842                   3-17- 1              10-31(note)
                       97
8843                   3-24- 1 Rpld         10A-86--
                       97                   10A-93
                           Added          10A-86--
                                            10A-95
8844                   3-24- 1              10-31(note)
                       97
8852                   4-7-  1 Dltd         29-20--
                       97                   29-27
                           2 Added        29-20--
                                            29-27
8856                   4-7-  1              19-100
                       97
                           3 Dltd         19-415.2(f)
8859                   4-14- 1              25-62(note)
                       97
8860                   4-14- 1              25-62(note)
                       97
8862                   4-14- 1              20-28
                       97
8878                   6-9-  1              10-31(note)
                       97
8879                   6-9-  1              22-37(f)
                       97
8881                   6-9-  1 Added        22-90,
                       97                   22-91
8891                   9-15- 1              11-33(b)
                       97
                           Added          11-33.1(4)
8904                   8-4-  1 Added        10A-145--
                       97                   10A-151
8905                   8-4-  1 Added        20-242
                       97
                           2 Dltd         20-258.1
                           3 Added        20-258.1
8915                   8-4-  1              28-19(1)
                       97
8917                   8-4-  1              15-33.3
                       97
8920 (repealed by      8-4-  1              21-14.2
12114)                 97
8924                   9-2-  1, 2           20-141(note)
                       97
8925                   9-2-  1, 2           20-142(note)
                       97
8926                   9-2-  1, 2           20-143(note)
                       97
8927                   9-2-  1, 2           20-179
                       97
8928                   9-2-  1, 2           20-230(note)
                       97
8929                   9-2-  1, 2           20-232(note)
                       97
8936                   9-2-  1 Added        7B-36
                       97
8937                   9-2-  1 Rpld         7A-1--
                       97                   7A-42
                           2 Added        7A-1--
                                            7A-42
8938                   9-2-  1              15-1
                       97
                           2 Added        15-51(b)(6.5)
                           3 Added        15-56.1
8943                   9-8-  1              8-2.2(d)
                       97
8957                   9-22- 1 Added        10-34
                       97
8958                   9-28- 1              503
                       97
                           2              8-6.6
                           3              11-2(5)
                                         11-3(3)
                                         11-57(6), (7)
                                         11-70.1
                           4              13-6
                           5              15-64
                           6              19-266
                                         19-465(10)
                                         19-475
                           7              20-1(14), (18)
                                         20-14
                                         20-16
                           8              20-241.5
8962                   10-6- 1              7-148
                       97
8964                   10-   1 Dltd         11-130--11-134
                       13-97
                           Added          11-130--11-135
8965                   10-   1              21-25.1
                       20-97
8956                   11-3- 1 Added        11-84
                       97
8975                   11-3- 1              10-31(note)
                       97
8978                   11-   1 Added        11-36
                       10-97
8983                   11-   1 Added        3-13(a)(3)
                       10-97
                           Rnbd           3-13(a)(3)--(8)
                           as             3-13(a)(4)--(9)
                           2 Added        3-14(b)(3)
                           Rnbd           3-14(b)(3)--(17)
                           as             3-14(b)(4)--(18)
                           3              3-77(b)
8986                   11-   1              3-27(c)
                       10-97
8987                   11-   1 Added        20-113
                       17-97
8989                   11-   1, 2           20-230(note)
                       24-97
8990                   11-   1, 2           20-232(note)
                       24-97
8994                   11-   1 Added        15-70--15-75
                       24-97
8996                   12-8- 1              4-3(5)
                       97
                           2              4-7
                           3--6           4-9--
                                            4-12
                           7              4-25
                           8              4-30
                           9              4-45
8997                   12-8- 1 Added        7C-1--7C-5
                       97
                           2 Added        7D-1--
                                            7D-7
8998                   12-8- 1              19-700
                       97
                           2              19-1070
9000                   12-   1 Rpld         21-55, 21-56
                       15-97
9004                   1-5-  1(1)           19-100
                       98
                           1(2)           19-465
                           1(3) Added     Reg.
                                            19-100.5
9011                   2-2-  1, 2           20-144(note)
                       98
9012                   2-2-  1, 2           20-141(note)
                       98
9013                   2-2-  1, 2           20-142(note)
                       98
9015                   2-9-  1              27-13
                       98
                           2              27-16
                           3              27-18(a)
9008                   2-2-  1              10-31(note)
                       98
9018                   2-23- 1              27-35
                       98
9023                   3-16- 1, 2           20-230
                       98
9024                   3-16- 1, 2           20-233.1
                       98
9025                   3-16- 1, 2           20-234(note)
                       98
9029                   3-23- 1              22-35(b)(5)
                       98
9030                   3-23- 1              22-43
                       98
9041                   4-13- 1              11-140--11-145
                       98
9042                   4-13- 1 Added        8-4.1
                       98
9043                   4-13- 1              27-16.2(1), (2)(c)
                       98
                           2              27-35
                           3 Rpld         27-35(8), (10)
                           4              27-37
                           5              27-50(d)
                           6 Added        27-54
                           7              27-86
9046                   4-20- 1              5-2.1
                       98
9047                   4-20- 1              10-10(5)
                       98
9049                   5-4-  1, 2           20-140(note)
                       98
9050                   5-4-  1, 2           20-141(note)
                       98
9051                   5-4-  1, 2           20-142(note)
                       98
9053                   5-4-  1              10A-147(a)(3), (4)
                       98
                           2              10A-149(b)
9055                   5-18- 1              10-31(note)
                       98
9056                   5-18- 1              25-62
                       98
9058                   5-18- 1 Added        20-500--
                       98                   20-502
9064                   6-1-  1              4-82
                       98
                           2              4-87
9065                   6-1-  1              25-38
                       98
9068                   6-8-  1              10-31
                       98
                           4              10-39
9069                   6-15- 1(1)           19-100
                       98
                           1(2)           19-110(a)(15)
                           Added          19-110(a)(16)--(18)
                           1(3) Added     19-120(b)(7)
                           1(4) Rpld      19-266(b)
                           Rnbd;          19-266(c), (d)
                           as             19-266(b), (c)
                           Added          19-266(d)
                           1(5)           19-425(b)(5)
                           1(6)           19-435(f)
                           1(7)           19-445(a)
                                         19-445(c)
                                         19-445(e)
                           1(8)           19-450(c)(5)
                           1(9)           19-455(c)
                           Added          19-455(d)--(f)
                           1(10)          19-465(10)
                                         19-465(16)
                           Rpld           19-465(25)
                           Added          19-465(28)--(34)
                           1(11)          19-480(e)
                           Added          19-480(h)
                           1(12)          19-556(b)(3)
9084                   7-6-  1              12A-7(b)
                       98
                                         12A-7(d)
                           Added          12A-7(e)
9085                   7-6-  1 Added        8-2.4
                       98
9086                   7-6-  1              8-2.1(d)
                       98
9091                   7-6-  1 Added        10-35
                       98
9093                   8-3-  1              10-31
                       98
9099                   8-3-  1 Rpld         7C-1--7C-5
                       98
9111                   9-8-  1 Added        27-38.1
                       98
9118                   11-   1 Added        2-130,
                       16-98                2-131
9120                   9-28- 1              13-3
                       98
9123                   9-14- 1              3-41
                       98
                           Added          3-41(c)
                           2              3-102(a), (b)
9128                   9-14- 1 Added        3-62
                       98
                           2 Rpld         3-60(e)
                           3 Rpld         3-27(a)(3)e.
                           Added          3-27(a)(8)
                           4              3-73(7)
                           5              3-102
9131                   9-28- 1              22-34(e)(10)
                       98
                           2              22-43(c), (c)(1)
                           3              22-36(e)
                           4 Added        22-36(b)(7)
9133                   10-5- 2              20-179(1)--(41)
                       98
9134                   10-5- 1, 2           20-141
                       98
9135                   10-5- 1, 2           20-142
                       98
9136                   10-5- 1              27-36(1)(c)
                       98
                                         27-36(1)(e)
9148                   10-   1              8-6.5(a)
                       26-98
9149                   10-   1              20-195.1
                       26-98
                                         20-209
                                         20-219(2)
                                         20-222(c)
                                         20-222.1
                                         20-223(1)
                                         20-224
                                         20-226,
                                            20-227
                                         20-233(1)
                                         20-239.1
                                         20-275,
                                            20-276
9151                   11-2- 1              10-31
                       98
9154                   11-2- 1              6-191
                       98
                           2              6-66
                           3              6-71
9155                   11-2- 1              6-34
                       98
9156                   11-9- 1              27-31
                       98
                           2              27-32.1
                           3              27-33
9158                   11-9- 1 Added        28-101(4)(d)
                       98
                           Rnbd           28-101(5), (6)
                           as             28-101(6), (7)
                           Added          28-101(5)
                           2 Added        11-38
                           3 Added        8-2.2(e)
9159                   11-9- 1              4-73
                       98
                           2              4-82
                           3              4-91
                           4              4-97(5)
                           5 Added        4-99(6)
9161                   11-9- 1 Rpld         12-94--12-99
                       98
                           2 Added        12-101--
                                            12-105
9166                   11-   1              20-305(a)
                       23-98
9167                   11-   1              4-97(3)
                       23-98
9172                   12-7- 1              27-62
                       98
9175                   12-   1 Added        12A-8
                       14-98
9182                   1-4-  3              11-34
                       99
9183                   1-4-  1              10-51
                       99
9185                   1-25- 1 Added        12-54(d)--(h)
                       99
9187                   1-4-  1              22-37(f)
                       99
                           2              22-34(e)(5)
                           3              22-37(c)(1)
9190                   1-11- 1              10A-147(a)(3)
                       99
9191                   1-11- 1              10-31
                       99
9192                   1-11- 1              11-28
                       99
                           2              11-28.1
9194                   1-25- 1 Added        8-6.7
                       99
9196                   1-25- 1 Rpld         20-193--
                       99                   20-277
                           Added          20-200--
                                            20-282
9198                   2-1-  1              20-28
                       99
9199                   2-1-  1              10-17
                       99
                           2              17-1
                           3              17-11--
                                            17-16
                           4              17-50--
                                            17-56
                           5              28-138
9220                   4-12- 1              11-19
                       99
9225 (§ 2 repealed by 5-10- 1, 2           21-14.1,
12114)                 99                   21-14.2
9237                   6-14- 1              10-31(note)
                       99
9238                   6-14- 1              27-16.2(2)(c)
                       99
                           2              27-30
                           3              27-35
                           4              27-38(1)
                           5              27-43(b)
                           6              27-50(d)
                           7              27-86
9240                   6-21- 1              7-440--
                       99                   7-446
                           2 Rpld         11-26
                           3              19-19
9247                   7-6-  1              25-62(note)
                       99
9254                   7-6-  1              12-18,
                       99                   12-20,
                                         12-25,
                                            12-26,
                                         12-29
9261                   8-2-  1              21-4(c)(6), (7)
                       99
                           2              21-8(b)
                           3              21-9(1)
                           4              21-10
                           5              21-11
                           6              21-12
                           7              21-13
                           8              21-14
                           9              21-14.3
                           10             21-16
                           11             21-51
9274                   9-13- 1              28-152--28-160
                       99
9279                   9-7-  1              13-3(note)
                       99
9287                   9-27- 1              6-84
                       99
9292                   10-4- 1              21-16(2)
                       99
9302                   10-   1              11-19
                       11-99
9316                   11-   1              19-41(c)(2)
                       15-99
9317                   11-   1              13-3(note)
                       15-99
9322                   11-   1              19-110(a)(5), (8), (15),
                       22-99
                                         (19)--(21), (d)(1)
                           2              19-415(b)(3)--(7)
                           3              19-416(c)
                           4              19-417(b)
                           5 Rpld         19-418
                           6              19-444
                           7              19-445(o)
                           8              19-450(c)(10)
                           9              19-460(g)
                           10             19-465(35)--(37)
                           11             19-470(f)
                           12             19-475(1)
                           13             19-575(e)--(g)
                           14             Reg.
                                            19-100.4
9329                   12-6- 1              22-34(e)(5)
                       99
9332                   12-6- 1              22-35(a)(9)
                       99
9334 (repealed by      12-   1              21-19--
12114)                 13-99                21-24,
                                         21-25.1--
                                            21-25.8,
                                         21-26,
                                            21-27,
                                         21-29
9341                   1-31- 1              21-4(a), (b), (d)
                       00
                           2              21-7
9347                   2-7-  1              10-31(note)
                       00
9348                   2-7-  1              Ch. 22, Art. V(tit.)
                       00
                           2              22-92
9349                   2-7-  1              10-47
                       00
9352                   2-28- 1              10-31(note)
                       00
9355                   2-28- 1              25-62(note)
                       00
9360                   3-20- 1              11-36.1--11-36.3
                       00
9367                   4-3-  1              15-36
                       00
                           2              15-36(3)
93-77                  4-17- 1              27-35,
                       00
                                         27-43(b)
9382                   5-15- 1              22-93
                       00
9383                   5-15- 1              22-100
                       00
9388                   5-22- 1              27-16.2(2)(c),
                       00
                                         27-35,
                                            27-37,
                                         27-38.1, 27-41.1(3),
                                         27-43,
                                            27-50,
                                         27-51,
                                            27-54
9392                   5-22- 2(1.1.1--      23A-1--
                       00    1.1.9.1)       23A-11
                           2(1.2.1,       23A-21,
                             1.2.2)         23A-22
                           2(2.1.1--      23A-31--
                             2.1.3)         23A-33
                           2(2.2.1---     23A-41--23A-49
                             2.2.9)
                           2(2.3.1,       23A-61,
                             2.3.2)         23A-62
                           2(3.1.1--      23A-71--23A-73
                             3.1.3)
                           2(3.2.1--      23A-81--23A-106
                             3.2.26)
9394                   6-5-  1              11-71
                       00
                           2 Rpld         11-78
                           3              11-83
9398                   6-12- 1              8-2.3(d)
                       00
9399                   6-12- 1              10-31(note)
                       00
                           2              10-34.1
                           3              10-37
9404                   6-19- 1              2-18
                       00
                           2              2-19
                           3              2-22
9405                   6-19- 1              10-47
                       00
9407                   6-19- 1              27-15
                       00
9412                   6-26- 1              25-62(note)
                       00
9416                   7-10- 1              11-55
                       00
9417                   7-10- 1              21-3(5)(2),
                       00                   21-7(c)
9424                   7-10- 1              20-273
                       00
9427                   7-10- 1              29-14,
                       00                   29-19
9432                   8-7-  1              22-35(b)(4)
                       00
                           2              22-42(a), (b)
9434                   8-7-  1              20-226.3
                       00
                           2              20-230.5
                           3              20-230.6(b)
                           4              20-259
                           5              20-260
                           6              20-273
                           7              20-278(7), (14)
9435                   8-7-  2              20-179
                       00
9436                   8-7-  1              20-146.1
                       00
                           2              20-146.3
9444                   8-7-  1              7B-26.1
                       00
9445                   10-9-               6-68(note)
                       00
9465                   9-25- 1              10-31(note)
                       00
9470                   10-9- 1              3-56
                       00
                           2              3-58(b)
9475                   10-   1              10-31(note)
                       16-00
                       10-                  27-31,
9477                   23-00 1              27-32,
                                            27-33
9479                   10-   1              20-500
                       23-00
                           2              20-501
9487                   11-   1              13-5(note)
                       20-00
9488                   11-   1              20-146.3
                       20-00
9489                   11-   1              29-14
                       20-00
9491                   11-   1              6-34
                       20-00
                           2              6-38
                           3              6-40
                           4              6-124
                           5              6-164
9492                   11-   1 Rpld         8-6.5
                       27-00
                           2              20-3
                           3 Rpld         20-201
                                         20-221,
                                            20-222(b),
                                         20-223,
                                            20-225
                                         20-246,
                                            20-262,
                                         20-272
9498                   12-   1              4-24
                       11-00
9499 (repealed by      12-   1              21-25.9
12114)                 11-00
9501                   1-22- 1              29-14
                       01
9519                   2-26- 1              10-53
                       01
9522                   3-5-  1              10-34.1
                       01
9523                   3-5-  1              22-93
                       01
9526                   3-19- 1              6-124
                       01
                           2              6-164
                           4              6-34
                           5              6-38
9537                   5-14- 1              3-14
                       01
                           2              3-37(a)(2), (6), (b)(5)
                           3              3-40
                           4              3-41(a)(4), (b)(4), (c)(4)
                           5              3-42
                           6              3-56(b)
                           7              3-58
                           8              3-59(g)--(q)
                           9              3-60
                           10             3-63
                           11             3-84
                           12             3-125(b), (c)
9538                   4-9-  1              22-34(e)(5)
                       01
                           2              22-37(c)(1)
                           3              22-37(f)
9540                   4-16- 1              10-33
                       01
9547                   5-7-  1              4-97(3)
                       01
9555                   5-14- 1              27-35(1)--(4), (6), (8)--(12)
                       01
                                         27-37(1), (4)
                                         27-43(b)
                                         27-51(2)
9558                   6-11- 1              10-53.1
                       01
9560                   6-11- 1              22-94
                       01
9561                   6-11- 1              22-93(b), (d)--(f)
                       01
9562                   6-11- 1              10-33
                       01
9563                   6-11- 1              10-34
                       01
9569                   6-18- 1              19-510
                       01
                           2              19-553
                           3              19-570
9570                   6-18- 1              22-90
                       01
                           2              22-91
9575                   6-25- 1              10-31(note)
                       01
9576                   7-2-  1              12-54(b), (d),
                       01
                                         12-58(c)
                           2              12-91(a)
9577                   8-6-  1 Rpld         15-31.2,
                       01                   15-32,
                                         15-33--15-33.4,
                                         15-34--15-38
                           3              15-31.1
9579                   7-2-  1              19-285(b)
                       01
9582                   8-6-  1              10A-160--10A-164
                       01
                           4              26-12(d)
                           5              26-12(e)
                           6              29-19(d)
                           7              29-19(e)
                           8 Rnbd         29-19(e)
                           as             29-19(f)
9586                   8-6-  1              28-153
                       01
                           2              28-154
                           3 Rpld         28-156
                           4              28-157
                           5              28-159
                           6              28-160
9587                   8-6-  1              7-97
                       01
                           2              7-98
                           3              7-99
                           4              7-100
                           5              7-101
                           6              7-102
                           7              7-103
                           8              7-104
                           9              7-105
                           10             7-114
9588                   8-6-  1              10-31(note)
                       01
9590                   8-6-  1              22-90(2)b.
                       01
                           2              22-94(e)
9604                   9-10- 1              27-31(3), (7),
                       01
                                         27-32.1(1), (2),
                                         27-33(2), (3),
                                         27-34
9605                   9-10- 1              4-98
                       01
9606                   9-10- 1              3-62(note)
                       01
9608                   10-1- 1              10-53.1
                       01
9609                   10-1- 1              13-3
                       01
                           2              13-6
9617                   10-8- 2              20-143(note)
                       01
9618                   10-8- 2              20-142(note)
                       01
9628                   11-   1              22-48
                       19-01
9641                   12-   1              10-48
                       10-01
9645                   12-   1 Rpld         22-34--
                       17-01                22-48
                           2 Added        22-34--
                                            22-49
9652                   1-14- 1--3           19-415--
                       02                   19-417
                           4              19-445
                           5              19-450
                           6              19-465
                           7              19-470
                           8              19-500
                           9              19-542
                           10             Reg.
                                            19-115.1
9658                   1-14- 1--7           7-350--
                       02                   7-356
                           8--14          7-358--
                                            7-364
                           15, 16         7-366,
                                            7-367
9661                   1-28- 1              7-223
                       02
9675                   2-25- 1 Amd          10-6
                       02
                           Added          10-7,
                                            10-8
                           Rnbd           10-7--
                                            10-9
                           as             10-9--
                                            10-11
                           Amd            10-11
                           2 Rnbd         10-10--
                                            10-14
                           as             10-12--
                                            10-16
                           Rnbd           10-16--
                                            10-21
                           as             10-17--
                                            10-22
                           3 Added        10-31(1)
                           Rnbd           10-31(1)--
                                            10-31(5)
                           as             10-31(2)--
                                            10-31(6)
9677                   2-25-               10-31(note)
                       02
9693                   4-15- 1              7-300(d)
                       02
                           2              7-401(d)
                           3              19-41(c)(2)
9697                   4-15- 1              20-12(d)(10)
                       02
                           2              20-14
9698                   4-15- 1, 2           20-143(note)
                       02
9699                   4-15- 1, 2           20-144(note)
                       02
9701                   4-15- 1              22-50
                       02
9704                   5-13- 1              27-16.2(2)(c)
                       02
                           2              27-33(2)
                                         27-35(1)--(4), (6), (8)--(11), (14),
                                         27-37(1), (4)
                           Rpld           27-41
                           Rnbd           27-41.1
                           as             27-41
                                         27-43(b),
                                         27-50(1)(a)--(c),
                                         27-51(2)
                           3              27-86
9709                   6-3-  1              10-48
                       02
9712                   6-3-  1              10-18
                       02
9717                   6-10- 1 Rpld         15-1,
                       02                   15-2,
                                         15-3--15-5.3,
                                         15-6--15-20,
                                         15-22, 15-23,
                                         15-31,
                                            15-31.1,
                                         15-51--15-56.1,
                                         15-57--15-67,
                                         15-70--15-75
                           2 Added        15-1--
                                            15-3,
                                         15-5--
                                            15-10.1,
                                         15-11--15-23
                                         15-24.1,
                                         15-31,
                                            15-31.1,
                                         15-50,
                                         15-70--15-75
9719                   6-10- 1              20-90(1)a., b.
                       02
                           2 Rnbd         22-90(3)
                           as             22-90(4)
                           3 Added        22-95(d)
9720                   6-10- 1              22-93(d)--
                       02                   22-93(g)
9724                   6-17- 1              10-31(note)
                       02
                           2              10-31(7)
                           3 Rpld         10-39
9725                   6-24- 1              27-37
                       02
9727                   6-24- 1              10-31(note)
                       02
                           2              10-31(7),
                                         10-33,
                                         10-34,
                                         10-34.1,
                                         10-35,
                                         10-47,
                                         10-53,
                                         10-53.1
9742                   8-5-  2              10-31(note)
                       02
9744                   8-5-  1              21-25.10
                       02
9754                   8-5-  1              22-49(f)
                       02
9757                   8-5-  1              21-4(a), (b), (b)(3), (c), (c)(4)--(7),
                       02                   (d)--(g)
                           2              21-5
                           3              21-6
                           4              21-7(a)
                           5              21-8(a), (b)
                           6              21-9(1),
                                            21-9(4)
                           7              21-10
                           8              21-12
                           9              21-13
                           10             21-13.1
                           11             21-13.2
                           12             21-14
                           13             21-14.1
(repealed by 12114)         14             21-14.2
                           15             21-14.3
                           16 Rpld        21-15
                                            21-16(1)--
                           17             21-16(4),
                                            21-16(6)
                           18             21-17
                           19             21-18
                           20             21-51
                           21 Rpld        21-52
9759                   9-3-  1, 2           20-141(note)
                       02
9760                   9-3-  2              20-179
                       02
9763                   9-9-  1              27-29,
                       02
                                         27-31(1), (4), (7)--(16),
                                         27-32,
                                         27-32.1,
                                         27-33(1), (3), (4),
                                         27-34
9773                   10-7- 1              28-71(2),
                       02                   28-71(3)
9776                   10-7- 1              22-44(a)
                       02
                           2              22-44(b)
                           3              22-46
                           4              22-47
9782                   10-   1              3-27(g)
                       14-02
9785                   10-   1              1-19
                       21-02
                           2              1-20
9786                   10-   1 Rpld         6-191--6-193
                       28-02
9797                   12-9- 1 Added        10-53.2
                       02
9801                   12-   1--5           28-147--
                       16-02                28-151
9803                   1-6-  1              11-22
                       03
9804                   1-13- 1              4-11
                       03
                           2              4-13
                           3              4-7(3)(a)
9805                   1-13- 1 Added        3-64
                       03
9808                   1-13- 1              3-27(g)
                       03
9811                   2-10- 1              2-2
                       03
9812                   2-10- 1              6-84
                       03
9813                   2-10- 1              6-1
                       03
                           2              6-38
                           3              6-36(note),
                                            6-124(note)
                                         6-84(note),
                                            6-164(note)
                           4              6-40
                           5 Rpld         6-181--
                                            6-183
9816                   2-24- 1 Rpld         6-66--6-68
                       03
                           2 Rpld         6-71--6-73
                           4 Rpld         11-46
                           5 Rpld         11-65
                           6 Rpld         11-71--11-84
                           7 Rpld         11-130--11-135
                           8 Rpld         11-140--11-145
                           11 Rpld        15-7--
                                            15-10
                           12 Rpld        15-70--15-74
                           13 Rpld        15-75
                           15 Added       16-1--
                                            16-4
                                         16-10--
                                            16-15
                                         16-20--
                                            16-28
                                         16-30--
                                            16-34
                                         16-40--
                                            16-51
                                         16-60--
                                            16-67
                                         16-70--
                                            16-74
                                         16-80--
                                            16-83
9826                   3-24- 1              22-50
                       03
9831                   4-14- 1 Added        22-90(4)
                       03
9838                   5-5-  1              19-66(a)
                       03
9839                   5-5-  1--3           19-53(3), (4)
                       03
9840                   5-5-  1              19-270(f)
                       03
                           2              19-300(a)(2)
                           3 Rnbd         19-600
                           as             19-130
                           4 Rpld         19-601,
                                            19-602
                           5 Added        19-600
                           Added          19-610
                           Added          19-620
                           Added          19-630
                           Added          19-640
                           Added          19-650
                           Added          19-660
                           6              19-115.1(f)
                           7              19-300(a)(4)
                           8              19-350.2(5)f.
                           9              19-520.1(a)(6)
9841                   5-12- 1              19-100
                       03
                           2              19-260(c)
                           3 Added        19-415.3
9842                   5-12- 1              27-32.1
                       03
                                         27-33
                                         27-35,
                                            27-36
                                         27-37(1)f.
                           Added          27-27(4)
                                         27-38(1)
                                         27-43(b)
9850                   5-12- 1              21-1
                       03
                           2              21-2
                           3              21-4(c)(6)(i)--(iv)
                           4              21-8(a), (b)
                           5              21-9(1)
                           6              21-12
                           7              21-13
                           8              21-13.1
                           9              21-13.2
                           10             21-14.1
(repealed by 12114)         11             21-14.2
                           12             21-15
                           13             21-16(1)
                           14             21-16(2)
                           15             21-16(3)
                           16             21-16(4)
                           17             21-19
9851                   5-12- 1 Added        8-6.5
                       03
9857                   6-2-  1 Added        22-86
                       03
9859                   6-23- 1 Added        3-59(a)(7)
                       03
                           2              3-91
9861                   6-16- 3              11-46.1(4)(3)a., (4)
                       03
                           4              11B-1,
                                            11B-2
                           5A             15-1
                           5B             15-2(c)
                           5C             15-13
                           5D             15-14(a)
                           5E             15-15
                           5F             15-22(b)
                           6              29-23A.8.
9864                   6-16- 1              22-90(3)--(5)
                       03
                           2              22-91a.6.
                           3              22-94(d)
                           Added          22-94(g)
9866                   6-16- 1              10-31(6)
                       03
                           3              10-37
                           4              10-48(1), (3)
9867                   6-23- 1              20-221
                       03
                           2              20-225
                           3              20-246
                           4              20-271
9870                   6-30- 1              19-700
                       03
                           2 Rpld         19-1070(c)
                           3              19-1080(a)
9878                   8-4-  1              22-91a.6.
                       03
                           2              22-94(b), (d)--(f)
9893                   9-15- 1--3           20-146--
                       03                   20-146.2
                           4 Added        20-112.1
9898                   9-15- 1 Added        17-70--
                       03                   17-77
9909                   11-3- 1, 2 Added     7B-37,
                       03                   7B-38
9911                   11-   1              7B-26
                       10-03
9913                   11-   1              28-1--
                       17-03                28-5
                                         28-11,
                                            28-12
                                         28-15--
                                            28-37
                                         28-41--
                                            28-45
                                         28-47--
                                            28-52
                                         28-58
                                         28-62,
                                            28-63
                                         28-66--
                                            28-71
                                         28-74--
                                            28-118
                                         28-126--
                                            28-129
                                         28-137--
                                            28-144
                                         28-147--
                                            28-151
                                         28-152--
                                            28-159
9916                   12-8- 1              4-76
                       03
                           2              4-81
                           3, 4           4-87,
                                            4-88
9922                   1-5-  1              2-26(2)
                       04
9925                   1-5-  1              7-130--
                       04                   7-151
9928                   1-26- 1              10A-90
                       04
                                         10A-92--
                                            10A-94
9934                   2-2-  1              Ch. 11A(tit.)
                       04
                           3              11A-1--
                                            11A-3
9935                   2-9-  1              27-36(b)(2)
                       04
9942                   3-15- 1              4-82
                       04
9943                   3-22- 1 Added        10A-139
                       04
9948                   4-19- 1              11A-2,
                       04                   11A-3
9953                   4-19- 1              2-26(2)
                       04
9962                   5-10- 1 Added        20-30
                       04
                           2 Added        7-480
9964                   5-17- 1, 2           20-141(note)
                       04
9965                   5-17- 1, 2           20-144(note)
                       04
9966                   5-17- 1, 2           20-142(note)
                       04
9967                   5-17- 7              23A-1
                       04
                           8 Rpld         23A-31--
                                            23A-33
                                         23A-41--23A-49
                                         23A-61,
                                            23A-62
                           9 Added        23A-31--
                                            23A-35
                                         23A-40
                                         23A-50--
                                            23A-54
                                         23A-61--
                                            23A-63
                           10             23A-111
                                         23A-114
                                         23A-124
                                         23A-126
                           11             29-13
                                         29-15(b)(3)
                                         29-16(b)(1)c., (2)
                                         29-17--
                                            29-19
9971                   5-17- 1 Added        8-2.5
                       04
9973                   5-17- 1              8-2.2(a)
                       04
                       5-24-
                       04                   7-450--
9975                   (eff. 1 Added        7-464
                       1-1-
                       05)
                           2 Rnbd         11-2(1)--
                                            11-2(8)
                           as             11-2.1--11-2.8
9976                   5-24- 1 Rpld         27-71--
                       04                   27-87
                           2 Added        27-70--
                                            27-86
9977                   5-24- 1              27-9
                       04
                           2              27-16.2
                                         27-30
                                         27-35
                                         27-37
                                         27-43(b)
9978                   5-24- 1              4-82
                       04
9979                   6-7-  1              27-31(1)
                       04
                                         27-32.1(2)
                                         27-33
9982                   6-14- 1              15-1
                       04
                           2              15-2
                           3              15-12--
                                            15-16
                           4              15-18--15-20
                           5              15-24.1(a)--(c)
                                         15-24.3
                                         15-24.6
                                         15-24.7
                           6              15-50
9985                   6-21- 1 Rpld         20-157
                       04
9987                   6-21- 1              21-3(5)(2)
                       04
9989                   6-21- 1 Added        15-51
                       04
9991                   6-28- 1 Rpld         7-130--
                       04                   7-151
                           2 Added        7-130--
                                            7-151
10003                  6-28- 1              10-31(6)
                       04
                           3              10-31(1)
                                         10-31(5)
                                         10-32
                                         10-37
                           4 Added        10-38
                           5 Rnbd         10-38
                           as             10-39
                           6              10-48(4)
                           7 Added        10-49
                           8              10-53.2
10004                  6-28- 1              22-90(4)a.
                       04
                           Added          22-90(4)b.
                           2              22-90(5)(note)
                           3 Added        22-95
10005                  6-28- 1              22-100
                       04
                           Added          22-101,
                                            22-102
10007                  8-2-  1              11-17
                       04
10010                  8-2-  1              8-6.7(a)
                       04
10011                  8-2-  1              22-36(b)
                       04
                           2              22-36(c)
10019                  8-2-  1              22-95
                       04
10020                  8-2-  1 Added        22-103
                       04
10021                  8-2-  1              10-31(6)
                       04
10035                  9-7-  1              6-34
                       04
                           2              6-38
                           3              6-36
10036                  9-7-  1              13-3
                       04
                           2              13-6
                           3              11-112
                           4              11-111
10037                  9-13- 1              29-20--
                       04                   29-29
10040                  9-20- 1              19-290(4)
                       04
                           2              19-415(b)(3)b.
                           3              19-416(c)(1)a.2.
                           4              19-417(b)(1)a.2.
10041                  9-20- 1              7-26--
                       04                   7-37
                           2 Added        19-41(e)
10043                  9-27- 1 Added        19-520.1(11)
                       04
10047                  10-   1              22-34
                       11-04
10053                  9-27- 1              23A-2
                       04
                           2 Rnbd         Ch. 23A, Art. III
                           as             Ch. 23A, Art. IV
                           3 Rnbd         23A-71--23A-73
                           as             23A-101--
                                            23A-103
                           4 Rnbd         23A-81--23A-106
                           as             23A-111--23A-136
                           5 Added        23A-71,
                                            23A-72
                                         23A-81--
                                            23A-87
                                         23A-91--23A-94
                           6              23A-111
                                         23A-113
                                         23A-119
                                         23A-125, 23A-126
                                         23A-128, 23A-129
                                         23A-132
10054                  9-27- 1              7-26--
                       04                   7-37
10057                  10-   1 Added        10-3(15)
                       11-04
                           2 Rnbd         10-3(15),
                                            10-3(16)
                           as             10-3(16),
                                            10-3(17)
                           3 Added        10-3(18)
                           4 Rnbd         10-3(17)
                           as             10-3(19)
                           Rnbd           10-3(18)--
                                            10-3(32)
                           as             10-3(20)--
                                            10-3(34)
                           5              10-3(22)--
                                            10-3(25)
                                         10-3(32)
                           6 Rpld         10-3(33)
                           7              10-4(2)
                           Rpld           10-4(3)
                           8              22-90(1)d.
                                         22-90(2)d.
10059                  10-   1              22-86
                       11-04
10062                  10-   1              8-2.1(a)
                       11-04
                           2              8-2.1(c)
                           3              8-4(5)
                           Added          8-4(6)
                           4              8-4.1
10063                  10-   1              8-2.2(a)
                       11-04
                           2              8-2.3(a)
10064                  10-   1 Added        10A-134(g), (h)
                       18-04
10070                  10-   1              21-22
                       25-04
                           2              21-23,
                                            21-23.1
                           3              21-25.1
                           4              21-25.2
(repealed by 12114)         5              21-25.3
(repealed by 12114)         6              21-25.4
(repealed by 12114)         7              21-25.6
                           8 Added        21-25.11
                           9 Rpld         21-29
10072                  10-   1              2-26
                       25-04
10081                  11-8- 1              12-1
                       04
                           2              12-18--
                                            12-29
                           3              12-93
10088                  11-   1              10-12(8)
                       22-04
10093                  12-6- 1              22-49
                       04
10095                  12-6- 1              23A-86(2)
                       04
10099                  12-   1              Ch. 11B(tit.)
                       13-04
                           2              11B-1,
                                            11B-2
                           3              15-1
                                         15-14D
                                         15-22(b)
                           4              27-1
10125                  3-1-  1 Added        22-96
                       05
10126                  3-1-  1              16-3
                       05
                           2              16-11(b)(1), (2)
                           3              16-12(a), (e)
                           Added          16-12(f)
                           4              16-13(a), (c)
                           Added          16-13(g)
                           5              16-14(b)
                           6              16-15
                           7              16-30(b)
                           8              16-31(b)
                           9              16-32
                           10 Added       16-35
                           11 Added       16-36
                           12             16-45(a), (b), (d)
                           13             16-60(a)
                           14             16-61(a), (g)
                           15             16-62
                           16             16-71
                           17             16-73
                           18             16-74(a)
                           19 Rpld        11-57
10135                  3-22- 2              6-101
                       05
                           3 Added        6-104
10136                  3-22- 1 Added        10-53.3
                       05
10140                  4-12- 1              25-24
                       05
                           2 Added        25-88--
                                            25-92
10141                  4-12- 1              7-26(3)
                       05
                           2              7-27(b)(3), (6)
                           3              7-30(b), (c)
10142                  4-12- 1              6-38
                       05
                           2              6-34
10146                  4-19- 1 Added        2-140--2-142
                       05
10148                  4-26- 1              21-17
                       05
10155                  5-24- 1              8-2.5
                       05
10157                  6-7-  1              22-38(a)
                       05
10158                  6-7-  1              22-41(a)
                       05
10163                  6-14- 1              22-90(2)
                       05
                           2 Added        22-95(c)
                           4              22-100
                           5              22-11
10165                  6-14- 1              10-31(note)
                       05
                           2              10-31(7)
                                         10-34,
                                            10-34.1
                                         10-35
                                         10-47--
                                            10-49
                                         10-53
                                         10-53.1,
                                            10-53.2
                                         10-53.3(c)
                           3              10-33(1)
                           4 Added        10-33.1
10173                  6-28- 1              3-27(a)(8), (c)
                       05
                                         3-62
                                         3-67
10176                  7-6-  1 Added        10A-170--10A-174
                       05
10178                  7-6-  1              6-40
                       05
10180                  7-6-  1 Added        10A-180--
                       05                   10A-183
10181                  8-2-  1              20-179(28)
                       05
10182                  9-7-  1              6-164
                       05
10183                  9-7-  1 Added        6-167
                       05
10184                  9-7-  1              6-124
                       05
10202                  9-27- 1 Added        27-36(b)(3)
                       05
10206                  10-4- 1              4-7(3)(b)
                       05
                           2              4-11(f)(2)
                           3              4-13(e), (e)(5), (f)(1), (g)(3), (h)(1)
                           4              4-82
                           5              4-95
                           6              4-97(4)
                           7              4-98
                           8              4-99(2)
10207                  10-   2 Added        10A-190--
                       18-05                10A-192
10209                  10-   1              ch. 26 (tit.)
                       18-05
                           3 Added        26-20--
                                            26-23,
                                         26-30--
                                            26-36,
                                         26-40--
                                            26-42,
                                         26-47,
                                            26-48
10211                  10-   1 Added        11-71,
                       18-05                11-72
10229                  12-   1, 2           20-142(note)
                       20-05
10230                  12-   1, 2           20-143(note)
                       20-05
10232                  12-   1              2-26
                       20-05
10236                  12-   1 Added        7-490--
                       20-05                7-495
                           2 Added        19-41(f)
10244                  1-24- 1              7-491(e)
                       06
10251                  2-28- 1              7-130
                       06
10254                  2-28- 1              Ch. 7, Art. V (tit.)
                       06
                           2              7-97(4)
                           Added          7-97(5),
                                            7-97(6)
                           3              7-98
                           4              7-99
                           5              7-102(a)(4), (7)
                           Added          7-102(b), (c)
                           6              7-103
                           7, 8 Added     7-115,
                                            7-116
10256                  2-28- 2              23A-86(2)
                       06
                           3 Added        23A-86(3)
                           4              23A-129
10260                  3-7-  1              21-4(c)(6), (7)
                       06
                           2              21-9(1)
                           3              21-12
                           4              21-13.1
                           5              21-13.2
                           6              21-14(1)
                           7              21-14.1
(repealed by 12114)         8              21-14.2
                           9              21-14.3
                           10             21-16(1)
                           11             21-16(2)
                           12             21-16(3)
                           13             21-16(4)
10269                  4-18- 1              12-1.1
                       06
                           2 Rpld         12-1.2
                           3 Added        12-1.2,
                                            12-1.3
                           4              12-7
                           5              12-18--
                                            12-29
10270                  5-2-  1 Added        7-211(e)
                       06
10283                  6-6-  1 Added        22-51
                       06
                           2              22-35(a)
                           3              22-36(f)
10284                  6-6-  1              22-44(b)
                       06
                           2              22-49(a), (c)
                           3              22-46
                           4 Added        22-52
                           5              22-84
10287                  6-13- 1              19-540(a)
                       06
                           2 Rpld         19-542(d)
                           3              19-560
                           4              19-250.1(Reg.)
                           5 Added        19-445(r)
10288                  6-13- 1 Added        2-22.1
                       06
10289                  6-27- 1--3           10-31(note)
                       06
                           4              10-34.1
                           5 Added        10-53.4
                           6 Added        10-53.5
10292                  6-27- 1              28-48
                       06
10293                  6-27- 1, 2           10-31(note)
                       06
10294                  6-27- 1              ch. 22 (tit.)
                       06
                           2              22-95(a), (b)
                           3              22-102
10295                  6-27- 2              23A-40(1)d., e.
                       06
                           Added          23A-40(1)f.
                           3              23A-52(4)
10299                  6-27- 1 Rpld         18-1--
                       06                   18-9
10302                  8-8-  1              10-3(18)
                       06
                           Rpld           10-3(29)
                           Added          10-3(35)
                           2              10-12(4)
                                         10-12(7)
                                         10-12(8)
10303                  7-6-  1              22-41(a)
                       06
10304                  7-6-  1              21-51
                       06
10305                  7-6-  1              27-32.1(2)
                       06
                                         27-33(2)
                                         27-54
10310                  8-8-  1 Added        10A-200--10A-204
                       06
10311                  8-8-  1              26-1.1
                       06
                                         26-1.3
                                         26-2
                                         26-3(b)
                                         26-5.2(9)
                           Added          26-5.3
                                         26-11.3(b)
                           Added          26-11.4
                                         26-12(b)(1)c.
                           Added          26-12(b)(4), (5)
10315                  9-6-  1              10A-171(a)
                       06
10317                  9-12- 1              7B-26.1
                       06
                           2              7B-36
10320                  9-19- 1 Added        22-53
                       06
10321                  9-19- 1 Added        5-4--
                       06                   5-11
                           2 Added        7-481
10322                  9-26- 1 Added        22-54
                       06
10328                  10-   1              28-48(2)
                       10-06
                           2 Added        28-48(4)
10337                  11-   1 Added        10A-220--10A-225
                       14-06
10348                  11-   1              Ch. 15 (tit.)
                       28-06
                           2              15-1 A.
                           3              15-2 D.
                           4              15-14 D.
                           5              16-13(c)(4)
                           6              16-61(g)
                           7              27-1
                           8 Rpld         11B-1,
                                            11B-2
10352                  12-5- 1              2-26
                       06
10359                  12-   1              27-16.2(2)(c), (e)
                       12-06
                           2              27-30
                           Rpld           27-33(4)
                                         27-35
                                         27-37(1)f., (3), (4)
                                         27-43(b)
                                         27-50(1)(b), (c)
                           3              27-86
10360                  12-   1              19-1
                       19-06
                           2              19-30
                           3              19-66
                                         19-68
                           Added          19-69--
                                            19-79
10361                  12-   1              19-100
                       19-06
                           2              19-266(a), (d)
                           3              19-410
                           4 Added        19-415(b)(9), (10)
                           5 Added        19-416(c)(1)e.
                           6 Added        19-417(b)(1)e.
                           7              19-444
                           8              19-450(c)(10)
                           9              19-455(d)
                           10             19-465(29), (38)
                           11 Added       19-470(a)(2)e.
                           12             19-475
                           13             19-565(d)
                           14             19-597(k)
                           15             19-660(29), (38)
10364                  12-   1              10-31(note)
                       19-06
10365                  12-   1              10-31(7)
                       19-06
10367                  12-   1 Added        10A-230--10A-234
                       19-06
10372                  2-6-  1              23A-72(1)
                       07
                           2              23A-81(1), (7), (8)
                           Added          23A-82(3)
                                         23A-83
                                         23A-84(5), (6), (10), (11), (14)
                                         23A-85
                           Rpld           23A-87
                           3              23A-91
                                         23A-92(1)
                           4              23A-113
                                         23A-125
                                         23A-129
10374                  2-13- 2 Added        10A-240--
                       07                   10A-244
10375                  2-21- 1              17-11(i), (o), (p)
                       07
                           2              17-12(e), (i)
                           3              17-13(a), (d), (e)
                           Added          17-13(f)(6)
                           4              17-15(a), (c)--(f)
                           Added          17-15(g)
                           5              17-16(a), (c)--(g)
10376                  2-21- 1              3-115
                       07
10378                  3-6-  1              1-8(4)
                       07
10379                  3-20- 1              27-62
                       07
10380                  3-20- 1 Added        27-110--
                       07                   27-119
10385                  4-4-  1              27-36
                       07
10386                  4-4-  1              27-36(b)
                       07
                           Added          27-36(c)
10387                  4-10- 4              Ch. 23A, Art. II, Div. 3 (intro ¶)
                       07
                                         23A-51
                                         23A-54
10393                  4-24- 1              16-3
                       07
                           2              16-30(b)(1)--(4)
                           3              16-30(c)
10396                  5-1-  1 Added        11-39
                       07
10401                  5-15- 1 Added        12-110
                       07
10402                  5-15- 1              19-53(4)
                       07
10404                  5-15- 1              28-1--
                       07                   28-5
                                         28-11,
                                            28-12
                                         28-15--
                                            28-38
                                         28-41--
                                            28-45
                                         28-47--
                                            28-51
                                         28-58
                                         28-62,
                                            28-63
                                         28-66--
                                            28-71
                                         28-75--
                                            28-118
                                         28-126--
                                            28-129
10408                  6-12- 1, 2           20-140(note)
                       07
10409                  6-12- 1, 2           20-141(note)
                       07
10410                  6-12- 1, 2           20-142(note)
                       07
10411                  6-12- 1, 2           20-143(note)
                       07
10412                  6-12- 1, 2           20-144(note)
                       07
10413                  6-12- 1, 2           20-145(note)
                       07
10415                  6-12- 1              27-31(3), (7)
                       07
                                         27-32.1
                                         27-33
                                         27-34
10417                  6-12- 1 Rpld         6-1
                       07
                           2              6-34
                           3              6-38
                           4              6-40
                           5              6-84
                           6              6-167
10418                  6-12- 1              10A-145--
                       07                   10A-151
                           2              20-1
                                         20-12
                                         20-13
                                         20-15,
                                            20-15.1
                                         20-17
                                         20-22
                           3              20-200
                                         20-203
                                         20-204
                                         20-210
                           Added          20-226.4
                                         20-229
                                         20-2303.6
                                         20-2303.12
                                         20-258
                                         20-261
                           Added          20-263
                                         20-279
10421                  6-19- 1 Rpld         11-19
                       07
10425                  6-19- 1 Added        22-90(3)d.
                       07
                           2              22-93(b)
                           3              22-94(b)
                           4              22-95(a), (b)
                           5 Rpld         22-100
10426                  6-19- 1              10-31(note)
                       07
                           2              10-31(7)(note)
                                         10-33(note)
                                         10-33.1(note)
                                         10-34(note)
                                         10-34.1(note)
                                         10-35(note)
                                         10-47(note)
                                         10-48(note)
                                         10-49(note)
                                         10-52(note)
                                         10-53(note)
                                         10-53.1(note)
                                         10-53.2(note)
                                         10-53.3(note)
                                         10-53.5(note)
                           3              10-53.4
                           4 Added        10-31(8)
                           5 Added        10-53.6
10428                  6-26- 1              22-41(a)(note)
                       07
10430                  6-26- 1              4-78
                       07
                           2              4-82
                           3              4-87
                           4              4-90
                           5              4-91
                           6              4-99(2)
10434                  7-10- 1              28-48(4)
                       07
10436                  7-10- 1              6-124
                       07
                           2 Added        6-66
                           3              6-164
10437                  7-10- 1              13-3
                       07
10442                  8-6-  1              23A-72
                       07
                           2              23A-81
                                         23A-82
                                         23A-83(2)(b)
                                         23A-84
                                         23A-86
                           3              23A-119
10445                  9-5-  1 Added        22-39(e)
                       07
10448                  9-5-  1              19-3
                       07
                           2 Added        19-39
                                         19-40(a)
                           3              Ch. 19, Art. I, Div. 2
                                         19-41(a)
                           4 Rnbd         19-41(c)--(f)
                           as             19-42--
                                            19-45
                           5              19-71(a)
                           6              19-130
                           7              19-300(a)
                           8              19-310(a), (d)
                           9 Added        Reg.
                                            19-310.1
                           10 Rnbd        Ch. 19, Art. I, Divs. 3, 4
                           as             Ch. 19, Art. I, Divs. 4, 5
                           11             7-64
                           12             7-300(d)
                           13             7-401(d)
                           14             7-491(b)(9)
                           15             19-900(a)
                           Added          19-900(c)
                           16             19-910(a)
                           17 Added       19-910(d)
10450                  9-5-  1              12-20(1)(b)
                       07
10454                  9-25- 1              8-4.1
                       07
10462                  10-   1 Added        28-48(3)
                       16-07
10475                  11-   1              4-8
                       13-07
                           2              4-97(5)
10479                  11-   1 Added        20-283
                       20-07
10481                  11-   1 Rpld         3-1--3-10,
                       27-07
                                         3-14, 3-15,
                                         3-19--3-27,
                                         3-31--3-43,
                                         3-47--3-69,
                                         3-73,
                                         3-77--3-80,
                                         3-84--3-86,
                                         3-90, 3-91,
                                         3-95,
                                         3-99--3-105,
                                         3-109, 3-110,
                                         3-114--3-125,
                                         3-130--3-136
                           2 Added        3-1--3-7,
                                         3-11,
                                         3-16--3-24,
                                         3-31--3-44,
                                         3-51--3-69,
                                         3-71--3-82,
                                         3-91--3-93,
                                         3-96,
                                         3-101--3-110,
                                         3-116, 3-117,
                                         3-121--3-133,
                                         3-141--3-148
10483                  11-   1              22-53
                       27-07
                           2              22-51
                           3              22-50
                           4 Added        22-55
10489                  1-8-  1              22-53(a)
                       08
10491                  1-8-  1, 2           10-31(note)
                       08
10494                  1-15- 1              11-69
                       08
                           2 Added        11-70.2
10507                  3-4-  1              10A-201(a), (b)
                       08
10510                  3-18- 1              27-16.2(2)(c)--(e)
                       08
                           2              27-30
                                         27-35
                                         27-37
                                         27-41.1(3)(b)
                                         27-43
                                         27-50(1)(b), (c)
                                         27-51(2)
                           3              27-86
10511                  3-25- 1              22-44(b)
                       08
10512                  3-25- 1 Added        16-29
                       08
                           2              16-45(b)(3)
                           3              16-60(a)
10524                  5-13- 1              19-100
                       08
                           2 Added        19-415(a)(4)
                           Added          19-415(b)(11)
                           3 Added        19-416(b)(5)
                           Added          19-416(c)(2)c.
                           4 Added        19-417(b)
                           Rnbd           19-417(b)--(c)
                           as             19-417(c)--(e)
                           Added          19-417(c)(2)c.
                           5 Added        19-465(39)
10535                  6-3-  1              27-32--
                       08                   27-34
10536                  5-20- 1 Added        2-4
                       08
                           2              10-12(1)
10538                  6-3-  1, 2           10-3
                       08
                           3              10-15
10539                  6-3-  1              15-1
                       08
                           2              15-2--
                                            15-7
                           3 Rpld         15-10.1--15-24.7
                           4 Added        15-10--
                                            15-10.5
                           Added          15-16--
                                            15-16.8
                           5 Rnbd         Ch. 15, Art. VI
                           as             Ch. 15, Art. V
                                         15-31--
                                            15-35
                           6 Rnbd         Ch. 15, Art. VII
                           as             Ch. 15, Art. VI
                           6A             Ch. 15, Art. VI(tit.)
                           6B Rpld        15-50
                           6C Rnbd        15-51
                           as             15-50
10541                  6-10- 1 Added        10A-201(c)(9)
                       08
                           2              10A-203(a)
10543                  6-10- 1, 2           20-140(note)
                       08
10544                  6-10- 1, 2           20-141(note)
                       08
10545                  6-10- 1, 2           20-142(note)
                       08
10546                  6-10- 1, 2           20-143(note)
                       08
10547                  6-10- 1, 2           20-144(note)
                       08
10548                  6-10- 4 Added        23A-32.1
                       08
10550                  6-17- 1              10-31(note)
                       08
                           2              10-31(7)(note)
                                         10-33.1(note)
                                         10-34(note)
                                         10-34.1(note)
                                         10-35(note)
                                         10-48(note)
                                         10-49(note)
                                         10-52(note)
                                         10-53(note)
                                         10-53.1(note)
                                         10-53.2(note)
                                         10-53.3(note)
                                         10-53.5(note)
                           3              10-33
                           4              10-37(2)
                           5              10-39
10554                  6-25- 1              19-53
                       08
10557                  6-25- 1              22-90(1)e.
                       08
                           2              22-91 a.7.
                           3              22-95(d)
                           4              22-101
                           5              22-102
                           6              22-103
                           7 Added        22-104
10558                  6-25- 1              10-31(7)
                       08
                           2              10-47
                           3              10-53.6
                           4 Added        10-53.7
10562                  7-8-  1 Added        7-501--
                       08                   7-504
10563                  7-8-  1              27-70
                       08
                           2              27-80(g)
                           Added          27-80(h)
                           Rnbd           27-80(h)
                           as             27-80(i)
                           3 Rnbd         27-80(i)--(p)
                           as             27-80(j)--(q)
                           4              27-82
10569                  7-8-  1              22-101
                       08
10570                  9-9-  1              10A-201(b)(1)h.
                       08
10571                  8-6-  1              7-350
                       08
                           2              7-351
                           3              7-354(a)(6)
                           4              7-358
                           5 Added        7-366(a)(9)
10575                  9-3-  1              4-82
                       08
                           2              4-87
                           3              4-90
                           4              4-91(a)
10578                  9-23- 1 Added        2-16.1
                       08
                           2              30-3
10579                  9-23- 2              6-38
                       08
10580                  9-23- 1 Added        11-65
                       08
10584                  10-7- 2              10B-1--
                       08                   10B-4
10585                  10-7- 1              8-6.5(a)
                       08
10591                  10-7- 1 Added        10A-210--
                       08                   10A-215
                           2 Rpld         10A-230--10A-234
10594                  10-7- 5              21-16(2)(7)
                       08
10597                  10-   1 Added        6-181--
                       14-08                6-188
                           2 Added        27-15(a)(17)
10598                  10-   1 Added        10A-120--
                       21-08                10A-125
10605                  11-   1(Exh. A)      6-38
                       25-08
10606                  11-   1 Added        27-62(d)
                       25-08
10615                  12-   1 Rpld         2-101--2-108
                       16-08
                           2 Added        2-101--
                                            2-103
10619                  1-6-  1, 2(Exh. A)   10-31
                       09
10625                  1-13- 1              6-34
                       09
10633                  2-10- 1              10-53.1
                       09
10634                  2-10- 1 Rpld         28-147--
                       09                   28-151
                           2 Added        28-147--
                                            28-151.2
10635                  2-24- 1              28-48(4)
                       09
10636                  2-24- 18             23A-35
                       09
                           19             23A-33.1
                           20             23A-35
10638                  3-3-  1              16-3
                       09
                           2              16-14(b)
                           3              16-15
                           4              16-45(e)
10642                  3-24- 1              15-1(A)
                       09
                           2 Added        15-60
10643                  3-24- 1              27-36(b)
                       09
10644                  3-24- 1              27-36(a)
                       09
10653                  4-21- 1              10-15
                       09
10654                  4-21- 1 Added        15-34.8
                       09
10655                  4-21- 1              Ch. 11B (tit.)
                       09
                           2 Added        11B-1--
                                            11B-4
                           4              23A-5--
                                            23A-8
                                         23A-31, 23A-32
                                         23A-32.1,
                                            23A-33.1
                                         23A-33.3
                                         23A-34
                                         23A-35
                                         23A-40
                                         Ch. 23A, Art. II, Div. 3 (intro ¶)
                                         23A-50--
                                            23A-53
                                         23A-61,
                                            23A-62
                                         23A-81
                                         23A-84
                                         23A-86
                                         23A-92
                                         23A-114
                                         23A-119
                                         23A-126
10656                  4-21- 1              23A-83
                       09
                           3              10B-1--
                                            10B-4
10657                  4-28- 1 Added        22-30--
                       09                   22-33
                           2              22-34--
                                            22-43
                           3 Added        22-43.1
                           4              22-44--
                                            22-47
                           5              22-48--
                                            22-52
                           6 Rpld         22-53--
                                            22-55
10672                  6-2-  1              2-18
                       09
                                         2-19
                                         2-22
                                         2-22.1
10673                  6-2-  1              27-32
                       09
                                         27-32.1
                                         27-33
                                         27-34
10674                  6-2-  1              15-1(A)
                       09
                           2              15-10.1(E)
                           3              15-16.1
                                         15-16.3
                                         15-16.4
                                         15-16.6
                                         15-16.8(C)
                           4 Added        15-31.1,
                                            15-31.2
                           5              15-32
                                         15-32.1(A)
                                         15-32.2
                                         15-32.4(D), (E)
                                         15-32.5
                           6              15-33.2(A)--(D)
                                         15-33.3
                           7              15-34.2
                                         15-34.3
                                         15-34.5
                                         15-34.7
                                         15-34.8
                                         15-35(A), (B)(1), (2)
10675                  6-2-  1              10-31(note)
                       09
                           2              10-31(7)(note)
                                         10-33.1(note)
                                         10-34(note)
                                         10-34.1(note)
                                         10-35(note)
                                         10-48(note)
                                         10-49(note)
                                         10-52(note)
                                         10-53(note)
                                         10-53.2(note)
                                         10-53.3(note)
                                         10-53.4(note)
                                         10-53.5(note)
                           3              10-34.1
                           4              10-53.1
                           5 Rpld         10-53.7
10678                  6-9-  1              22-84
                       09
                           2              22-86
                           3              22-90(5)
                           4              22-95
10679                  6-9-  1              2-13
                       09
10683                  6-16- 1              4-82
                       09
                           2              4-87
                           3              4-90
                           4              4-91(a)
10685                  6-16- 1              19-1070(a)(1)(i)
                       09
                           2              19-1080(a)
                           3              19-410(a)(2)
                           4              19-66(b)
10687                  6-23- 1              16-42
                       09
                           2              16-42(b)
                           3              16-71,
                                            16-73
10691                  7-7-  1              2-1
                       09
10692                  7-7-  2 Rpld         12A-3,
                       09                   12A-4 
10696                  8-5-  1              22-30(i)
                       09
                           2              22-36(b)(2)
                                         22-36(b)(4)
                           3              22-39(f)(1)
                           4              22-40(a)(1)
                                         22-40(d)
10703                  8-5-  1              28-147
                       09
                           2              28-149(1)
                           3              28-150(5)(2), (3)
                                         28-150(7)(2), (3)
                                         28-150(8)(4)
                           Added          28-150(10), (11)
                           4              28-151(2)
                                         28-151(4)
10711                  9-9-  1              22-30(u)
                       09
                           2              22-33(f)
                           3              22-40(a)
                                         22-40(d)--(f)
                           4              22-42(a)
                                         22-42(e)
10712                  9-9-  1              22-30(u)
                       09
                           2              22-33(f)
                           3              22-40(a)
                                         22-40(d)--(f)
                           4              22-42(a)
                                         22-42(e)
10723                  10-   1 Added        12-1.4
                       27-09
10726                  11-   1              23A-32.1
                       24-09
                           2              23A-61
                           3 Added        23A-64
10728                  11-   1, 2           20-140(note)
                       17-09
10729                  11-   1, 2           20-141(note)
                       17-09
10730                  11-   1, 2           20-142(note)
                       17-09
10731                  11-   1, 2           20-143(note)
                       17-09
10732                  11-   1, 2           20-144(note)
                       17-09
10733                  11-   1, 2           20-145(note)
                       17-09
10734                  12-7- 1              10A-133
                       09
10735                  11-   1 Added        11-130--
                       24-09                11-132
10748 (repealed by     1-5-  1              21-9
12114)                 10
                                         21-12
                                         21-13.1
                                         21-14
                                         21-14.1
                                         21-14.2
                                         21-14.3
                                         21-16
                                         21-51
10751                  1-5-  1 Added        22-21
                       10
10754                  1-20- 1              19-415
                       10
                           2              19-416
                           3              19-417
                           4              19-450
                           5              19-570
                           6              Reg.
                                            19-350.3
10757                  2-9-  1              2-4
                       10
10758                  2-9-  1              2-1
                       10
10767                  3-9-  1              10A-241
                       10
10775                  4-6-  1              22-36
                       10
                           2              22-39
10785                  5-11- 2 Rpld         10A-190--
                       10                   10A-192
                           5 Added        10A-190--
                                            10A-194
10789                  5-18- 1 Added        7-300
                       10
                           2 Rnbd         7-300 as
                                            7-301
                           3 Added        7-302
                           4 Added        7-303
10790                  5-18- 1              7-97--
                       10                   7-100
                           2              7-102
                           3              7-115
                           4              19-1
                           5              19-6
                           6 Added        19-85--
                                            19-87
10795                  5-25- 1              27-32.1
                       10
                                         27-33
                                         27-34
10796                  5-25- 1              15-1
                       10
                           2              15-5
                           3              15-16.4
                           4              15-32.1--
                                            15-32.5
                           Added          15-32.6
                           5              15-33.2
                           6              15-33.3
                           7              15-34.3
                           8              15-34.6--
                                            15-34.8
                           Added          15-34.9
                           9 Added        15-36
                           10 Rpld        15-50
                           11 Added       15-70,
                                            15-71
10800                  6-8-  1              15-70
                       10
10806                  6-15- 1              10-31 (note)
                       10
                           2              10-31(7) (note)
                                         10-31(8) (note)
                                         10-33 (note)
                                         10-33.1 (note)
                                         10-34 (note)
                                         10-34.1 (note)
                                         10-35 (note)
                                         10-48 (note)
                                         10-49 (note)
                                         10-52 (note)
                                         10-53 (note)
                                         10-53.1 (note)
                                         10-53.2 (note)
                                         10-53.3 (note)
                                         10-53.4 (note)
                                         10-53.5 (note)
                           3              10-48
10807                  6-22- 1              2-13
                       10
10810                  6-22- 1              10A-139
                       10
10812                  6-22- 1              22-95
                       10
10814                  7-7-  1              10-48
                       10
10825                  8-4-  1              11-17
                       10
10833                  8-4-  1              16-3
                       10
                           2              16-11
                           3              16-12
                           4              16-13
                           5              16-14
                           6              16-30
                           7              16-61
10836                  9-8-  1              19-53
                       10
10843                  10-   2 Rpld         10A-170--10A-174
                       19-10
10849                  11-9- 1 Added        8-6.8
                       10
10854                  11-   1              Ch. 7, Art. V (tit.)
                       23-10
                           2              7-97
                           3              7-98
                           4              7-98
10856                  11-   1 Rpld         11-22,
                       23-10                11-23
                           2 Added        11-22
10864                  12-   1              3-33
                       14-10
                           2              3-82
10865                  12-   1              16-30
                       21-10
10866                  12-   1              7-211
                       21-10
10867                  12-   1              27-70
                       21-10
                                         27-71
                                         27-74
                                         27-75
                                         27-76
                                         27-78
                                         27-80
                                         27-82
10871                  1-19- 1              10A-76
                       11
                                         10A-77
10872                  1-19- 1              10A-110
                       11
10874                  1-25- 1              2-4
                       11
10880                  3-8-  1              Ch. 14 (tit.)
                       11
                                            14-1,
                                            14-3 –
                           2 Added        14-15,
                                            14-18–
                                            14-22
10885                  3-8-  1              12-110
                       11
10887                  4-12- 1              2-18
                       11
                                         2-19
                                         2-22
10893                  5-3-  1              4-78
                       11
                                         4-82
                                         4-82.2
                                         4-87
                                         4-88
                                         4-90
                                         4-91
10895                  5-17- 2              15-1
                       11
                           3              15-16.1
                                         15-16.5
                                         15-16.8
                           4              15-31.1
                           Added          15-31.3
                           5              15-32.2
                                         15-32.4
                                         15-32.5
                                         15-32.6
                           6              15-33.2
                                         15-33.3
                           7              15-34.5
                                         15-34.7
                                         15-34.9
                           8              15-36
10896                  5-24- 1              27-32.1
                       11
                                         27-33
                                         27-34
10897                  5-24- 1              27-9
                       11
                                         27-16
                                         27-16.1
                                         27-16.2
                                         27-18
                           2              27-35
                                         27-37
                                         27-43
                                         27-50
                           3              27-86
10899                  6-7-  1              22-95
                       11
10900                  6-28- 1              10-31 (note)
                       11
                           2              10-31(7) (note)
                                         10-31(8) (note)
                                         10-33 (note)
                                         10-33.1 (note)
                                         10-34 (note)
                                         10-34.1 (note)
                                         10-35 (note)
                                         10-47 (note)
                                         10-48 (note)
                                         10-49 (note)
                                         10-52 (note)
                                         10-53 (note)
                                         10-53.1 (note)
                                         10-53.2 (note)
                                         10-53.3 (note)
                                         10-53.5 (note)
                           3              10-53.4
10901                  6-14- 1 Added        8-6.9
                       11
10903                  6-28- 2              3-11
                       11
                           3              3-53
                           Added          3-70
                           4              3-76
                                         3-77
                                         3-79
                                         3-81
                           5              3-96
10904                  6-28- 1              Ch. 18 (tit.)
                       11
                           2 Added        18-1 –
                                            18-10
                           3 Rnbd         2-12 as
                                            18-11
10910                  8-9-  2              7-211
                       11
10911                  8-9-  1              19-100
                       11
                           2              19-415
                           3              19-416
                           4              19-417
                           5              19-445
                           6              19-595
                           7              19-660
10915                  6-21- 1              22-30
                       11
                           2              22-33
                           3              22-34
                           4              22-36
                           5              22-37
                           6              22-40
                           7              22-41
10918                  8-9-  1              10A-145
                       11
                                         10A-147
                                         10A-148
                                         10A-150
                           2              20-210
                           3              20-230
                                         20-230.1
                                         20-230.2
                                         20-230.12
                           4              20-255
                                         20-258
                           5              20-309
10919                  8-9-  1              19-53
                       11
10934                  10-   1              2-140
                       12-11
10940                  10-   1              20-179
                       25-11
10948                  12-5- 1              10-35
                       11
10949                  12-   1              19-100
                       13-11
                           2 Rpld         19-130
                           3              19-405
                           4              Reg.
                                            19-415.2
                           5              Reg.
                                            19-460.1
10950                  12-   2 Added        6-10,
                       20-11                6-11
                           3              10A-134
10951                  12-   1              3-33
                       20-11
                           2              3-33 (note)
                                         3-82 (note)
10952                  12-   1              8-2.1
                       20-11
                           2              8-2.2
10954                  1-10- 1              3-96
                       12
10955                  1-10- 2 Rpld         10A-220--10A-225
                       12
10958                  1-24- 1              27-36
                       12
10959                  1-24- 1              27-36
                       12
10963                  2-7-  2              6-101
                       12
10965                  2-15- 6 Added        16-37
                       12
                           Added          16-38
                           7              16-70
                                         16-73
10966                  2-22- 1 Added        20-160
                       12
10967                  2-28- 1              Ch. 7, Art. XXI, Div. 1 (tit.)
                       12
                           2 Added        7-449
                           3              7-450
                           4              7-453
                           5 Added        7-465 –
                                            7-479
                           6 Rpld         11-2
10896                  5-22- 1              15-10.1
                       12
                           2              15-16.1
                                         15-16.6
                           3              15-31.1
                           Added          15-31.4
                           Added          15-31.5
                           Added          15-31.6
                           Added          15-31.7
                           Added          15-31.8
                           Added          15-31.9
                           4              15-32.2
                                         15-32.5
                           5              15-33.1
                                         15-33.2
                           6              15-34.3
                                         15-34.6
                                         15-34.7
                           7              15-34.8
                           8              15-36
                           9              15-70
                           Added          15-70.1
10987                  5-22- 1              27-32.1
                       12
                                         27-33
                                         27-34
10989                  6-5-  2              10-31 (note)
                       12
                           3              10-31(7) (note)
                                         10-31(8) (note)
                                         10-33 (note)
                                         10-33.1 (note)
                                         10-34 (note)
                                         10-34.1 (note)
                                         10-35 (note)
                                         10-48 (note)
                                         10-49 (note)
                                         10-52 (note)
                                         10-53 (note)
                                         10-53.1 (note)
                                         10-53.2 (note)
                                         10-53.3 (note)
                                         10-53.4 (note)
                                         10-53.5 (note)
10991                  6-12- 1              22-86
                       12
                           2              22-95
10992                  6-12- 1              28-39
                       12
                       6-12-
                       12
10993                  (eff. 1              28-147
                       7-1-
                       12)
                                         28-148
                                         28-149
                                         28-150
                                         28-151
                                         28-151.1
                                         28-151.2
                                         28-151.3
                                         28-151.4
                                         28-151.5
10996                  6-19- 1              8-2.5
                       12
10999                  6-19- 1 Added        27-52
                       12
11000                  6-26- 1              21-10
                       12
                           2              21-12
                           3              21-13.1
                           4              21-14
                           5              21-16
                           6 Added        21-18.1
                           7              21-51
11014                  8-7-  1              16-32
                       12
11016                  9-5-  2 Rpld         10A-160 – 10A-164
                       12
                           3 Added        10A-160
11020                  9-11- 1              22-30(d)
                       12
                           2              22-33(b)
                           3              22-41(b)
                           4              22-43(e)
11022                  9-19- 1              19-53
                       12
11024                  10-9- 1              16-31
                       12
11025                  10-9- 1 Added        Ch. 23B (note)
                       12
                           2              Ch. 23 (note)
                           3              Ch. 23A (note)
                                         Ch. 23A, Art. I (note)
                                         Ch. 23A, Art. II (note)
                           4              23A-122
                                         23A-124
                                         23A-126
                           6              Ch. 23 (note)
                                         Ch. 23B (note)
11027                  10-9- 1              4-3
                       12
11032                  11-7- 1              3-33, 3-82
                       12
11033                  11-   1              1-19
                       20-12
                           2              1-20
11040                  12-   1              13-3
                       18-12
                           2 Rpld         13-6
11042                  12-   1              6-34
                       18-12
                           2              6-38
                           3              6-40
                           4              6-66
                           5              6-84
                           6              6-124
                           7              6-164
                           8              6-167
                       3-19-
                       13
11056                  (eff. 1              15-1
                       7-1-
                       13)
                           2              15-60
11057                  3-27- 1              7A-21
                       13
                           2              11-30
                           3              28-138
                       3-27-
                       13
11062                  (eff. 1              22-30
                       7-1-
                       13)
                           2              22-30
                           3              22-34
11063                  3-27- 1              20-1
                       13
                           2              20-260
                           3              20-277
                       5-21-
                       13
11071                  (eff. 1              22-95
                       7-1-
                       13)
                       5-21-
                       13
11072                  (eff. 1              27-16
                       7-1-
                       13)
                                         27-16.2
                           1              27-30
                                         27-35
                                         27-37
                                         27-41
                                         27-43
                                         27-48
                                         27-50
                                         27-51
                           3              27-86
                       5-21-
                       13
11073                  (eff. 1              27-32.1
                       7-1-
                       13)
                                         27-33
                                         27-34
                       5-21-
                       13
11075                  (eff. 5              10-31 (note)
                       7-1-
                       13)
                           6              10-31(7) (note)
                                         10-31(8) (note)
                                         10-33 (note)
                                         10-33.1 (note)
                                         10-34 (note)
                                         10-34.1 (note)
                                         10-35 (note)
                                         10-48 (note)
                                         10-49 (note)
                                         10-52 (note)
                                         10-53 (note)
                                         10-53.1 (note)
                                         10-53.2 (note)
                                         10-53.3 (note)
                                         10-53.4 (note)
                                         10-53.5 (note)
11076                  5-29- 2              3-11
                       13
                           3              3-51
                                         3-53
                                         3-58
                           Added          3-59
                           Rnbd           3-59 – 3-70 as 3-60 – 3-71
                                         3-71
                           4 Rnbd         3-71 as 3-72
                           5 Rnbd         3-72 – 3-74 as 3-73 – 3-75
                           5 Rnbd         3-75 – 3-79 as 3-76 – 3-80
                                         3-77
                                         3-78
                                         3-79
                                         3-80
                           7 Rnbd         3-80 – 3-82 as 3-81 – 3-83
                                         3-81
                                         3-82
                                         3-83
11081                  5-29- 1 Added        11-56
                       13
11082                  5-29- 1              2-18
                       13
                           2              2-19
                           3              2-22
                       6-18-
                       13
11087                  (eff. 1              15-16.8
                       7-20-
                       13)
                           2              15-32.5
                           3              15-33.2
                           4              15-34.7
                                         15-34.8
                       6-18-
                       13
11088                  (eff. 1              17-70
                       7-19-
                       13)
                                         17-71
                                         17-72
                                         17-73
                                         17-74
                                         17-75
                                         17-76
                                         17-77
                           2 Added        17-78
11088                  7-9-  1 (Exh. A)     6-38
                       13
11091                  7-9-  2              20-179
                       13
11104                  8-6-  1 Added        19-1200 – 19-1255
                       13
11111                  9-24- 1              8-2.2
                       13
11118                  10-8- 1 Added        16-39
                       13
11126                  11-6- 1              16-3
                       13
                           2              16-12
                           3              16-13
                           4              16-15
                           5 Added        16-39.1
11131                  12-2- 1              3-11
                       13
                                         3-53
                                         3-70
                                         3-76
                                         3-77
                                         3-79
                                         3-81
                                         3-96
11134                  12-   2              10-31
                       17-13
                                         10-31(7)
                                         10-31(8)
                                         10-33
                                         10-33.1
                                         10-34
                                         10-34.1
                                         10-35
                                         10-48
                                         10-49
                                         10-52
                                         10-53
                                         10-53.1
                                         10-53.2
                                         10-53.3
                                         10-53.4
                                         10-53.5
11146                  3-4-  1              22-91
                       14
11161                  4-23- 1              10A-147
                       14
11164                  5-6-                3-77
                       14
11166                  5-6-                3-11
                       14
                                         3-53
                                         3-70
                                         3-76
                                         3-77
                                         3-79
                                         3-81
                                         3-96
                       5-20-
                       14
11173                  (eff. 1              29-17
                       6-20-
                       14)
                           2              29-18
                           3              29-19
11174                  5-20- 1 Added        30-5 –
                       14                   30-10
                       6-3-
                       14
11175                  (eff. 1              3-62
                       7-4-
                       14)
                           2              3-78
                       6-3-
                       14
11176                  (eff. 1              22-95
                       7-1-
                       14)
                       6-3-
                       14
11177                  (eff. 1              27-32.1
                       7-4-
                       14)
                                         27-33
                                         27-34
                                         27-35
                       6-3-
                       14
11178                  (eff. 1              15-1
                       7-4-
                       14)
                           2              15-16.6
                           3              15-33.2
                                         15-33.3
                           4              15-34.3
                                         15-34.7
                           5              15-60
                           6              15-70
                           7 Added        15-80
                       6-3-
                       14
11180                  (eff. 1              10-31
                       6-29-
                       14)
                           2              10-31(7)
                                         10-31(8)
                                         10-33
                                         10-33.1
                                         10-34
                                         10-34.1
                                         10-35
                                         10-48
                                         10-49
                                         10-52
                                         10-53
                                         10-53.1
                                         10-53.2
                                         10-53.3
                                         10-53.4
                                         10-53.5
                       6-17-
                       14
11182                  (eff. 1              2-18
                       7-17-
                       14)
                           2              2-21
                           3              2-22
                           4              2-22.1
11183                  6-17- 1 (eff. 12-13- Reg.
                       14    11)            19-405.1
                           2 (eff. 1-1-   19-100
                             07)
                           3 (eff. 1-1-   19-465
                             13)
                           4 (eff. 1-1-   19-480
                             07)
                           5 (eff. 1-1-   19-660
                             13)
                           6 (eff. 1-1-   19-200
                             13)
                           7 (eff. 1-1-   19-120
                             13) Rpld
                           8 (eff. 1-1-   19-462
                             13) Added
                           9 (eff. 1-1-   Reg.
                             13) Rpld       19-120.1
                           10 (eff. 1-1-  Reg.
                             13)            19-460.1
                           11 (eff. 1-1-  19-485
                             13) Added
                           12 (eff. 1-1-  Reg.
                             13)            19-270.1
                           13 (eff. 7-20- 19-445
                             11)
                           14 (eff. 9-21- 19-425
                             06)
                           15 (eff. 9-1-  19-450
                             04)
                           16 (eff. 10-1- 19-460
                             07)
                           17 (eff. 8-1-  19-700
                             14)
11188                  8-5-  2 (eff. 9-5-   3-82
                       14    14)
11198                  9-9-  1 (eff. 1-1-   19-39
                       14    15)
                           2 (eff. 1-1-   19-310
                             15)
                           3 (eff. 1-1-   19-310.1
                             15) Rpld
11203                  10-9- 1   Rpld    ch. 23A, art. III (23A-71 – 23A-100)
                       14
                                            ch. 23A, art. III (
                              Added    23A-71 –
                                            23A-91)
                           3   Rpld    ch. 23A, art. IV, div. 2 (23A-111 – 23A-
                                            136)
11204                  10-9- 1              4-12
                       14
11209                  11-5- 1              1-19
                       14
11219                  12-9- 1 (eff. 1-1-   19-300 –
                       14    15)            19-380
                             2 (eff. 1-1-   Reg.
                           15) Rpld       19-300.1 –
                                            19-360.2
                           3 (eff. 1-1-   19-480
                             15)
                           5 Rpld         19-1200 –
                                            19-1255
11220                  12-9- 1, 2           20-140 (note)
                       14
11221                  12-9- 1, 2           20-141 (note)
                       14
11222                  12-9- 1, 2           20-142 (note)
                       14
11223                  12-9- 1, 2           20-143 (note)
                       14
11224                  12-9- 1, 2           20-144 (note)
                       14
11225                  12-9- 1, 2           20-145 (note)
                       14
11226                  12-9- 1              10B-2
                       14
                           2              10B-3
                           3              10B-4
11227                  12-9- 1              11B-3
                       14
                           2              11B-4
11228                  12-9- 1 Added        2-45 –
                       14                   2-47
11232                  12-   1              10A-122
                       16-14
11233                  12-   1              10-31
                       16-14
11240                  2-4-  1              10-53.7
                       15
11243                  2-18- 1 (eff. 7-1-   22-34
                       15    15)
11245                  2-18- 1 Rpld         ch. 12 (12-1 – 12-110)
                       15
                                            ch. 12 (
                           2 Added        12-1 –
                                            12-175)
11266                  5-5-  1 Added        10A-250 –
                       15                   10A-255
11269                  5-19- 1 (eff. 7-6-   27-9
                       15    15)
                           2              27-63
                       5-19- 1 (eff. 7-1-   27-32.1,
11270                  15    15)            27-33,
                                            27-34
11272                  6-9-  1 (eff. 7-1-   15-1
                       15    15)
                           2 (eff. 7-1-   15-16.1
                             15)
                           3 (eff. 7-1-   15-31
                             15)
                           4 (eff. 7-1-   15-32.2
                             15)
                           5 (eff. 7-1-   15-33.2
                             15)
                             6 (eff. 7-1-   15-34.2,
                           15)            15-34.7,
                                            15-34.8
                           7 (eff. 7-1-   15-60
                             15)
                       6-9-
                       15
11273                  (eff. 1              10-31
                       6-28-
                       15)
                           2              10-31(7)
                                         10-31(8)
                                         10-33
                                         10-33.1
                                         10-34
                                         10-34.1
                                         10-35
                                         10-47
                                         10-48
                                         10-49
                                         10-52
                                         10-53
                                         10-53.1
                                         10-53.2
                                         10-53.3
                                         10-53.4
                                         10-53.5
                                         10-53.6
                                         10-53.7
                       6-23-
                       15
11280                  (eff. 1 Added        10-53.8
                       7-1-
                       15)
11291                  8-5-  3              10-31(8)
                       15
                           4 Rpld         10-53.6
11292 (repealed by     8-5-  1              22-95
11782)                 15
11295                  8-5-  1              20-221
                       15
                           2              20-246
                           3              20-271
11296                  8-5-  1              28-1
                       15
                                         28-2
                                         28-5
                                         28-11
                                         28-15 – 28-18
                           Rpld           28-20
                                         28-21 –
                                            28-27
                           Rpld           28-29, 28-30
                                         28-31
                                         28-33
                                         28-35,
                                            28-36
                           Rpld           28-39
                           Rpld           28-41
                                         28-42
                                         28-44,
                                            28-45
                                         28-47 –
                                            28-50
                                         28-62
                                         28-67 –
                                            28-70
                                         28-77
                                         28-79,
                                            28-80
                                         28-82 –
                                            28-84
                                         28-86 –
                                            28-90
                                         28-92 –
                                            28-94
                                         28-105
                                         28-114
                           Rpld           28-115, 28-116
                                         28-117
                                         28-126,
                                            28-127
                                         28-129
                                         28-138 –
                                            28-140
                                         28-142
                                         28-147 –
                                            28-154
                                         28-157
11297                  8-5-                20-2
                       15
11316                  11-4- 1 Added        12-5
                       15
                                            12-12,
                           2              12-25,
                                            12-26
                                            12-40 –
                           3              12-42,
                                            12-44,
                                            12-45
                           4              12-66,
                                            12-68
                                            12-81,
                           5              12-82,
                                            12-87,
                                            12-90
                                            12-112 –
                                            12-115,
                                            12-117,
                                            12-119,
                           6              12-121,
                                            12-126,
                                            12-127,
                                            12-130 –
                                            12-134
                           7              12-140 –
                                            12-142
Res. 22499             11-                 20-2
                       17-15
11324                  12-8- 1              20-203
                       15
                           2              20-210
                           3              20-221
                           4              20-225
                           5              20-246
                           6              20-271
11327                  12-8- 1              22-30
                       15
                           2, 3           22-33
                           4, 5           22-34
                           6, 7           22-36
                           8, 9           22-37
                           10, 11         22-39
                           12             22-40
                           13, 14         22-42
                           15             22-43.1
                           16             22-44
                           17             22-46
                           18             22-47
11328                  12-8- 10             4-56,
                       15                   4-59
11329                  12-   1              3-11
                       15-15
                                         3-53
                                         3-71
                                         3-77
                                         3-78
                                         3-80
                                         3-82
                                         3-96
11331                  12-8- 1 Rpld         11-160–11-160.3
                       15
                           2              11-33.1,
                                            11-36
                           3              16-35
                                            21-2–
                           4              21-4,
                                            21-8
                           5              25-51
11333                  1-5-  1              3-33, 3-83
                       16
11335                  1-5-  1              8-2.1
                       16
                       4-5-
                       16
11349                  (eff. 1              22-34
                       7-1-
                       16)
11354                  5-3-  1   Added   10A-41–
                       16                   10A-45
11355                  5-3-  1              10A-77
                       16
                       5-17-
                       16
                       (eff.                27-32.1,
11361                  7-5-  1              27-33,
                       16,                  27-34
                       7-3-
                       17)
                                          
                                          
                                          
                                          
                       6-7-
                       16
11364                  (eff. 1              22-82
                       6-26-
                       16)
                           2              22-85
                           3              22-86
                           4-5            22-90
                       6-7-
                       16
11367                  (eff.                
                       7-1-
                       16)
                       6-7-
                       16
11369                  (eff.                
                       7-1-
                       16)
                       6-7-
                       16
11373                  (eff. 1              10-31
                       6-26-
                       16)
                           2              10-31(7)
                                         10-31(8)
                                         10-33
                                         10-33.1
                                         10-34
                                         10-34.1
                                         10-35
                                         10-47
                                         10-48
                                         10-49
                                         10-52
                                         10-53
                                         10-53.1
                                         10-53.2
                                         10-53.3
                                         10-53.4
                                         10-53.5
                                         10-53.6
                                         10-53.7
                                         10-53.8
                           3              10-34
                           4              10-48
11375                  6-21- 1              23A-90,
                       16                   23A-91
11376                  6-21- 1              4-99
                       16
11377                  6-21- 1              15-1
                       16
                           2              15-32.4
                           3              Added
                                            15-32.7
                                            15-33,
                           4              15-33.1,
                                            15-33.2
                           5              15-34.7
                           6              15-36
11387                  7-6-  1              11-39
                       16
11392                  8-9-  1              3-121–3-140
                       16
                       8-9-
                       16
11393                  (eff. 1              13-3
                       9-1-
                       16)
                           3              8-6.1
                                            14-3–
11395                  8-9-  1              14-15,
                       16                   14-18–
                                            14-22
11396                  8-9-  1              26-1
                       16
                                         26-1.1
                                         26-1.2
                                         26-1.3
                           Added          26-1.4
                                         26-2
                                         26-3
                                         26-3.1
                                         26-4
                                         26-4.1
                                         26-5.1
                                         26-5.2
                                         26-8
                                         26-9
                                         26-10
                                         26-11.1
                                         26-11.2
                                         26-11.3
                                         26-11.4
                                         26-12
                           Added          26-13
                                         26-14
                                         26-15
                                         26-16
                                         26-17
                                         26-18
11398                  9-7-  1              10-48
                       16
11399                  9-20- 1              19-53
                       16
11400                  9-20- 1              10A-145–
                       16                   10A-148
                                         10A-150
                                         10A-151
                           2              20-7
                           3              20-200
                                         20-203
                                         20-220
                                         20-222
                                         20-223
                                         20-226
                                         20-226.1
                                         20-227
                                         20-230–
                                            20-230.2
                                         20-230.12
                                         20-249
                                         20-258
                                         20-259
                                         20-262
                                         20-309
                           4              30-3
11401                  9-20- 1              2-18
                       16
                                         2-19
                                         2-22
                       11-9-
                       2016
11407                  (eff. 1              10-31
                       11-
                       27-
                       2016)
                       11-
11413                  22-   1              21-4
                       2016
11415                  12-6- 1              22-91
                       16
11420 (repealed by     12-   1   Added   20-138.1,
Ord. No. 11924)        20-16                20-138.2
11429                  1-24- 1              10-31
                       17
11430                  1-24- 1              22-34
                       17
11442                  3-21- 2   Rpld    20-160
                       17
                       (eff.
                      5-1-  3   Added   20-160
                       17)
11443                  3-21- 1              11-30,
                       17                   11-30.1
11445                  3-21- 1              16-32
                       17
11452                  4-19- 1   Added   20-161
                       17
                           2              20-12
11454                  4-19- 1              2-18
                       17
11457                  4-19- 1   Rpld    12-1–12-175
                       17
                           2   Added   12-1–
                                            12-191
11460                  5-23- 1              Ch. 11, Art. II, title
                       17
                       (eff.
                      7-1-  2   Added   11-73
                       17)
11464                  6-6-  1              10-31
                       17
                           2              10-31(7)
                                         10-31(8)
                                         10-33
                                         10-33.1
                                         10-34
                                         10-34.1
                                         10-35
                                         10-47
                                         10-48
                                         10-49
                                         10-52
                                         10-53
                                         10-53.1
                                         10-53.2
                                         10-53.3
                                         10-53.4
                                         10-53.5
                                         10-53.7
                       6-20-
                       17
11469                  (eff. 1              22-90
                       7-1-
                       17)
11471                  6-20- 1              23A-90,
                       17                   23A-91
                       6-20-
                       17                   19-1,
11472                  (eff. 1              19-66
                       9-1-
                       17)
                       8-8-
                       17
11478                  (eff. 1              6-34
                       9-7-
                       17)
                                            19-410,
                                            19-415–
                                            19-417,
                                            19-425,
                                            19-427,
                                            19-430,
                       8-8-                 19-435,
11479                  17    1              19-445,
                                            19-450,
                                            19-455,
                                            19-460,
                                            19-470,
                                            19-475,
                                            19-480,
                                            19-610
                       8-8-
                       17
11483                  (eff. 1              22-90
                       9-1-
                       17)
11485                  8-8-  1              Ch. 19, Art. II
                       17
                                         21-51
11488                  9-6-  1   Rpld    2-142
                       17
                           2              Ch. 2, Art. IX, title
                       9-19-
                       17
11492                  (eff. 1              19-53
                       10-1-
                       17)
11496                  10-   3   Rpld    Ch. 10A, Art. X, XX
                       24-17
                           4   Added   Ch. 10A, Art. XX
11498                  10-   1              20-255
                       24-17
11508                  12-5- 2 (eff. 2-1-   Ch. 3
                       17    18)   Rpld
                           9 (eff. 2-1-   Ch. 2 (note)
                             18)
                           10 (eff. 1-4-  10A-134
                             18)
                           11 (eff. 1-4-  11B-3
                             18)
11509                  12-   2   Rpld    10A-200–10A-204
                       19-17
11511                  12-   1              10-31
                       19-17
11512                  12-   1   Rpld    9-1–9-3
                       19-17
                           2   Added   9-1–
                                            9-3
11513                  12-   1              20-210
                       19-17
11515                  12-   1              22-37
                       19-17
                                            19-410,
                                            19-415–
                                            19-417,
                                            19-425,
                                            19-427,
                       1-23-                19-430,
                       18                   19-435,
11518                  (eff. 1              19-445,
                       2-1-                 19-450,
                       18)                  19-455,
                                            19-460,
                                            19-470,
                                            19-475,
                                            19-480,
                                            19-610
                           2   Added   Ch. 21, Art. V
11519                  1-23- 1              15-32.4
                       18
11520                  1-23- 1 (eff. 2-1-   20-160
                       18    18)
11524                  2-6-  1              12A-1–
                       18                   12A-8
11525                  2-21- 1   Rpld    12-1–12-191
                       18
                           2   Added   12-1–
                                            12-191
11527                  2-21- 1, 2           20-140 (note)
                       18
11528                  2-21- 1, 2           20-141 (note)
                       18
11529                  2-21- 1 (eff. 7-1-   22-34
                       18    18)
11534                  3-20- 1   Added   22-97
                       18
11535                  3-20- 1              10-31
                       18
                       4-3-                 10A-87 -
11537                  18    2              10A-93,
                                            10A-95
11542                  4-17- 1              10-31
                       18
11544                  5-8-  1              10A-26
                       18
                       5-22-
                       18
11550                  (eff. 1              19-66
                       8-1-
                       18)
                       5-22-                27-32.1,
11551                  18    1              27-33,
                                            27-34
11556                  6-5-  1              13-3
                       18
11558                  6-5-  1              10-31
                       18
                           2              10-31(7)
                                         10-31(8)
                                         10-33
                                         10-33.1
                                         10-34
                                         10-34.1
                                         10-35
                                         10-47
                                         10-48
                                         10-49
                                         10-52
                                         10-53
                                         10-53.1
                                         10-53.2
                                         10-53.3
                                         10-53.4
                                         10-53.5
                                         10-53.7
11565                  6-19- 1              23A-90,
                       18                   23A-91
11576                  8-8-  1              2-18
                       18
11582                  9-5-  1              5-2
                       18
                           2              5-4
                                         5-5
                                         5-6
                           3   Added   5-12–
                                            5-14
11583                  9-5-  2   Added   5-15–
                       18                   5-23
11590                  10-9- 1 (eff. 1-1-   6-34
                       18    19)
                           2 (eff. 1-1-   6-38
                             19)
                           3 (eff. 1-1-   6-40
                             19)
                           4 (eff. 1-1-   6-66
                             19)
                           5 (eff. 1-1-   6-84
                             19)
                           6 (eff. 1-1-   6-124
                             19)
                           7 (eff. 1-1-   6-164
                             19)
                           8 (eff. 1-1-   6-167
                             19)
                           9 (eff. 1-1-   6-191
                             19)   Added
                           10 (eff. 1-1-  6-192
                             19)   Added
                           11 (eff. 1-1-  6-193
                             19)   Added
11595                  10-   1              22-30
                       23-18
                           2              22-33
                           3, 4           22-37
                           5              22-40
                           6              22-42
                           7              22-90
11596                  10-   1              15-34.8
                       23-18
11598                  11-   1              2-1
                       14-18
11599                  12-4- 1              10A-134
                       18
11604                  12-4- 2              20-140 (note)
                       18
11605                  12-4- 2              20-141 (note)
                       18
11606                  12-4- 2              20-179
                       18
11607                  12-4- 1              10A-134
                       18
11611                  12-   1              10-31
                       18-18
                                         10-31(7)
                                         10-31(8)
                           3              10-33
                                         10-33.1
                                         10-34
                                         10-34.1
                                         10-35
                                         10-47
                                         10-48
                                         10-49
                                         10-52
                                         10-53
                                         10-53.1
                                         10-53.2
                                         10-53.3
                                         10-53.4
                                         10-53.5
                                         10-53.7
                       2-20-
                       19
11624                  (eff. 1              23A-81
                       3-22-
                       19)
11626                  2-20-               8-2.1,
                       19                   8-2.2
11628                  3-5-  1              22-79
                       19
                           2              22-80
                           3   Added   22-81
                           4   Added   22-82
                           5   Added   22-83
                           6   Added   22-84
                           7   Added   22-85
                           8   Added   22-86
                           9   Added   22-87
                           10   Rnbd   22-86 as
                                            22-88
11632                  3-19- 1              23A-90,
                       19                   23A-91
11642                  4-23- 1              Added
                       19                   22-98
11649                  5-21- 1              10A-251
                       19
11653                  5-21- 1              8-2.5
                       19
11659                  6-18- 1              10-31
                       19
                           2              10-31(7)
                                         10-31(8)
                                         10-33
                                         10-33.1
                                         10-34
                                         10-34.1
                                         10-35
                                         10-47
                                         10-48
                                         10-49
                                         10-52
                                         10-53
                                         10-53.1
                                         10-53.2
                                         10-53.3
                                         10-53.4
                                         10-53.5
                                         10-53.7
11675                  8-6-  2   Rpld    10A-240 – 10A-244
                       19
                           3   Added   10A-240 –
                                            10A-247
11678                  9-4-  2              20-140 (note)
                       19
11679                  9-4-  2              20-141 (note)
                       19
11692                  10-   2              20-140 (note)
                       10-19
11693                  10-   2              20-141 (note)
                       10-19
11694                  10-   2              20-142 (note)
                       10-19
11695                  10-   2              20-143 (note)
                       10-19
11696                  10-   2              20-144 (note)
                       10-19
11697                  10-   2              20-145 (note)
                       10-19
                       10-
                       22-19                Rpld
11703                  (eff. 1              7-426 – 7-437
                       1-1-
                       20)
                                            Added
                           2              7-426 –
                                            7-434
                           3              11-89
                       11-6-
                       19
11709                  (eff. 1              Added
                       10-                  10-53.9
                       17-
                       19)
11717                  12-   1              23A-90,
                       17-19                23A-91
11720                  1-7-  1              7-428
                       20
11725                  2-4-  1              10A-147
                       20
11726                  2-4-  1    Added  27-55
                       20
11728                  2-19- 2              20-179
                       20
11733                  3-3-  1              14-4
                       20
11734                  3-3-  1, 2           20-141 (note)
                       20
11735                  3-3-  1, 2           20-142 (note)
                       20
11736                  3-3-  1, 2           20-143 (note)
                       20
11737                  3-3-  1, 2           20-144 (note)
                       20
11738                  3-3-  2              20-179
                       20
11741                  3-17- 1              Added
                       20                   7-505
                       4-14-
                       20
11743                  (eff. 1              22-44
                       7-1-
                       20)
11746                  4-21- 1    Added  11-70.3, 11-70.4
                       20
                       5-5-
                       20
11749                  (eff. 1              21-8
                       6-4-
                       20)
                       5-19-
                       20
11752                  (eff. 1              22-34
                       7-1-
                       20)
11753                  5-19- 1              10A-242
                       20
                       6-9-
                       20
11756                  (eff. 1   Rpld    2-25, 2-25.1
                       7-9-
                       20)
                                Added    2-25 –
                                            2-25.6
                       6-9-
                       20                   23A-73,
                       (eff.                23A-81,
11759                  7-1-  1              23A-90,
                       21,                  23A-91
                       8-23-
                       20)
11761                  6-30- 1              10-31
                       20
                             2              10-31(7)
                                            10-31(8)
                                            10-33
                                            10-33.1
                                            10-34
                                            10-34.1
                                            10-35
                                            10-47
                                            10-48
                                            10-49
                                            10-52
                                            10-53
                                            10-53.1
                                            10-53.2
                                            10-53.3
                                            10-53.4
                                            10-53.5
                                            10-53.7
                                            10-53.9
11765                  6-30- 1              11-70.3, 11-70.4
                       20
11769                  7-7-  3     Added 10A-110 –
                       20                   10A-117
11770                  7-7-  2   Rpld    11-70.3, 11-70.4
                       20
11779                  9-9-  1              5-15–
                       20                   5-23
11780                  9-9-  1    Added  10-41
                       20
11782                  9-22- 2              Rpld 22-95
                       20
                       9-22-                Note
11785                  20    2              10A-42,
                                            10A-45
11787                  10-6- 1   Added   7-510 –
                       20                   7-513
11794                  10-   1              27-114
                       20-20
11795                  10-   1              22-34
                       20-20
                             2              22-36
                             3, 4           22-90
11800                  11-   1, 2           10-31
                       17-20
                                            26-2,
                                            26-5.2,
                                            26-7.1,
11801                  12-8- 1              26-8,
                       20                   26-10,
                                            26-12,
                                            26-13,
                                            26-42
11810                  12-8- 1              1-19
                       20
11812                  1-20- 1              27-53
                       21
11813                  1-20- 1              12-83
                       21
11817                  2-23- 1, 2           10-31
                       21
11818                  2-23- 1, 2           10-31
                       21
11821                  3-9-  1              20-161
                       21
11826                  3-9-  1              16-11
                       21
11829                  4-20- 1              17-11
                       21
11831                  4-20- 1              27-53
                       21
11832                  5-4-  2              18-1 –
                       21                   18-12
11833                  5-4-  1              23A-90,
                       21                   23A-91
11837                  6-8-  1              22-34
                       21
                       6-22-
                       21
11844                  (eff. 1, 2           6-38
                       7-22-
                       21)
                       6-22-
11846 (repealed and    21
superseded by 11881)   (eff. 1              27-33
                       12-1-
                       21)
11848                  6-22- 1              10-31
                       21
                             2              10-31(7)
                                            10-31(8)
                                            10-33
                                            10-33.1
                                            10-34.1
                                            10-41
                                            10-47
                                            10-48
                                            10-49
                                            10-52
                                            10-53
                                            10-53.1
                                            10-53.2
                                            10-53.3
                                            10-53.5
                                            10-53.7
                                            10-53.8
                                            10-53.9
                             3              10-34
                             4              10-35
                             6   Rpld    10-53.4
11851                  7-7-  1              10A-112
                       21
11858                  8-10- 1              10-47
                       21
11859                  8-10- 2              20-140 (note)
                       21
11861                  8-10- 2              20-141 (note)
                       21
11862                  8-10- 2              20-143 (note)
                       21
11863                  8-10- 2              20-144 (note)
                       21
11868                  8-10-                8-1,
                       21                   8-8
                                Added    17-80 -
                                            17-88
11875                  9-14- 1              10A-242,
                       21                   10A-247
11878                  10-5- 1              22-91
                       21
11881                  10-   1              27-32,
                       19-21                27-33
11883                  11-9- 1-2            10-31
                       21
11887                  12-7- 2              20-179
                       21
11903                  1-25- 1              28-157
                       22
11910                  2-23- 1-2            10-31
                       22
                             3              10-33
                                            10-33.1
                                            10-34
                                            10-34.1
                                            10-35
                                            10-41
                                            10-47
                                            10-48
                                            10-49
                                            10-52
                                            10-53
                                            10-53.1
                                            10-53.2
                                            10-53.3
                                            10-53.5
                                            10-53.7
                                            10-53.8
                                            10-53.9
11911                  2-23- 1              22-90
                       22
                                            22-94
11912                  2-23- 1              10-33.1
                       22
11914                  2-23- 3              10A-243,
                       22                   10A-247
11919                  3-22- 1              23A-81
                       22
11924                  5-3-                 20-138.1,
(repealed by Ord. No.  22    2              20-138.2
12007)
11925                  5-3-  1              1-19
                       22
11927                  5-3-  1              22-34
                       22
11935                  6-7-  1              10-31
                       22
                           2              10-31
                                         10-33
                                         10-33.1
                                         10-34
                                         10-34.1
                                         10-35
                                         10-41
                                         10-47
                                         10-48
                                         10-49
                                         10-52
                                         10-53
                                         10-53.1
                                         10-53.2
                                         10-53.3
                                         10-53.5
                                         10-53.7
                                         10-53.8
                                         10-53.9
11936                  7-12- 1   Added   19-80
                       22
                           2              19-110
                           3              19-410
                           4              19-415
                           5   Added   19-415.1
                           6              19-416
                           7   Added   19-416.1
                           8   Added   19-416.2
                           9              19-445
                           10             19-450
                           11             19-455
                           12             19-462
                           13             19-465
                           14             19-470
                           15             19-475
                           16             19-530
                           17             19-660
                                            R-19-416.1,
                           18   Rpld   R-19-416.2,
                                            R-19-470.1
11937                  7-12- 1   Added   22-56 –
                       22                   22-65
11938                  7-12- 2              20-179
                       22
11946                  7-12- 1              10A-112,
                       22                   10A-117
11950                  8-9-  1              10A-44
                       22
11952                  8-9-  1              10-53.9
                       22
11958                  9-27- 1              10A-42 (note)
                       22
                           2              10A-45 (note)
11959                  9-27- 1              17-1
                       22
                           2              17-50
                           3              17-52
11966                  11-   1              22-91
                       14-22
11967                  11-   1              22-90
                       14-22
11968                  11-   1              22-90
                       14-22
11969                  11-   1              10-33.1
                       14-22
11970                  11-   1              10-34.1
                       14-22
                              Added    10-34.2 -
                                            10-34.5
11972                  12-6- 1              10-53.8
                       22
                           2              10-53.9
                           3   Added   10-53.10,
                                            10-53.11
11973                  12-6- 2              10-31
                       22
11973                  12-6- 2              10-31
                       22
11979                  12-   1              1-19
                       20-22
                                            27-31,
11982                  1-11- 1              27-32.1,
                       23                   27-33,
                                            27-34
11983                  1-11- 2 (eff.1-1-24) 15-32.5
                       23
                           3 (eff. 2-13-  15-33.2
                             23)
                           4 (eff. 2-13-  15-34.7,
                             23)            15.34.8
11993                  3-7-  1              27-31,
                       23                   27-32
11995                  3-21- 1              10-4
                       23
                           2   Added   10-5
12000                  4-4-  1, 2           20-140 (note)
                       23
Res. 23599             4-18- 1, 2           ch. 7 (note)
                       23
12003                  5-23- 1              18-9
                       23
12007                  6-6-  2              20-138.1,
                       23                   20-138.2
12009                  6-6-  1 (eff. 7-6-   6-124
                       23    23)
                           2 (eff. 7-6-   6-38
                             23)
12012                  6-6-  1 (eff. 7-2-   10-31
                       23    23)
                           2 (eff. 7-2-   10-31(8), (9)
                             23)
                                         10-33
                                         10-33.1
                                         10-34
                                         10-34.1
                                         10-34.2
                                         10-34.3
                                         10-34.4
                                         10-34.5
                                         10-35
                                         10-41
                                         10-47
                                         10-48
                                         10-49
                                         10-52
                                         10-53
12019                  7-18- 2              20-179
                       23
12021                  8-8-  1              10-34.1
                       23
12023                  8-8-  3   Added   10A-50 -
                       23                   10A-56
12024                  8-8-  1   Added �10A-140
                       23
12030                  8-22- 1              20-9
                       23
12045                  10-3- 1              14-5
                       23
12051                  10-   1              10A-51
                       17-23
                       10-                  27-31,
12052                  17-23 1              27-32.1 -
                                            27-34
12055                  11-   1   Added   7-514 -
                       14-23                7-528
12057                  11-   4              7-427
                       14-23
12057                  11-   4   Added   7-435,
                       14-23                7-436
12058                  11-   1   Added   1-21
                       14-23
12060                  11-   5              7-26
                       28-23
12062                  12-   1 (eff. 12-18- 10-31
                       12-23 23)
12063                  12-   1              21-51
                       12-23
12066                  1-9-  1              28-163 -
                       24                   28-168
                           2              28-100
12069                  1-23- 2              14-1 -
                       24                   14-22
12074                  2-21- 1              10-31(7),
                       24                   10-35
12080                  4-25- 1              22-90
                       24
12081                  5-7-  1              1-19
                       24
12087                  5-21- 1, 2           20-140
                       21
12088                  5-21- 1, 2           20-141
                       24
12089                  5-21- 1, 2           20-142
                       24
12090                  5-21- 1, 2           20-143
                       24
12099                  6-4-  1, 2           7-514,
                       24                   7-525
12100                  6-4-  1              28-160 -
                       24                   28-162
12101                  6-4-  1 (eff. 6-30-  10-31(7)
                       24    24)
                                            10-31(7),
                                            10-31(8),
                                            10-31(9),
                                            10-33,
                                            10-33.1,
                                            10-34,
                                            10-34.1,
                                            10-34.2,
                                            10-34.3,
                                            10-34.4,
                                            10-34.5,
                             2 (eff. 6-30-  10-35,
                           24)            10-41,
                                            10-47,
                                            10-48,
                                            10-49,
                                            10-52,
                                            10-53,
                                            10-53.1,
                                            10-53.2,
                                            10-53.3,
                                            10-53.5,
                                            10-53.7,
                                            10-53.8,
                                            10-53.9
                           3 (eff. 6-30-  10-31(7)
                             24)
                                            25-4,
                       6-18-                25-18,
12108                  24    2              25-31,
                                            25-57.1,
                                            25-91
                                            8-2.2 -
                                            8-2.5,
                       8-7-                 8-4,
12110                  24    1              8-4.1,
                                            8-6.1,
                                            8-6.4,
                                            8-7
12114                  8-7-  1              21-2
                       24
                           2              21-4
                           3              21-9
                           4              21-10
                           5              21-11
                           6              21-12
                           7              21-13
                           8              21-13.1
                           9              21-13.2
                           10             21-14
                           11             21-14.1
                           12             Rpld 21-14.2
                           13             21-14.3
                           14             21-15
                           15             21-16
                           16             21-18.1
                           17             21-22
                           18             21-23
                           19             21-23.1
                           20             21-25.1
                           21             25.2
                           22             Rpld 21-25.3, 21-25.4, 21-25.6, 21- 25.9
12115                  8-27- 1              13-3
                       24
                           3              8-6.1
12119                  8-27- 6              10A-44
                       24
12133                  11-7- 1 (eff. 12-8-  7-427
                       24    24)
                           2 (eff. 12-8-  Added
                             24)            7-437
12137                  12-   1              27-32,
                       10-24                27-33
12143                  2-4-  1              10A-113
                       25
12144                  2-4-  1              21-1
                       25
12145                  2-19- 1              22-91
                       25
12148                  3-18- 1              10A-134
                       25
12149                  3-18- 1              20-500 -
                       25                   20-502
12161                  5-6-  1, 2           20-140
                       25
12162                  5-6-  1, 2           20-141
                       25
12163                  5-6-  1, 2           20-142
                       25
12164                  5-6-  1, 2           20-143
                       25
12169                  6-3-  1              23A-90,
                       25                   23A-91
12171                  6-3-  1 (eff. 1-1-   6-34
                       25    26)
                           2 (eff. 1-1-   6-38
                             26)
                           3 (eff. 1-1-   6-66
                             26)
                           4 (eff. 1-1-   6-84
                             26)
                           5 (eff. 1-1-   6-124
                             26)
                           6 (eff. 1-1-   6-164
                             26)
                           7 (eff. 1-1-   6-167
                             26)
                           8 (eff. 1-1-   6-191
                             26)
                                            10-31(7),
                                            10-31(8),
                                            10-31(9),
                                            10-33,
                                            10-33.1,
                                            10-34,
                                            10-34.1,
                                            10-34.2,
                                            10-34.3,
                                            10-34.4,
                                            10-34.5,
                       6-3-  2 (eff. 7-1-   10-35,
12173                  25    25)            10-41,
                                            10-47,
                                            10-48,
                                            10-49,
                                            10-52,
                                            10-53,
                                            10-53.1,
                                            10-53.2,
                                            10-53.3,
                                            10-53.5,
                                            10-53.7,
                                            10-53.8,
                                            10-53.9
                                         10-31(7)
12175                  6-17- 1              28-47
                       25
12178                  6-17- 1              27-32 -
                       25                   27-33
12179                  6-17- 1              27-33
                       25
12180                  6-17- 3              27
                       25
12181                  6-17- 1              21-1
                       25
                           2              21-3
12182                  6-17- 1   Added   11-51
                       25
12188                  8-19- 3   Added   27-20,
                       25                   27-21
12191                  9-23- 2              20-179
                       25
12192                  9-23- 1              10-31
                       25
12196                  10-   1              7-29
                       21-25
                           2              7-30
                           3              20-248.1
12213                  12-   1 (eff. 1-1-   6-34
                       16-25 26)
                           2 (eff. 1-1-   6-38
                             26)
                                          
 
 
TUCSON, AZ
UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE
Unified Development Code
Chapter 23B of the Tucson Code
Adopted – October 9, 2012
Effective – January 2, 2013
Last Revision — June 4, 2025
 
Administrative Manual
Supplement to the Unified Development Code
Adopted – October 9, 2012
Effective – January 2, 2013
Last Revision — June 4, 2025
 
Technical Standards Manual
Supplement to the Unified Development Code
Adopted – October 9, 2012
Effective – January 2, 2013
Last Revision — June 4, 2025
UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-17.jpg]
 
Chapter 23B of the Tucson Code
Adopted – October 9, 2012
Effective – January 2, 2013
Last Revision — June 4, 2025
ARTICLE 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
1.1   TITLE AND EFFECTIVE DATE
1.2   AUTHORITY
1.3   PURPOSE OF THIS CODE
1.4   APPLICABILITY AND JURISDICTION
1.5   DETERMINATIONS OF THE UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE
1.6   CONFLICTING PROVISIONS
1.7   TRANSITIONAL REGULATIONS
1.8   SEVERABILITY
ARTICLE 2: REVIEW AUTHORITIES AND POWERS
2.1   PURPOSE OF ARTICLE
2.2   REVIEW AND DECISION-MAKING BODIES
ARTICLE 3: GENERAL PROCEDURES
3.1   PURPOSE OF ARTICLE
3.2   GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
3.3   ZONING COMPLIANCE REVIEW PROCEDURES
3.4   SPECIAL EXCEPTION LAND USES
3.5   REZONING (CHANGE OF ZONING)
3.6   LAND USE PLAN ADOPTION AND AMENDMENT PROCEDURES
3.7   UDC TEXT AMENDMENT PROCEDURE
3.8   LAND DIVISION AND SUBDIVISION
3.9   APPEALS
3.10   BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT APPEALS AND VARIANCES
3.11   ADMINISTRATIVE MODIFICATIONS
3.12   MISCELLANEOUS PERMITS AND APPROVALS
ARTICLE 4: ZONES
4.1   PURPOSE
4.2   ESTABLISHMENT OF BOUNDARIES
4.3   CATEGORIES OF LAND USES
4.4   ORGANIZATION OF LAND USES
4.5   MORE RESTRICTIVE ZONING
4.6   ZONING OF LAND ANNEXED INTO THE CITY OF TUCSON
4.7   ZONES - PURPOSE
4.8   USE TABLES
4.9   USE-SPECIFIC STANDARDS
4.10   ACCESSORY USES , BUILDINGS , AND STRUCTURES
4.11   TEMPORARY USE OR BUILDING
ARTICLE 5: OVERLAY ZONES
5.1   PURPOSE OF OVERLAY ZONES
5.2   HILLSIDE DEVELOPMENT ZONE
5.3   SCENIC CORRIDOR ZONE
5.4   MAJOR STREETS AND ROUTES  SETBACK  ZONE
5.5   GATEWAY CORRIDOR ZONE
5.6   AIRPORT ENVIRONS ZONE
5.7   ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCE ZONE
5.8   “H” HISTORIC PRESERVATION ZONE AND “HL” HISTORIC LANDMARK
5.9   DRACHMAN SCHOOL OVERLAY ZONE
5.10   NEIGHBORHOOD PRESERVATION ZONE
5.11   COMMUNITY CORRIDORS TOOL
5.12   DOWNTOWN AREA INFILL INCENTIVE DISTRICT
5.13   URBAN OVERLAY DISTRICT
ARTICLE 6: DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS AND MEASUREMENTS
6.1   PURPOSE
6.2   APPLICABILITY
6.3   DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
6.4   RULES OF MEASUREMENT AND EXCEPTIONS TO DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
6.5   PRINCIPAL LAND USE
6.6   ACCESSORY USES , BUILDINGS , AND STRUCTURES
ARTICLE 7: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
7.1   PURPOSE
7.2   APPLICABILITY
7.3   SOLAR CONSIDERATIONS
7.4   MOTOR VEHICLE AND BICYCLE PARKING
7.5   OFF-STREET LOADING
7.6   LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING
7.7   NATIVE PLANT PRESERVATION
7.8   ACCESS
7.9   STREETS
7.10   ALLEYS
7.11   DETENTION AND RETENTION BASINS
7.12   EASEMENTS REQUIRED
7.13   EXCAVATING AND GRADING
7.14   HYDROLOGY
7.15   SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLE DISPOSAL, COLLECTION, AND STORAGE
7.16   UTILITIES
ARTICLE 7A: SIGN STANDARDS
7A.1   PURPOSE, INTENT, AND APPLICABILITY
7A.2   INTERPRETATION, SEVERABILITY, AND NON-COMMERCIAL SPEECH SUBSTITUTION
7A.3   DEFINITIONS
7A.4   PERMITS, INSPECTIONS, AND FEES
7A.5   VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT, PENALTIES
7A.6   MEASUREMENTS, LOCATION, AND GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
7A.7   SIGN DESIGN OPTIONS
7A.8   EXEMPT AND PROHIBITED SIGNS
7A.9   NONCONFORMING SIGNS AND CHANGE OF USE
7A.10   SIGN TYPES AND GENERAL STANDARDS
7A.11   SPECIAL DISTRICTS
7A.12   APPEALS AND VARIANCES
7A.13   SIGN DESIGN REVIEW COMMITTEE
ARTICLE 8: LAND DIVISION, LAND SPLIT , AND SUBDIVISION STANDARDS
8.1   PURPOSE
8.2   APPLICABILITY
8.3   LAND DIVISION
8.4   SUBDIVISIONS
8.5   EXPIRATION DATES
8.6   GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR SUBDIVISIONS
8.7   SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS
ARTICLE 9: NONCONFORMING USES , BUILDINGS , AND STRUCTURES
9.1   GENERAL
9.2   NONCONFORMING USE
9.3   NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE
ARTICLE 10: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
10.1   PURPOSE
10.2   ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY
10.3   VIOLATIONS
10.4   PENALTIES AND REMEDIES
ARTICLE 11: DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
11.1   ARTICLE ORGANIZATION
11.2   GENERAL RULES FOR CONSTRUCTION OF LANGUAGE
11.3   DEFINITIONS OF LAND USE GROUPS, CLASSES, AND TYPES
11.4   OTHER TERMS DEFINED
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Ordinances
ARTICLE 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
1.1.   TITLE AND EFFECTIVE DATE
1.2.   AUTHORITY
1.3.   PURPOSE OF THIS CODE
1.4.   APPLICABILITY AND JURISDICTION
   
1.4.1.   General Applicability and Compliance
   
1.4.2.   Zoning Maps
1.5.   DETERMINATIONS OF THE UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE (UDC)
   
1.5.1.   Zoning Determinations and Zoning Certifications by the Zoning
Administrator
   
1.5.2.   Determinations of Graphics and Captions
   
1.5.3.   References to Other Codes and Laws
   
1.5.4.   Terms
1.6.   CONFLICTING PROVISIONS
   
1.6.1.   Conflict with Ordinances, Regulations, or Permits
   
1.6.2.   Effect on Other Provisions
   
1.6.3.   No Relief from Other Provisions
1.7.   TRANSITIONAL REGULATIONS
   
1.7.1.   Purpose
   
1.7.2.   Violations Continue
   
1.7.3.   Nonconforming Uses , Structures , and Lots
   
1.7.4.   Applications Commenced or Approved Under Previous Ordinances
1.8.   SEVERABILITY
1.1.   TITLE AND EFFECTIVE DATE
   This ordinance is enacted as Chapter 23B of the Tucson Code and may be cited
as the “Unified Development Code ” or “UDC ” of the City of Tucson.
(Am. Ord. 11070, 5/14/2013)
1.2.   AUTHORITY
   This UDC is adopted pursuant to the powers granted by the Arizona Revised
Statutes (A.R.S.).
1.3.   PURPOSE OF THIS CODE
   The provisions of the UDC are established to protect and promote the general
health, safety, and welfare of all present and future residents of Tucson and
more specifically:
•   To implement the General Plan ;
•   To guide new growth and redevelopment of the community in accordance with
the policies of the General Plan ;
•   To encourage the most efficient use of land through site sensitive design;
•   To reduce potential hazards to the public that may result from incompatible
land uses or from the development of environmentally hazardous or sensitive
lands;
•   To protect and enhance the City ’s natural, cultural, historical, and
scenic resources; and,
•   To promote the economic stability of the community.
1.4.   APPLICABILITY AND JURISDICTION
1.4.1.   GENERAL APPLICABILITY AND COMPLIANCE
   A.   The provisions of the UDC apply to all development and uses of land
within the City .
   B.   Land shall not be divided into two or more parcels , except as allowed
in accordance with Section
8.2, Land Division and Subdivision Standards, or be used or occupied, no site
modification or construction started, and no existing use or structure
expanded, reconstructed, changed, or otherwise altered until compliance with
the provisions of the UDC  have been certified.
   C.   The Planning and Development Services Department shall not issue
approvals or permits for, nor shall any person commence excavation , grubbing,
grading , paving, demolition, or construction of any sort before compliance
with UDC standards has been certified.
   D.   All provisions of the UDC shall be consistent with, and conform to, the
General Plan and other related plans and policies adopted by the Mayor and
Council.
   E.   The certification of zoning compliance as provided in Section
1.5.1.B, Zoning Determinations and Zoning Certifications, shall consist of the
certification that proposed development  and construction are in conformance
with the UDC  prior to final development  approval.
   F.   The Administrative and Technical Standards Manuals are companion
documents to the UDC and provide additional criteria, standards, and
requirements that support the implementation of the UDC .
1.4.2.   ZONING MAPS
   A.   Title
   A set of maps depicting all zoning boundaries within the City of Tucson is
established and entitled “City of Tucson Zoning Maps .”
   B.   Purpose
   The City is divided into zoning districts , and the establishment of the
zoning maps is for the purpose of graphically indicating the locations of all
land use zoning boundaries within the corporate limits of the City , and
facilitating the application of the UDC on each individual piece of property.
   C.   Applicability
   The City of Tucson Zoning Maps , as part of the UDC , depict the land use
regulations applicable on each individual property within the City limits by
identifying the zoning classification that applies on each property. Maps are
added to the set upon the adoption of original City zoning for land annexed
into the City .
   D.   Determination of Zoning Boundaries
   Zoning boundary lines are intended to follow lot lines to the centerlines of
streets , alleys, railroad rights-of-way , or extensions of such rights-of-way
, except where referenced to a street line or other designated line. (See
Figure 1.4-1.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2968.jpg]
 
Figure 1.4-1: Determination of Zoning Boundaries
   E.   Zoning Boundaries Dividing a Lot
   On any lot that was under single ownership and of record on September 20,
1948, and divided by a zoning boundary into two or more separate zoning
categories, the permitted uses and accessory uses allowed in one zone may
encroach 25 feet into the other zone if such zone is more restrictive and the
encroaching use is not permitted in the more restrictive zone . (See
Figure 1.4-2.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2970.jpg]
Figure 1.4-2: Zoning Boundaries Dividing a Lot
   F.   Zoning Boundary Conflict
   If any question arises concerning the location of a land use zoning
boundary, the Zoning Administrator renders a final decision and determination
on the matter in conformance with Section
1.5.1, Determination by the Zoning Administrator.
   G.   Zoning of Right-of-Way
   Zoning is applicable on all property, except street  rights-of-way . Use of
street  rights-of-way for other than public street purposes requires approval
by the Zoning Administrator and the Department of Transportation. The Zoning
Administrator may allow, within the right-of-way , only those uses or
structures that are permitted on the property immediately abutting the right-
of-way .
1.5.   DETERMINATIONS OF THE UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE (UDC )
1.5.1.   ZONING DETERMINATIONS AND ZONING CERTIFICATIONS BY THE ZONING
ADMINISTRATOR
   A.   General
   The Zoning Administrator renders a final decision and determination in
accordance with this section when an determination of the substantive
provisions of the UDC or the application of substantive zoning provisions in
the zoning certification of a site plan , tentative plat , or final plat is
requested.
   B.   Requesting a Zoning Determination or Certification
      1.   Requests for a written determination or certification must be made
in writing to the Zoning Administrator. The request must include: the name and
address of the person requesting a certification or determination; the
ordinance, code or part therefore, or substantive policy statement that
requires determination or clarification; the requesting party ’s proposed
determination or clarification; and whether the issue(s) are currently being
considered by the City in connection with a pending application or request for
approval and the identity of the proposed project or development ; and,
      2.   Any person , including those affected by the proposed development
may request a written determination or certification. For the purposes of this
section, a person affected by the proposed development is the applicant,
owners, or residents of property within 400 feet of the site , any neighborhood
association within one mile.
   C.   Decision and Notice of Decision
      1.   The Zoning Administrator shall make a final, written, zoning
determination and mail notice of the determination or certification to the
applicant and all parties of record within the time frames set forth in Section
3-02, Compliance Review Timeframes Policy, of the Administrative Manual. The
applicant or the Zoning Administrator may place other parties on notice of the
determination or certification by providing a copy of the application to such
parties at the time it is submitted to the Zoning Administrator and listing
such persons  as a party of record in the application. The Zoning Administrator
may include as a party of record a person (s) affected by the proposed
development  as provided in Section
1.5.1.B.2 and any person  as determined by the Zoning Administrator who may be
personally affected by the proposed development  in a manner that is beyond the
impact of the development  on the general public;
      2.   The Zoning Administrator shall provide the applicant with an
opportunity to meet with designated City staff to discuss the Zoning
Administrator’s written determination;
      3.   The Zoning Administrator shall rely on the purpose of the UDC
section in question when making a zoning determination;
      4.   The Zoning Administrator may designate certain decisions as
precedent for future decisions. Any decision so designated shall be binding
upon future cases unless reversed on appeal. One copy of all precedent
decisions shall be maintained by the Zoning Administrator and one copy shall be
maintained by the City Clerk for public review and inspection;
      5.   All zoning determinations shall be posted to the City website; and,
      6.   The Zoning Administrator’s determination shall be binding upon the
applicant and all parties of record unless appealed.
   D.   Substantive Policy Statements
   The Zoning Administrator may, in his sole discretion, also issue substantive
policy statements. Such written, substantive policy statements will be advisory
in nature, providing information regarding the City ’s policies and current
practices, procedures, methods of action and approach to implementing the
stated policy and the UDC and the Administrative and Technical Standards
Manuals.
   No less than annually, the City shall publish, on its website, a directory
summarizing any substantive policy statements and maintain a copy of the
directory and policy statements at the office of the Planning and Development
Services Department, where they will be available for public inspection.
   E.   Appeals to the Zoning Determination
      1.   A party of record to a zoning determination can appeal the
determination;
      2.   Appeals are considered by the Board of Adjustment in accordance with
Sections
3.10.1 and
3.10.2, Board of Adjustment Appeal Procedure;
      3.   Notice of intent to appeal, including a statement explaining the
reason for the appeal, must be filed with the Planning and Development Services
Department no later than 14 days after the effective date of the zoning
determination; and,
      4.   The complete appeal application is due no later than 30 days after
the effective date of the zoning determination.
1.5.2.   DETERMINATIONS OF GRAPHICS AND CAPTIONS
   All graphics and captions included in the UDC are for illustrative purposes
and do not have legal status, unless specified otherwise.
1.5.3.   REFERENCES TO OTHER CODES AND LAWS
   Section references to codes and laws other than the UDC , such as the
Arizona Revised Statutes (A.R.S.) or other chapters in the Tucson Code, are
generally provided for the reader’s convenience. Since these codes and laws are
adopted separately from the UDC , the references are administratively amended
as needed to assure that correct references are maintained. These
administrative amendments do not affect the substantive application of the UDC
.
1.5.4.   TERMS
   For purposes of the UDC , the terms regulations, standards, and requirements
all refer to regulatory provisions of the UDC .
(Am. Ord. 11732, 2/19/2020)
1.6.   CONFLICTING PROVISIONS
1.6.1.   CONFLICT WITH ORDINANCES, REGULATIONS, OR PERMITS
   If any provisions within the UDC conflict, the most restrictive as
determined by the Zoning Administrator shall apply, unless otherwise provided.
1.6.2.   EFFECT ON OTHER PROVISIONS
   The provisions of the UDC do not abrogate any other ordinance, statute,
regulation, private covenant, agreement, or contract that is more restrictive
or that requires greater performance in the regulation of any land use or
development within the City .
1.6.3.   NO RELIEF FROM OTHER PROVISIONS
   Except as otherwise specifically provided, no provision of the UDC shall be
construed as relieving any party , to whom UDC compliance approval is issued,
from any other provision of county , state , or federal law or from any
provision, ordinance, or regulation of the City of Tucson requiring approval,
license, or permit to accomplish, engage in, carry on, or maintain a particular
business, enterprise, occupation, transaction, or use.
1.7.   TRANSITIONAL REGULATIONS
1.7.1.   PURPOSE
   The purpose of transitional regulations is to clarify the status of
properties with pending applications or recent approvals, as those terms are
used below, and properties with outstanding violations , at the time of the
adoption of this UDC .
1.7.2.   VIOLATIONS CONTINUE
   Any violation of the previous Land Use Code (LUC) shall continue to be a
violation under this UDC and shall be subject to the penalties and enforcement
in Article 10, Enforcement and Penalties; except when a use, structure , or lot
not lawfully existing at the time of the adoption of this UDC  is deemed lawful
and conforming as of the effective date of this UDC  if it conforms to all of
the standards of this UDC . Payment shall be required for any civil penalty
assessed under the previous code, even if the original violation  is no longer
considered a violation  under this UDC .
1.7.3.   NONCONFORMING USES , STRUCTURES , AND LOTS
   A.   When a building , structure, or lot is used for a purpose that was a
lawful use before the effective date of this UDC , or before the adoption of
original City zoning for an annexed property, and this UDC does not classify
such use as an allowed use in the zoning district in which it is located, such
use shall be considered nonconforming and shall be controlled by Article 9,
Nonconforming Uses , Buildings , and Structures.
   B.   Where any use, building , structure, or lot that legally existed on the
effective date of this Code does not meet all standards set forth in the UDC ,
such use, building , structure, or lot shall be considered nonconforming and
shall be controlled by Article 9, Nonconforming Uses , Buildings , and
Structures.
1.7.4.   APPLICATIONS COMMENCED OR APPROVED UNDER PREVIOUS ORDINANCES
   A.   Pending Applications
      1.   Any complete application that has been submitted for approval, but
upon which no final action has been taken by the appropriate decision-making
body prior to the effective date of this UDC , shall be reviewed in accordance
with an ordinance in effect on the date the application was deemed complete.
There may be a transition period set forth by ordinance which allows an
applicant to select whether the LUC or UDC will governs the development during
a limited time period (see Choice of Code below). If the applicant fails to
comply with any applicable required period for submittal or other procedural
requirements for the applicable code, the application shall expire and
subsequent applications shall be subject to the standards of this UDC . Any re-
application for an expired project approval shall meet the standards in effect
at the time of re-application.
      2.   An applicant with a complete application that has been submitted for
approval, but upon which no final action has been taken prior to the effective
date of this UDC , may request review under this UDC , or a form of the LUC
then applicable by a written letter to the Planning and Development Services
Department.
   B.   Tentative and Final Plats
      1.   Tentative plat approvals granted prior to the effective date of this
UDC may be extended no more than once, and for no longer than one year.
      2.   A final plat application, for which the tentative plat was approved
prior to the effective date of this UDC , may be processed pursuant to the
applicable terms of the ordinance in place at the time of tentative plat
approval, even if the application does not comply with standards set forth in
this UDC .
   C.   Approved Projects
      1.   Approvals and permits that are valid on January 2, 2013, shall
remain valid until their expiration date. Projects with valid approvals or
permits may be completed in conformance to the regulatory provisions in effect
at the time of approval.
      2.   Any building or development for which a building permit was granted
prior to the effective date of this UDC may be permitted to proceed to
construction. If the development for which the building permit is issued prior
to the effective date of this UDC fails to comply with the time frames for
development established for the building permit, the building permit shall
expire and future development shall comply with the standards of this UDC .
   D.   Choice of Code
   For a period of three years after the effective date of this UDC , an
applicant who was the landowner of record prior to the effective date of this
UDC may choose to be governed by the provisions of this UDC or those of the
Land Use Code (LUC) in effect on the date this UDC becomes effective. During
this three-year transition period, ending January 2, 2016, the landowner shall
comply, without exception, with all provisions of either the UDC or LUC
selected by that landowner. For a period of one year ending January 1, 2014,
applicants electing to be governed by the LUC will have the ability to seek
modifications or exceptions pursuant to: Flexible Lot Development (FLD), Design
Development Option (DDO), and Parking Design Modification Request (PDMR).
Between January 2, 2014 and January 2, 2016, applicants electing to be governed
by the LUC will not have the ability to seek modifications or exceptions
pursuant to the FLD, DDO, and PDMR. The selection shall be made and
communicated to the City on a form provided by the City prior to acceptance of
any development applications on the subject property. The landowner shall not
be permitted to alternate compliance between the previous LUC and current UDC
during the three-year transition period. At the expiration of the three-year
transition period, the LUC will be repealed.
   E.   Waiver of Potential Claims
   By electing to proceed under this code, the property owner waives any and
all potential claims that may arise under A.R.S. §§12-1134 et seq. for any
diminution in the value of his property that may be claimed from any difference
between the requirements and standards of this code and those of the LUC.
(Am. Ord. 11070, 5/14/2013)
1.8.   SEVERABILITY
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this ordinance is
held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such findings do not affect the
validity or constitutionality of the remaining portions of the ordinance.
ARTICLE 2: REVIEW AUTHORITIES AND POWERS
Section
2.1.   PURPOSE OF ARTICLE
2.2.   REVIEW AND DECISION-MAKING BODIES
   
2.2.1.   Mayor and Council
   
2.2.2.   City Manager
   
2.2.3.   Planning Commission
   
2.2.4.   Zoning Examiner
   
2.2.5.   Board of Adjustment
   
2.2.6.   Design Review Board
   
2.2.7.   Tucson-Pima County Historical Commission
   
2.2.8.   Historic Preservation Zone Advisory Boards
   
2.2.9.   Planning and Development Services Department (PDSD)
   
2.2.10.   Housing and Community Development Department (HCDD)
   
2.2.11.   Design Professional
   
2.2.12.   Sign Design Review Committee
2.1.   PURPOSE OF ARTICLE
   This article describes the powers and responsibilities of the legislative
and administrative bodies, appointive officers, municipal agencies, and boards
and commissions involved in the planning, zoning, and division of land within
the City .
2.2.   REVIEW AND DECISION-MAKING BODIES
2.2.1.   MAYOR AND COUNCIL
   The Mayor and Council perform the following functions:
   A.   General Plan
   The Mayor and Council shall adopt a comprehensive, long-range general plan
for the development of the City known as the General Plan as mandated by the
A.R.S. §§ 9-461.05 et seq. and in accordance with the procedures in Section
3.6, Land Use Plan Adoption and Amendment Procedures.
   B.   Specific Plans and Regulations
   The Mayor and Council shall adopt specific plans , regulations, programs,
and legislation as may be needed for the systematic implementation of the
General Plan and as required by Arizona Revised Statutes in accordance with the
procedures in Section
3.6, Land Use Plan Adoption and Amendment Procedures.
   C.   Redevelopment Plans
   The Mayor and Council may adopt or amend redevelopment plans, which are
policy plans addressing slum and blighted areas from the standpoint of
providing economic incentives to stimulate development /redevelopment, in
accordance with Section
3.6, Land Use Plan Adoption and Amendment Procedures.
   D.   Unified Development Code (UDC )
   The Mayor and Council shall adopt and amend the UDC in accordance with
Section
3.7, UDC Text Amendment Procedure.
   E.   Establishment of Original City Zoning
   The Mayor and Council shall establish original zoning for land annexed into
the City in accordance with Section
3.5, Rezoning (Change of Zoning) Procedure, and A.R.S. § 9-471.
   F.   Changes in Zoning District Boundaries (Rezonings)
   The Mayor and Council shall consider amendments to zoning district
boundaries as set forth on the City Zoning Maps in accordance with procedures
in Section
3.5, Rezoning (Change of Zoning) Procedure.
   G.   Appeals of Zoning Examiner (Examiner) Decisions, Special Exception Land
Uses
   The Mayor and Council shall consider appeals from Zoning Examiner decisions
on Special Exception Land Use applications in accordance with Section
3.9.2, Mayor and Council Appeal Procedure.
   H.   Plats
   The Mayor and Council shall consider final plats in accordance with
procedures in Section
8.4.5, Final Plat, and Arizona Revised Statutes. Authority to approve a
tentative plat  is delegated to the Director of the Planning and Development
Services Department (PDSD).
   I.   Special Exception Land Uses
   The Mayor and Council shall consider Special Exception Land Use requests
requiring Mayor and Council consideration in accordance with procedures in
Section
3.4.4, Mayor and Council Special Exception Procedure.
   J.   Enforcement
   The Mayor and Council shall adopt policies for establishing rules and
procedures deemed necessary or advisable for the enforcement of the UDC .
   K.   Appointments
   The Mayor and Council shall appoint the following individuals and members of
boards and commissions:
      1.   Planning Commission in accordance with Section
2.2.3;
      2.   Board of Adjustment in accordance with Section
2.2.5;
      3.   Design Review Board in accordance with Section
2.2.6; and,
      4.   Design professional in accordance with Section
2.2.11.
   L.   Appeals of Director ’s 400' Notice Procedure Decisions
   The Mayor and Council shall consider appeals of the PDSD Director’s
decisions on applications under the zoning compliance 400' Notice Procedure in
accordance with procedures in Section
3.9.2, Mayor and Council Appeal Procedure.
   M.   Protected Development Right Plan Approvals
   The Mayor and Council shall consider protected development right plans
submitted in accordance with A.R.S. §§ 9-1201 et seq. and the procedures in
Section
3.12.2, Protected Development Right.
(Am. Ord. 11732, 2/19/2020)
2.2.2.   CITY MANAGER
   The City Manager provides general supervision of and direction to the PDSD
and the Housing and Community Development Department (HCDD) in the
administration of the UDC , subject to the control of the Mayor and Council,
and is given the authority to perform the following duties.
   A.   Enforcement
   The City Manager assures that the UDC is enforced and that City agencies and
employees provide assistance to the PDSD, HCDD, and other responsible boards
and commissions in the planning, zoning, and division of land.
   B.   Capital Improvement Program
   The City Manager, with the assistance of the HCDD and PDSD Directors and
other City agencies, shall prepare a coordinated program of proposed public
improvements for the City on an annual basis.
   C.   Establishment of Fees
   The City Manager recommends fees to the Mayor and Council to be imposed in
connection with reviews necessitated by the application of the UDC .
2.2.3.   PLANNING COMMISSION
   The Planning Commission is established to advise the Mayor and Council,
PDSD, and HCDD on the adoption of long-range plans, policies, specific plans ,
and standards that affect land use and development . The Planning Commission
serves in the capacity of a planning commission as provided in the Arizona
Revised Statutes.
   A.   Composition
   The Planning Commission consists of 13 members as provided below.
      1.   Appointment
      Each member of the City Council appoints two members, both of whom must
be residents of the City and at least one of whom must be a resident of the
Council member’s ward. The Mayor appoints one member who must be a resident of
the City . Should an appointment not be made within 30 days of when the
position becomes available, the appointment can be made by a majority vote of
the Mayor and Council. All members of the Commission serve without
compensation.
      2.   Qualifications
      Members of the Planning Commission are appointed on the basis of their
interest in City City and its future development , particularly as demonstrated
by active participation in community affairs directly related to planning
issues. No member shall hold any City , county , or state elective office or be
a permanent employee of the City while appointed to the Commission.
      3.   Terms and Removal from Office
      The term of appointment and the removal of a member of the Planning
Commission shall be in accordance with Tucson Code, Chapter 10A, Article XIII.
      4.   Vacancies
      All vacant positions on the Planning Commission shall be filled by
appointment as described in Section
2.2.3.A.1. An appointment to fill an unexpired term shall be for the unexpired
portion of the term.
   B.   Administrative Functions
   The Planning Commission’s administrative functions shall be accomplished as
follows.
      1.   Election of Officers
      The Planning Commission shall elect a Chair and Vice Chair from among its
members. The terms of the Chair and Vice Chair are one year which shall
commence in February of each year.
      2.   Meetings
      The Planning Commission shall hold at least one meeting per month, except
when there are no agenda items that require action, but may hold as many
meetings as necessary to conduct its business in a timely manner. All meetings
shall be open to the public, with the exception of executive sessions.
      3.   Quorum and Voting
      Seven members of the Planning Commission present at a meeting constitute
a quorum. A concurring vote of seven members is necessary to make a
recommendation to the Mayor and Council. A simple majority of those members
present is required to approve or deny any other matter before the Planning
Commission. If a concurring vote cannot be attained within the specified time
allotted by the procedure on matters requiring Mayor and Council decision, the
matter shall be forwarded to the Mayor and Council without recommendation.
      4.   Records
      The PDSD shall keep public records of the Planning Commission’s public
hearings, findings, and recommendations.
      5.   Rules of Procedure
      The Planning Commission shall adopt rules of procedure necessary to carry
out its functions. Copies of such rules shall be available to the public
through the PDSD.
      6.   Subcommittees
      The Planning Commission may create such special subcommittees as it deems
necessary or desirable in accordance with Chapter 10A of the Tucson Code. The
members of such subcommittees shall be selected from among the members of the
Planning Commission and may include other persons qualified to contribute to
the work of the special subcommittee.
   C.   Powers and Duties
   The Planning Commission shall perform the following duties.
      1.   General Plan
      The Planning Commission conducts public hearings and makes
recommendations to the Mayor and Council on the adoption of, and amendments to,
the General Plan in accordance with Section
3.6, Land Use Plan Adoption and Amendment Procedure.
      2.   Specific Plans
      The Planning Commission conducts public hearings and makes
recommendations to the Mayor and Council on adoption of, and amendment to,
specific plans , including but not limited to area and neighborhood plans, and
on regulations for the implementation of the General Plan in accordance with
Section
3.6, Land Use Plan Adoption and Amendment Procedure.
      3.   Unified Development Code (UDC)
      The Planning Commission conducts public hearings and makes
recommendations to the Mayor and Council on adoption of, and amendments to, the
text of the UDC in accordance with Section
3.7, UDC Text Amendment Procedure.
      4.   Other Matters
      The Planning Commission shall review such other issues as might be
required by the Mayor and Council, and upon agreement by seven of its members.
The Planning Commission may consider any other matter that pertains or is
reasonably related to its duties.
2.2.4.   ZONING EXAMINER
   The position of the Zoning Examiner is established to conduct public
hearings on rezoning requests on behalf of the Mayor and Council and to
consider other land use applications as provided in the Unified Development
Code (UDC) .
   A.   Position
   The Zoning Examiner serves in accordance with the following provisions.
      1.   Appointment
      The Zoning Examiner is appointed by the City Manager in accordance with
Chapter V, Sections 2 and 13, of the City Charter.
      2.   Qualifications
      The Zoning Examiner is appointed on the basis of a demonstrated ability
to perform the duties of the office, such as training and experience relevant
to the conduct of administrative and adjudicative hearings and knowledge of the
principles and practices of land use planning. The Zoning Examiner may not hold
a City elective office concurrently with this position.
      3.   Term
      The Zoning Examiner serves at the pleasure of the City Manager. The City
Manager may designate a qualified person as a temporary Zoning Examiner
whenever the Zoning Examiner is unable to perform the duties of the office due
to illness, potential conflict of interest, or similar reason.
   B.   Administrative Functions
   The administrative functions necessary to discharge the duties and
responsibilities of the Zoning Examiner are assigned to the Zoning Examiner,
the City Clerk, and the Planning and Development Services Department (PDSD), as
provided in the Zoning Examiner’s Rules and Procedures. Copies of such rules
and procedures shall be available to the public through the PDSD.
   C.   Powers and Duties
   The Zoning Examiner shall perform the following duties.
      1.   Rezoning
      The Zoning Examiner conducts public hearings on applications to rezone
property and makes recommendations to the Mayor and Council in accordance with
Section
3.5, Rezoning (Change of Zoning) Procedure.
      2.   Special Exception Land Use
      The Zoning Examiner conducts public hearings on certain special exception
land uses and, depending upon the applicable procedure, makes decisions, or
provides recommendations to the Mayor and Council in accordance with Section
3.4.3, Zoning Examiner Special Exception Procedure.
      3.   Expansion of Nonconforming Use
      The Zoning Examiner hears and decides requests to exceed the amount of
expansion allowed for structures and land area devoted to a nonconforming use
in accordance with Section
3.4.3, Zoning Examiner Special Exception Procedure, and Section
9.2.2, Expansion of a Nonconforming Use.
      4.   Substitution of Nonconforming Use
      The Zoning Examiner hears and decides requests to substitute a land use
for an existing nonconforming land use , when the proposed substitution is from
a land use class that is different from the one to which the existing
nonconforming use belongs in accordance with procedures in Section
3.4.3, Zoning Examiner Special Exception Procedure, and the standards in
Section
9.2.4, Substitution with a Use from Different Land Use Class.
      5.   Other Responsibilities
      The Zoning Examiner shall perform such other functions as may be required
by the City Manager or the UDC .
   D.   Authority and Conduct of the Zoning Examiner
      1.   The Zoning Examiner may obtain information from all parties,
including PDSD review agencies, prior to the public hearing, provided all
requests for information are in writing and the request and information are
included as part of the public record. The Zoning Examiner may, after the close
of the public hearing, obtain additional information or clarify information
presented and of record at the hearing provided the request for additional
information or clarification is requested in writing and such request and
information are included as part of the record.
      2.   The Zoning Examiner may not communicate, directly or indirectly,
with any party or party ’s representative in connection with any issue involved
with a particular request, except upon notice and opportunity for all parties
to participate; use or rely upon any communication, report, staff memorandum,
or other material prepared in connection with the particular case, unless it is
made a part of the record; or inspect the site with any party or party ’s
representative, unless all parties are given an opportunity to be present.
2.2.5.   BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
   The Board of Adjustment (B/A) is established to hear and decide requests for
variances from provisions of the UDC , appeals of Zoning Administrator’s
interpretations, appeals by the applicant from administrative design review
decisions, appeals from limited notice procedure decisions and other land use
issues as provided by the UDC . The B/A serves in the capacity of a “Board of
Adjustment” as provided by the Arizona Revised Statutes.
   A.   Composition
   The B/A consists of seven members as provided below.
      1.   Appointment
      Each member of the City Council appoints one B/A member who must be a
resident of the appointing Council member’s ward. The Mayor appoints one B/
A member who must be a resident of the City . Should an appointment not be made
within 30 days of the date the position becomes vacant, the appointment can be
made by a majority vote of the Mayor and Council. All members of the B/A serve
without compensation.
      2.   Qualifications
      No member of the B/A may hold any City , county , or state elective
office or be a permanent employee of the City while a member of the B/A.
      3.   Terms and Removal from Office
      The term of appointment and the removal of a member of the B/A shall be
in accordance with Tucson Code, Chapter 10A, Article XIII.
      4.   Vacancies
      Any position on the B/A that is vacated shall be filled by appointment as
described in Section
2.2.5.A.1. An appointment to fill an unexpired term shall be for the unexpired
portion of the term.
   B.   Administrative Functions
   The B/A’s administrative functions shall be accomplished as follows.
      1.   Election of Officers
      The B/A shall elect a Chair and Vice Chair from among its members. The
terms of the Chair and Vice Chair are one year which shall commence in February
of each year.
      2.   Meetings
      The B/A shall hold at least one meeting per month, except when there are
no agenda items that require action, but shall hold as many meetings as
necessary to conduct its business in a timely manner. All meetings shall be
open to the public, with the exception of executive sessions.
      3.   Quorum and Voting
      Four members of the B/A present at a meeting constitute a quorum. A
concurring vote of four members is necessary to decide any matter within its
powers and duties as provided in Section
2.2.5.C. On all other matters before the B/A, a simple majority of those
members present is sufficient to approve a motion.
      4.   Records
      The Planning and Development Services Department (PDSD) shall keep public
records of the B/A’s hearings, findings, and decisions.
      5.   Rules of Procedure
      The B/A shall adopt rules of procedure necessary to carry out its
functions. Copies of such rules shall be available to the public through the
PDSD.
   C.   Powers and Duties
   The B/A shall perform the following duties.
      1.   Appeals of UDC Interpretations
      The B/A hears and decides appeals from interpretations made by the Zoning
Administrator in the interpretation, application, or enforcement of the UDC or
in the determination of a zone boundary location as provided in Section
1.5.1. For detailed enumeration of the procedures and standards for B/
A decisions, see Section
3.10.1, General Board of Adjustment Procedure.
      2.   Variances from UDC Provisions
         a.   Variance Powers Granted to Board of Adjustment
         The B/A hears and decides requests for variances from the provisions
of the UDC in accordance with Sections
3.10.1 and
3.10.3, Board of Adjustment Variance Procedure, and standards for a B/
A decision.
         b.   Variance Powers Not Granted the Board of Adjustment
         The B/A may not:
            (1)   Delete or vary any use-specific standards applicable to a
special exception land use as required by the UDC or as established as a
condition by the decision-making body in granting the use, unless specifically
allowed by the UDC ;
            (2)   Make any changes in the uses permitted in any zoning
classification;
            (3)   Grant a variance if the special circumstances applicable to
the property are self-imposed by the property owner;
            (4)   Grant a variance to any administrative requirement of the UDC
or to any requirement which is not a specific development regulation or use-
specific standards required of a land use ; or,
            (5)   Grant a variance to the use-specific standards required of
educational uses as provided in Section
4.9.3.E.
   D.   Appeals of City Zoning Map Interpretation
   The B/A hears and decides appeals of Zoning Administrator’s interpretations
of the official City Zoning Maps in determining exact locations of zone
boundary lines as shown on the City Zoning Maps in accordance with Sections
3.10.1 and
3.10.2, Board of Adjustment Appeal Procedure.
   E.   Appeals of Design Development Option (DDO) Decision
   The B/A hears and decides appeals of decisions by the PDSD Director on DDO
applications in accordance with Sections
3.10.1 and
3.10.2, Board of Adjustment Appeal Procedure.
   F.   Appeals of Administrative Design Review Decision
   The B/A hears and decides appeals of decisions by the PDSD Director on
Administrative Design Review applications in accordance with Sections
3.10.1 and
3.10.2, Board of Adjustment Appeal Procedure. In considering the appeal, the B/
A shall apply the same findings required of the PDSD Director .
   G.   Appeals of Design Review Board (DRB) Decision on Neighborhood
Preservation Zone (NPZ) Permit
   In accordance with Section
5.10.3.I, the B/A hears and decides appeals of the DRB affirming or reversing
the Director’s decisions of compliance or non-compliance with the neighborhood-
specific design manual and compatibility review criteria in accordance with
Sections
3.10.1 and
3.10.2, Board of Adjustment Appeal Procedure.
   H.   Other Responsibilities
   The B/A shall perform such other functions as may be required by the UDC .
2.2.6.   DESIGN REVIEW BOARD
   The Design Review Board (DRB) is established to review proposed buildings ,
structures , landscaping , architectural features, and site plans .
   A.   Composition
   The DRB consists of seven members, of whom five are regular members and two
are alternates, as provided below. Five members constitute the entire DRB panel
at any meeting of the DRB. An alternate member may serve on the DRB panel at a
hearing only if a regular member is not available for the hearing.
      1.   Appointment
      Any member of the Mayor and Council may make a recommendation for
appointment of a DRB member. Such appointments are made by a majority vote of
the Mayor and Council. Alternate members must be identified as such at the time
of their appointment. The DRB members must be City residents. All members of
the DRB serve without compensation.
      2.   Qualifications
      Of the seven members, there shall be at least one registered architect,
one contractor, and two registered landscape architects. No member of the DRB
is to hold any City , county , or state elective office or be a permanent
employee of the City while a member of the DRB.
      3.   Terms
      The term of each member is four years, beginning with the date of
appointment. Members are eligible for reappointment but shall not serve more
than eight continuous years. After the eight continuous years of service, a
member is eligible for reappointment after a break in service of one year.
      4.   Vacancies
      An appointment to fill an unexpired term is considered a new appointment
to a full four-year term in accordance with Subsection 3 above. Any position on
the DRB that is vacated shall be filled by appointment as described in Section
2.2.6.A.1.
      5.   Removal
      A member of the DRB may be removed with or without cause by a majority
vote of the Mayor and Council. A member who misses four consecutive meetings
for any reason or fails to attend for any reason at least 40% of the DRB
meetings held in one calendar year is automatically and immediately removed as
a member of the DRB.
   B.   Administrative Functions
   The DRB’s shall accomplish the following administrative functions:
      1.   Election of Officers
      The DRB shall elect a Chair and Vice Chair from among its regular
members. The terms of the Chair and Vice Chair are one year which shall
commence in February of each year. Should both the Chair and Vice Chair be
absent from a meeting, an interim Chair shall be voted upon by those members
attending.
      2.   Meetings
      The DRB shall hold meetings as necessary to conduct its business in a
timely manner. All meetings shall be open to the public.
      3.   Quorum and Voting
      Three members, who may be either regular or alternate members constitute
a quorum for a DRB panel at a hearing. Alternate members may serve on a panel
or vote on a matter only if they are serving as a replacement for a regular DRB
member. Except as provided below, a concurring vote of a majority of the
members present and voting is necessary to make a decision. When making a
decision on an appeal the Director’s decision on Neighborhood Preservation Zone
design review applications, a concurring vote of a majority of the DRB (i.e.,
three out of five) is necessary to make a decision.
      4.   Records
      The Planning and Development Services Department (PDSD) shall maintain
public records of the DRB’s actions, findings, and recommendations.
      5.   Rules of Procedure
      The DRB shall adopt rules of procedure necessary to carry out its
functions. Copies of such rules shall be available to the public through the
PDSD.
      6.   Required Action
      Applications reviewed for the purpose of providing a recommendation to
another board, committee, official, or the Mayor and Council for a decision
shall be forwarded without a recommendation should the DRB fail to act within
21 days of the date a plan is accepted for review by the DRB. Action by the DRB
to continue deliberation to another meeting shall stay the 21-day requirement.
   C.   Powers and Duties
   The DRB shall perform the following duties:
      1.   Scenic Corridor Zone (SCZ), Development Review
      In accordance with Section
5.3.11.B, the DRB reviews development applications for projects located within
a SCZ when requested by the PDSD Director or applicant, in accordance with
Section
3.3.3, PDSD Director Approval Procedure. The DRB recommendation shall apply the
same standards required in Section
5.3.11 .C for the decision of the PDSD Director .
      2.   Scenic Corridor Zone (SCZ), Variances
      In accordance with Section
5.3.14, the DRB reviews, for recommendation to the B/A, all requests for
variances from SCZ provisions and shall forward its recommendations in
accordance with Subsection
2.2.6.B.6. The DRB recommendation shall apply the same findings required in
Section
3.10.3.J for granting a variance. In addition, the DRB may make any
recommendation that would assist in mitigating any negative impacts which might
occur should the request be granted.
      3.   Design Development Option (DDO), Appeals
      The DRB reviews, for recommendation to the B/A, appeals of decisions by
the PDSD Director on DDO applications in accordance with Section
3.10.2, Board of Adjustment Appeal Procedure. The DRB shall apply the same
findings (Section
3.11.1.D, Findings for Approval) required of the PDSD Director when making its
recommendation.
      4.   Environmental Resource Zone (ERZ), Variances
         a.   In accordance with Section
3.10.3.G.2, the DRB reviews, for recommendation to the B/A, all requests for
variances from ERZ standards, in accordance with Sections
3.10.1 and
3.10.3, Board of Adjustment Variance Procedure. The DRB recommendation shall
apply the same findings required in Section
3.10.3.J for granting a variance. In addition, the DRB may make any
recommendation that would assist in mitigating any negative impacts which might
occur should the request be granted.
         b.   If the City Engineer or designee, a notified property owner, or
the applicant for the variance requests consideration of stormwater management
issues related to the variance, the Stormwater Technical Advisory Committee may
review the variance request concurrently with the DRB and may provide written
or oral testimony at the public hearing for the variance request. Any such
testimony must address the required findings.
      5.   Landscaping and Screening Standards, Variances
      In accordance with Section
7.6.9.D, the DRB reviews, for recommendation to the B/A, all requests for
variances from Section
7.6, Landscaping and Screening Standards, in accordance with Sections
3.10.1 and
3.10.3, Board of Adjustment Variance Procedure. The DRB recommendation shall
apply the same findings required in Section
3.10.3 .J, Findings for Approval, for granting a variance. In addition, the DRB
may make any recommendation that would assist in mitigating any negative
impacts which might occur should the request be granted.
      6.   Gateway Corridor Zone , Variances
      In accordance with Section
5.5.6, the DRB reviews, for recommendation, all requests for variances from
Section
5.5, Gateway Corridor Zone, in accordance with Sections
3.10.1 and
3.10.3 , Board of Adjustment Variance Procedure. In formulating its
recommendation, the DRB shall utilize the same findings required in Section
3.10.3 .K, Findings for Approval, for granting a variance. In addition, the DRB
may make any recommendation that may assist in mitigating any negative impacts
which may occur should the request be granted.
      7.   Native Plant Preservation (NPP), Variances
      In accordance with Section
7.7.6.B, the DRB reviews, for recommendation to the B/A, all requests for
variances from NPP standards in accordance with Sections
3.10.1 and
3.10.3, Board of Adjustment Variance Procedure. The DRB recommendation shall
apply the same findings required in Section
3.10.3.K for granting a variance. In addition, the DRB may make any
recommendation that would assist in mitigating any negative impacts which might
occur should the request be granted.
      8.   Neighborhood Commercial (NC) Zone , Development Review
      In accordance with Section
4.9.13.M.4, the DRB reviews all proposed nonresidential development , including
exterior remodeling, for approval of architectural and site design
compatibility with the surrounding residential area.
      9.   Office (O-1) Zone , Development Review
      In accordance with Section
4.9.4.R.7, the DRB reviews all new office development in the O-1 zone ,
including Medical Service - Outpatient.
      10.   Communications Land Use , PDSD Director Special Exception Procedure
      The DRB reviews, for recommendation when requested by the PDSD Director,
Communications land uses in all zones that require approval in accordance with
Section
3.4.2, PDSD Director Special Exception Procedure.
      11.   Communications Land Use , Zoning Examiner Special Exception
Procedure
      The DRB reviews, for recommendation, Communications land uses in all
zones that require approval in accordance with Section
3.4.3, Zoning Examiner Special Exception Procedure.
      12.   Communications Land Use , Mayor and Council Special Exception
Procedure
      The DRB reviews, for recommendation when requested by the Mayor and
Council, or Zoning Examiner, Communications land uses in all zones that require
approval in accordance with Section
3.4.4, Mayor and Council Special Exception Procedure.
      13.   Home Occupation : Travelers’ Accommodation, Lodging, Development
Review
      The DRB reviews all home occupation , travelers’ accommodation, and
lodging land uses in the various zones in which the use is permitted, as
provided in Section
4.9.7.H.6.
      14.   Rio Nuevo Area (RNA), Development Review
      The DRB reviews, for recommendation, development in the Rio Nuevo Area
(RNA) under existing underlying zoning, as provided in Section
5.12.2.C.1 and
5.12.4.D. In formulating its recommendation, the DRB shall apply the design
standards in Section
5.12.7.
      15.   Neighborhood Preservation Zone (NPZ), Appeals
      In accordance with Section
5.10.3.H, the DRB hears and decides appeals from decisions of the PDSD Director
on NPZ Design Review application in accordance with Section
3.9.1, Design Review Board Appeal Procedure.
      16.   Community Corridors Tool (CCT), Master Plan Review
         In accordance with Section
5.11.8.C.3, the DRB reviews Master Plan applications for projects utilizing the
CCT in accordance with Section
3.3.3, PDSD Director Approval Procedure. The DRB recommendation shall apply the
design principles in Section
5.11.1.B for the decision of the PDSD Director.
      17.   Other Responsibilities
         The DRB shall perform such other functions as may be required by the
UDC .
   (Am. Ord. 11070, 5/14/2013; Am. Ord. 11246, 2/18/2015; Am. Ord. 12152, 3/18/
2025)
2.2.7.   TUCSON-PIMA COUNTY HISTORICAL COMMISSION
   The Tucson-Pima County Historical Commission is established to advise the
Mayor and Council, the City Planning and Development Services Department
(PDSD), the Board of Supervisors, and the applicable county officials on issues
concerning historic sites , historic structures , and new construction and
demolition within Historic Preservation Zones or Historic Landmarks within the
community. The functions and duties of the Tucson-Pima County Historical
Commission as provided herein shall be performed by the Tucson-Pima County
Historical Commission Plans Review Subcommittee.
   A.   Establishment
   The Tucson-Pima County Historical Commission is established and constituted
as provided in Chapter 10A, Boards and Commissions, of the Tucson Code.
   B.   Administrative Functions
   The Tucson-Pima County Historical Commission Plans Review Subcommittee’s
administrative functions are as provided in Chapter 10A, Boards and
Commissions, of the Tucson Code.
   C.   Powers and Duties within the Unified Development Code (UDC)
   In addition to the powers and duties provided in Chapter 10A, Boards and
Commissions, of the Tucson Code, the Tucson-Pima County Historical Commission
Plans Review Subcommittee shall perform the following duties.
      1.   Establishment of an Historic Preservation Zone or Historic Landmark
      The Tucson-Pima County Historical Commission Plans Review Subcommittee
shall review all requests to establish an HPZ or historic landmark in
accordance with Section
5.8.3.D.
      2.   Amendments to an Existing Historic Preservation Zone or Historic
Landmark
      The Tucson-Pima County Historical Commission Plans Review Subcommittee
shall review any request to amend an existing HPZ or historic landmark in
accordance with Section
5.8.3.D.
      3.   Development Review
      The Tucson-Pima County Historical Commission Plans Review Subcommittee
shall review any development proposal within an HPZ for compliance with design
and construction requirements and standards in accordance with Section
5.8.8.
      4.   Demolition Review
      The Tucson-Pima County Historical Commission Plans Review Subcommittee
shall review all proposals to demolish any structure within an HPZ or a
historic landmark in accordance with Section
5.8.10.
2.2.8.   HISTORIC PRESERVATION ZONE ADVISORY BOARDS
   For each HPZ proposed or established, an HPZ advisory board is appointed to
assist the Mayor and Council and the Planning and Development Services
Department (PDSD) in evaluating establishment of, or amendment to, an historic
zone and in evaluating proposed development within an adopted Historic
Preservation Zone .
   A.   Composition
   Each HPZ advisory board shall consist of at least six, but not more than 15,
members. Members may be either voting or non-voting advisory members.
      1.   Appointment
      Members of each HPZ advisory board are appointed by the Mayor and
Council.
      2.   Qualifications
      For each HPZ advisory board, approximately one-third of the voting
members must be residents within the historic zone ; approximately one-third of
the voting members must be property owners within the historic zone ; and
approximately one-third of the voting members must have special qualifications
in such areas as archaeology, architecture, architectural history, local
history, historic preservation law, landscape architecture, planning,
construction, or other related field. The application information for all
prospective members must be accompanied by a statement of interest, including
the category in which they would serve. The information for members having
special qualifications shall also reference the individuals’ educational and
professional experience. The PDSD Director, the Historic Preservation Officer,
and a member of the Tucson-Pima County Historical Commission Plans Review
Subcommittee shall review the information for applicants in the special
qualifications category and make recommendations prior to the nomination being
forwarded to the Mayor and Council for consideration. Members serve without
compensation.
      3.   Terms
      The term of each member of an HPZ advisory board is for a maximum of four
years, expiring on December 31 of the fourth year. Terms may be staggered to
assure continuity. Members are eligible for reappointment.
      4.   Removal
      A member of an HPZ advisory board may be removed by a two-thirds vote of
the Mayor and Council.
   B.   Administrative Functions
   Each HPZ advisory board shall perform the following administrative
functions.
      1.   Election of Officers
      Each HPZ advisory board elects a Chair and Vice Chair from among its
members. The terms of the Chair and Vice Chair are one year.
      2.   Meetings
      Each HPZ advisory board holds as many regular meetings as necessary to
conduct its business in a timely manner. All meetings shall be open to the
public.
      3.   Quorum and Voting
      A majority of the voting members constitutes a quorum of an HPZ advisory
board. The concurring vote of the majority of members present and voting is
necessary to make any recommendation to the PDSD Director or to the Mayor and
Council. If a concurring vote cannot be attained within the specified time
allotted by the review procedure, the matter will be forwarded without
recommendation.
      4.   Records
      Each HPZ advisory board shall keep a public record of its actions,
findings, and recommendations. Records may be found at the City Clerk’s office.
      5.   Rules of Procedure
      Each HPZ advisory board may adopt rules of procedure necessary to carry
out its functions. Copies of such rules will be filed with the City Clerk and
made available to the public through the Planning and Development Services
Department (PDSD).
      6.   Training
      HPZ advisory boards shall schedule not less than one meeting per year for
the purposes of training related to their design review responsibilities. The
training shall be coordinated with the City’s Historic Preservation Officer.
   C.   Powers and Duties
   Each HPZ advisory board shall perform the following duties.
      1.   Establishment of Historic Preservation Zone
      Upon receipt of a request to establish an HPZ, the Mayor and Council may
establish an HPZ advisory board for the proposed historic zone to evaluate and
make recommendations on the proposed establishment of the HPZ in accordance
with Section
5.8.3, Establishment and Amendment to Historic Preservation Zones. As part of
the review, the HPZ advisory board makes recommendations on the boundaries of
the HPZ and which sites or structures  are to be designated “Contributing
Properties ” and “Noncontributing Properties .”
      2.   Historic District Amendments
      Each HPZ advisory board shall make written recommendations to the PDSD
Director and to the Mayor and Council concerning amendments to the boundaries
of its HPZ and the addition or deletion of designated sites and structures in
accordance with Section
5.8.3, Establishment and Amendment to Historic Preservation Zones.
      3.   Historic Preservation
      Each HPZ advisory board shall review and make written recommendations to
the PDSD Director on applications involving new construction, additions,
alterations , and moving or demolition of existing structures located within
its HPZ for compliance with the purpose and intent of the HPZ and all
applicable provisions and standards.
      4.   Permitted Uses
      The HPZ advisory board shall review applications for resident artisan
uses and make recommendations to the PDSD Director.
2.2.9.   PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT SERVICES DEPARTMENT (PDSD)
   A.   Functions and Duties
   The PDSD shall generally administer and enforce the UDC , serve as the
planning agency when applicable, and in addition shall have the following
specific responsibilities.
      1.   Implementation of and Compliance with the UDC
      The PDSD is responsible for the implementation of and assuring compliance
with the applicable provisions of the UDC on all projects being developed under
the existing zoning of a property, including applicable overlay zones .
      2.   City Zoning Maps
      The PDSD is responsible for maintaining the official City Zoning Maps and
for the coordination and review of any request to amend the zoning boundaries
as provided on the maps.
      3.   Board of Adjustment (B/A)
      The PDSD is responsible for scheduling meetings, providing agendas and
public notice of meetings, and maintaining public records of the B/A’s findings
and decisions.
      4.   Design Review Board (DRB)
      The PDSD is responsible for scheduling meetings, providing agendas and
public notice of meetings, and maintaining public records of the DRB’s
decisions.
      5.   Historic Preservation Zones (HPZ)
      The PDSD shall coordinate review of all alterations , new development ,
and demolitions within the HPZ and perform any other administrative function as
required by Section
5.8, “H” Historic Preservation Zone.
      6.   Subdivision , Minor Subdivision , and Land Split
      The PDSD is responsible for the review of all development proposals for
compliance with the subdivision , including Flexible Lot Development, minor
subdivision , and lot split standards as provided in Article 8, Land Division
and Subdivision Standards.
      7.   Rezoning, Planned Area Development (PAD), Planned Community
Development (PCD), Urban Overlay District (UOD), and Neighborhood Preservation
Zone (NPZ)
      The PDSD shall review and provide recommendations for all PAD, PCD, UOD,
and NPZ applications and any rezoning initiated by the Mayor and Council.
      8.   Special Land Use Exception
      The PDSD is responsible for review and recommendation for an application
for a special land use exception in accordance with the UDC .
      9.   Amendment of UDC
      The PDSD is responsible for review of and provide recommendations on
amendments to the UDC .
      10.   Planning Commission
      The PDSD shall provide technical assistance to and be responsible for
scheduling meetings, providing agendas and public notice of meetings, and
maintaining public records of the Planning Commission’s findings and decisions.
      11.   Airport Regulations
      The PDSD shall administer and enforce airport zoning regulations in
accordance with provisions of this UDC and applicable Arizona Revised Statutes.
      12.   Non-conforming Uses, Temporary Uses and Structures
      The PDSD shall evaluate and make decisions on non-conforming uses and
temporary uses and structures in accordance with the UDC .
      13.   100' and 400' Notice Procedures
      The PDSD shall evaluate and make decisions whether an application will be
reviewed in accordance with Section
3.3.4, 100' Notice Procedure, or Section
3.3.5, 400' Notice Procedure.
      14.   Modifications to the UDC Standards
      The PDSD shall evaluate and make decisions on an application to modify
standards such as setbacks , parking, screening and landscaping in accordance
with the UDC .
      15.   Administrative Design Review
      The PDSD shall evaluate and make decision on an application under the
Administrative Review Procedure in accordance with the UDC .
      16.   Amendments to and Administration of Specific Plans (including Area,
Sub-Area, and Neighborhood Plans)
         a.   Amendments
         The PDSD shall review and provide recommendations to the Planning
Commission and the Mayor and Council on amendments to specific plans . The PDSD
may coordinate with the HCDD when developing its recommendation.
         b.   Administration
         The PDSD shall provide for the maintenance and administration of
specific plans .
      17.   Other Responsibilities
      The PDSD shall perform such other functions as may be required by the
Mayor and Council, City Manager, or the UDC .
      18.   Director of the Planning and Development Services Department (PDSD)
      The PDSD Director shall be the chief administrative officer of PDSD. The
PDSD Director, or designee, shall be responsible for administering the
functions and duties of PDSD listed in this section. The PDSD Director or
designee may perform other functions and duties, including assisting the Zoning
Administrator in enforcing the UDC , as may be required for the administration
of the department or as provided by the City Manager or the UDC .
      19.   Zoning Administrator
      The Zoning Administrator, who is appointed by the PDSD Director, shall
perform the duties and responsibilities as described below. The PDSD Director
shall designate a temporary Zoning Administrator whenever the Zoning
Administrator is unable to perform the duties of the office due to illness,
potential conflict of interest, or similar reason.
         a.   Unified Development Code (UDC) Determinations
         The Zoning Administrator shall interpret the City Zoning Maps and the
provisions of the UDC and make determinations in accordance with Section
1.5.1, Zoning Determinations and Zoning Certifications by the Zoning
Administrator.
         b.   Unified Development Code (UDC) Enforcement
         The Zoning Administrator shall enforce the UDC with assistance from
the PDSD and the Housing Community Development Department as provided in
Section
10.2, Enforcement Authority, and from other City  departments as may be
provided by the City Manager and Mayor and Council.
         c.   Other Responsibilities
         The Zoning Administrator shall perform such other functions as may be
required by the PDSD Director or the UDC .
(Am. Ord. 11732, 2/19/2020)
2.2.10.   HOUSING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT (HCDD)
   The Housing and Community Development Department (HCDD), as established by
the Mayor and Council, shall serve in the capacity of a planning agency as
provided in the A.R.S. Title 9, Article 6.
   A.   Functions and Duties
   The HCDD is responsible for preparing, maintaining, and administrating the
General Plan , certain specific plans , and redevelopment plans, assisting in
the enforcement of the UDC , and other functions as deemed necessary or
desirable for the City .
      1.   Administration of General Plan
         a.   Preparation and Adoption
         The HCDD shall prepare the General Plan and amendments thereto, for
consideration by the Mayor and Council in accordance with Section
3.6, Land Use Plan Adoption and Amendment Procedure.
         b.   Implementation
         The HCDD shall:
            (1)   Investigate and make recommendations to the Mayor and Council
concerning reasonable and practical means for putting the General Plan , or
parts thereof, into effect in order that it will serve as a pattern and guide
for the orderly growth and development of the City and as a basis for the
efficient expenditure of its funds relating to the subjects of the General Plan
. The measures recommended may include plans, regulations, financial reports,
and capital budgets;
            (2)   Submit an annual report to the Mayor and Council on the
status of the plan and its implementation;
            (3)   Endeavor to promote public interest in, and understanding of,
the General Plan and regulations relating to it; and,
            (4)   Consult with and advise public officials and agencies; public
utility companies; civic, educational, professional, and other organizations;
and citizens, generally, with relation to carrying out the General Plan .
      2.   Preparation of Specific Plans (Including Sub-area Plans Area and
Neighborhood Plans)
      The HCDD shall prepare new specific plans for consideration of adoption
by the Mayor and Council. Specific plans include such elements as, but are not
limited to, neighborhood and area plans, plans for major streets or parks, and
land use standards and policy documents for the implementation of the General
Plan . The Mayor and Council, with a recommendation from the HCDD, may adopt
administrative rules and procedures for the implementation of specific plans .
      3.   Capital Improvement Program
      The HCDD shall assist the City Manager and other City departments in
coordinating the Capital Improvement Program, monitoring its implementation,
and advising the Mayor and Council on its conformance with the General Plan and
specific plans .
      4.   Historic Preservation
      The HCDD shall perform the following duties:
         a.   Oversee the General Plan ’s policies pertaining to historic
preservation;
         b.   Assist in establishing local National Register Historic Districts
and Historic Preservation Zones ;
         c.   Perform the duties and responsibilities of the Historic
Preservation Program, including creating and maintaining programs to encourage
the recognition, restoration, and maintenance of the historic, archaeological,
and cultural resources of the City ; and,
         d.   Work with and assist departments of the City and the Tucson-Pima
County Historical Commission in matters affecting historic preservation.
      5.   Enforcement of the UDC
      The HCDD shall assist the Zoning Administrator in the enforcement of
violations of the UDC as provided in Section
10.2, Enforcement Authority.
      6.   Other Responsibilities
      The HCDD shall perform such other functions as may be required by the
Mayor and Council, City Manager, or the UDC .
   B.   Director of the Housing and Community Development Department
   The Director of HCDD is the chief administrative officer of the HCDD and
shall be responsible for administering the functions and duties of the HCDD.
The Director, or designee, performs other such functions as may be required for
the administration of the HCDD or as provided by the Mayor and Council, City
Manager, or the UDC .
2.2.11.   DESIGN PROFESSIONAL
   The position of Design Professional (DP) is established: 1) to review
building permits for projects located in the Neighborhood Preservation Zone
(NPZ) overlays for compliance with applicable design manuals, and 2) to review
proposed buildings , structures , landscaping , architectural features, of
proposed subdivisions , development plans, and site plans , as set forth in the
UDC .
   A.   Appointment and Qualifications
      1.   Appointment
      The PDSD Director shall recommend a candidate(s) for the position of DP.
The Mayor and Council shall appoint one or more DPs.
      2.   Qualifications
         a.   NPZ Review
         The DP shall be a registered architect, preferably with historic
preservation experience.
         b.   Subdivision Review
         The DP shall be a registered architect or landscape architect.
   B.   Powers and Duties
      1.   Neighborhood Preservation Zone (NPZ) Design Review
      The DP shall review applications for building permits for projects
located within adopted NPZs for compliance with the applicable Design Manual
and Section
5.10.3, Neighborhood Preservation Zone Design Review Procedure. The DP will
forward a written report with findings and recommendation to the PDSD Director
. The Director shall take into account the recommendations of the DP when
considering approval of the application.
      2.   Flexible Lot Development (FLD) Project Review
      The DP shall review FLD projects for compliance with, but not limited to:
         a.   Architectural variation, Section
8.7.3.M.1;
         b.   Functional open space , Section
8.7.3.F.1 & .2;
         c.   Modifications to street  perimeter yard  setbacks , Section
8.7.3.L.2;
         d.   Privacy mitigation , Section
8.7.3.M.2.b;
         e.   Transition edge treatment, Section
8.7.3.M.2.a;
         f.   Recommendation on FLD Review
         The DP shall forward a written recommendation with findings to the
PDSD Director. The Director shall consider the DP’s recommendation and render a
decision on the FLD.
         g.   Findings for FLD Privacy Mitigation Plan
         The DP may recommend a project if it meets the following findings:
            (1)   Will not be detrimental to public health and safety;
            (2)   Will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to
adjoining properties; and,
            (3)   Will not create a nuisance to surrounding properties.
      3.   Conditions
         a.   NPZ Review
         The DP may recommend conditions on the approval of a building permit
to ensure that the design of the project mitigates the impact of the project on
the subject development zone .
         b.   FLD Review
         The DP may recommend conditions on the approval of an FLD to ensure
that the design of the FLD mitigates the impact of the FLD and provides
suitable transitions to the adjoining existing residential developments .
      4.   Conflict of Interest
      The DP shall not render professional services under this section on any
project if the DP’s judgment could be affected by responsibilities to, or
interest in another project or person or by the DP’s own interests. The DP
shall comply with City of Tucson Administrative Directive 2.02-14 and Policy
282, Ethics and Conflict of Interest for City Officers and Employees.
      5.   Other Responsibilities
      The DP shall perform such other functions as may be required by the UDC .
Additionally, the PDSD Director may request other design assistance and
recommendations as needed in implementing the UDC .
2.2.12.   SIGN DESIGN REVIEW COMMITTEE
      A.   Creation
         A sign design review committee is hereby created to assist the Mayor
and Council, the Planning Commission, and the Planning and Development Services
Director by advising on sign standard text amendments and design option
applications permitted by Section
7A.7 Sign Design Options.
      B.   Authority
         The sign design review committee shall advise the Mayor and Council
and the Planning Commission on sign standards text amendments. It shall also
act as the design review committee for Section 7A.7 Sign Design Options and
advise the Planning and Development Services Director  on various design option
applications.
      C.   Composition
         The committee shall be composed of the following nine members who
shall serve without compensation. Members shall include an architect, an
Outdoor Lighting Committee representative, a sign industry representative, a
local business representative, a planner (architect, land use planner or
landscape architect), portable sign expert (e.g. commercial real estate
broker), one at-large appointment by the City Manager, general neighborhood
association representative, and an ad hoc representative appointed by a
neighborhood association within 300 feet of the location of the subject
property submitting the application. The City Manager may appoint a
professional or stakeholder with a similar background and/or experience to the
above listed committee members.
      D.   Appointment and Terms
         1.   Appointment
            The members shall be appointed by the City Manager.
         2.   Terms
            City Manager shall appoint a member for a four-year term. After two
terms the member shall be replaced. A former member may return after a one-year
hiatus from the committee.
         3.   City Employees, Elected Officials Excluded
            No member of the committee may be a City employee or hold a City
elective office.
      E.   Vacancies
         Vacancies on the committee shall be filled by appointment in the same
manner in which members are initially appointed.
      F.   Removal
         Removal of the members shall be done by the City Manager.
      G.   Sign Standards Text Amendment Meeting
         The committee shall have meetings as needed to discuss sign standard
text amendments and make recommendations to the Planning Commission. Along with
the Planning Commission recommendation, the committee's recommendation shall be
forwarded to the Mayor and Council.
      H.   Design Review Meeting
         1.   The applicant may ask for a pre-application meeting with the
committee to receive input on the proposal.
         2.   When the applicant requests a meeting on the application, the
committee may continue a case one time.
         3.   The applicant will present the proposal. The committee will
review the application in accordance with the applicable provisions of Section
7A.7 Sign Design Options.
         4.   The applicant may ask for additional continuances.
         5.   After reviewing the case, the committee shall make a
recommendation of approval, approval with conditions or denial to the planning
and development services director .
      I.   Quorum
         A quorum for a meeting shall be 50% of those members seated. If for
any reason the City Manager has not appointed the members of the committee or a
quorum is not obtained for a particular application, the director may request
that the Design Professional make a recommendation directly to the PDSD
Director .
      J.   Administrative Procedures
         1.   City Manager
            The City Manager shall ensure that all City departments and persons
under his authority shall cooperate in providing assistance and data to the
sign design review committee.
         2.   Executive Secretary
            The zoning administrator or designee shall serve as executive
secretary to the committee.
         3.   Chairperson and Other Officers
            The committee shall elect a chairperson and vice-chairperson and
such other officers as it may deem necessary from its members. The terms of
chairperson, vice-chairperson and other officers shall be for one year subject
to one additional term of one year.
(Ord. 11508, 12/5/2017; Am. Ord. 11803, 12/8/2020)
ARTICLE 3: GENERAL PROCEDURES
Section
3.1.   PURPOSE OF ARTICLE
3.2.   GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
   
3.2.1.   Pre-Application Conference
   
3.2.2.   Neighborhood Meeting
   
3.2.3.   Application Requirements
   
3.2.4.   Public Notice
3.3.   ZONING COMPLIANCE REVIEW PROCEDURES
   
3.3.1.   Purpose
   
3.3.2.   Review Procedures
   
3.3.3.   PDSD Director Approval Procedure
   
3.3.4.   100' Notice Procedure
   
3.3.5.   400' Notice Procedure
   
3.3.6.   Zoning Administrator Approval Procedure
   
3.3.7.   Historic Preservation Zone (HPZ) Design Review Procedure
   
3.3.8.   Neighborhood Preservation Zone (NPZ) Design Review Procedure
3.4.   SPECIAL EXCEPTION LAND USES
   
3.4.1.   General
   
3.4.2.   PDSD Director Special Exception Procedure
   
3.4.3.   Zoning Examiner Special Exception Procedure
   
3.4.4.   Mayor and Council Special Exception Procedure
   
3.4.5.   Findings
   
3.4.6.   Conditions of Approval
3.5.   REZONING (CHANGE OF ZONING)
   
3.5.1.   General
   
3.5.2.   Types of Rezoning Ordinances
   
3.5.3.   Zoning Examiner Legislative Procedure
   
3.5.4.   Change in Conditions of Approval and Completion of Conditions
   
3.5.5.   Planned Area Development (PAD) Zone
   
3.5.6.   Planned Community Development (PCD) Zone
3.6.   LAND USE PLAN ADOPTION AND AMENDMENT PROCEDURES
   
3.6.1.   Purpose
   
3.6.2.   Applicability
   
3.6.3.   Initiation
   
3.6.4.   Pre-Application Conference Required
   
3.6.5.   Public Outreach and Neighborhood Meetings
   
3.6.6.   Application
   
3.6.7.   Staff Review and Recommendation
   
3.6.8.   Planning Commission Public Hearing Required
   
3.6.9.   Planning Commission Recommendation and Reconsideration
   
3.6.10.   Mayor and Council’s Public Hearing and Decision
   
3.6.11.   Re-Application
3.7.   UDC TEXT AMENDMENT PROCEDURE
   
3.7.1.   Purpose
   
3.7.2.   Applicability
   
3.7.3.   Initiation
   
3.7.4.   Development of a Text Amendment
   
3.7.5.   Planning Commission Public Hearing Required
   
3.7.6.   Planning Commission Recommendation and Reconsideration
   
3.7.7.   Mayor and Council’s Public Hearing and Decision
3.8.   LAND DIVISION AND SUBDIVISION
3.9.   APPEALS
   
3.9.1.   Design Review Board (DRB) Appeal Procedure
   
3.9.2.   Mayor and Council Appeal Procedure
   
3.9.3.   Takings and Exactions Appeal Procedure
3.10.   BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT APPEALS AND VARIANCES
   
3.10.1.   General Board of Adjustment Procedures
   
3.10.2.   Appeals
   
3.10.3.   Variances
3.11.   ADMINISTRATIVE MODIFICATIONS
   
3.11.1.   Design Development Option (DDO)
3.12.   MISCELLANEOUS PERMITS AND APPROVALS
   
3.12.1.   Architectural Documentation Prior to Demolition of Historic Buildings
   
3.12.2.   Protected Development Right
   
3.12.3.   Multifamily Residential Development and Adaptive Reuse of Qualified
Obsolete Commercial Buildings
3.1.   PURPOSE OF ARTICLE
   This article describes zoning and land use review procedures related to
development activity in the City of Tucson.
3.2.   GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
   This section establishes general requirements pertaining to pre-application
conference, neighborhood meeting, public notice, public comments, application
completeness, and other rules for processing applications after they are
accepted for review. Individual review procedures and their specific
requirements are set forth in this Article.
3.2.1.   PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE
   A.   Purpose
   The pre-application conference is designed to assist the applicant by
providing as much information as possible regarding City regulations and
requirements and how they may affect the proposed project ’s scope and design,
prior to submission of a formal application.
   B.   Applicability
   A pre-application conference is required in accordance with the applicable
procedure detailed in this Article.
Table 3.2-1 sets forth the procedures for which a pre-application conference is
required.
   C.   Requirements
   At the pre-application conference, the applicant shall describe to the PDSD
the general goals, uses, and development characteristics (e.g., size, location,
density , etc.) of the proposed project in sufficient detail to enable the City
to identify potential code or plan compliance issues and discuss design issues
and options. Depending upon the level of detail of the information provided for
the proposed project or the need to include other City departments in the
preliminary discussions, the PDSD may request additional pre-application
conference(s).
   D.   Effect
   Review is on a conceptual basis, therefore, comments made at this conference
are advisory and do not constitute approval or denial of the project .
3.2.2.   NEIGHBORHOOD MEETING
   A.   Purpose
   The neighborhood meeting is intended to provide an opportunity to inform
potentially affected property owners of the details of a proposed development
and application, how the applicant intends to meet the standards contained in
the UDC , and to receive public comment and encourage dialogue at an early time
in the review process.
   B.   Applicability
   A neighborhood meeting is required in accordance with the applicable review
procedures required in this Article, and
Table 3.2-1.
   C.   Meeting Requirements
      1.   Standards
      The applicant shall mail notices offering to meet at a specified time and
place to discuss the proposed project with the persons and entities entitled to
notice of the application in accordance with following requirements.
         a.   The offer is made when mailed, and must be mailed at least ten
days prior to the date of the meeting and sent by first class mail to property
owners within 400 feet of the property, registered neighborhood associations
within one mile of proposal, and the Council Ward offices where the project is
located.
         b.   For Concurrent Plan Amendment and Rezoning Applications a single
neighborhood meeting shall be held for both applications. The mailed notice for
the neighborhood meeting shall be mailed at least 30 days , and no more than 45
days prior to the neighborhood meeting.
         c.   The meeting shall occur not more than 60 days prior to the date
of the submittal of the application.
         d.   Documentation of the offer to meet and a summary of the meeting
must be submitted with the application.
         e.   The meeting must be held at or near the subject site .
      2.   Exceptions
         a.   For designation or amendment to a Historic Preservation Zone ,
the offer to meet shall be made no more than one year before the Zoning
Examiner public hearing.
         b.   A neighborhood meeting is not required for amendments to the
General Plan or for any text amendment to the UDC .
      3.   Content of Neighborhood Meeting Notices
      A neighborhood meeting notice shall contain the following:
         a.   The notice shall describe the substance of the application,
include the date, time, and location of the meeting, and specify the contact
person , company, or official applicant’s name and phone number;
         b.   For Board of Adjustment variance applications, the notice shall
contain information necessary to fully describe the proposed project ,
including a description of the code requirement(s) and the requested variance
(s) from that particular requirement(s);
         c.   The notice shall advise the recipients of the notice that they
may submit comments to the PDSD Director or, when applicable, speak at the
public hearing; and,
         d.   For Concurrent Plan Amendment and Rezoning Applications, the
required Neighborhood Meetings for each the Plan Amendment and Rezoning shall
be combined and in addition to the content requirements under a., b., and c. in
this subsection, the notice shall contain the following additional information:
            (1)   pre-application case number and instructions on how to review
pre-application materials;
            (2)   where to find the area and/or neighborhood plan(s) affected
by the proposal; and,
            (3)   a map showing the proposed area of the plan amendment and
rezoning.
      4.   Preparation of Notice
      For neighborhood meeting notices, the applicant is responsible for
mailing the notices. Applicants must obtain mailing labels from the PDSD and
mail the notices to the persons and entities entitled to receive mailed notice
in
Table 3.2-1 in compliance with the preparation of notice procedures in Section
3.2.4.B.5.
(Am. Ord. 11070, 5/14/2013; Am. Ord. 11127, 11/6/2013; Am. Ord. 11729, 2/19/
2020)
3.2.3.   APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS
   A.   Application Required
      1.   The Director of the Planning and Development Services Department
(PDSD) initiates the review and processing of a complete application, except as
provided below. The PDSD Director shall make a determination of application
completeness. An application is considered complete if it is submitted in the
required form, includes all mandatory information, including all supporting
materials specified in the Administrative Manual, and is accompanied by the
applicable fee. Rezoning applications shall also submit evidence of plan
compliance to be considered complete. If the application is determined to be
complete, the application shall then be processed according to this article.
      2.   If an application is determined to be incomplete, the PDSD Director
shall provide notice to the applicant with an explanation of the application’s
deficiencies. Incomplete submittals are generally not accepted for review.
However, if an incomplete submittal is accepted for review, the applicant
should be aware that, because of a lack of information, the review will take
longer since comments cannot be finalized until after the re-submittal when the
required information is provided.
      3.   Applications submitted with false or misleading information shall be
deemed incomplete.
   B.   Sequential or Concurrent Review Process
      1.   Where an application under this section requires review under more
than one review procedure, the PDSD Director shall determine whether reviews
will be conducted sequentially or concurrently, based upon the issues raised by
each application.
      2.   Where the Director determines that reviews will be conducted
sequentially, the date of acceptance for each procedure shall commence upon the
date of decision of the prior procedure unless otherwise stated by the PDSD
Director.
   C.   Appeal Procedure for Denial of Plan Compliance
   If an application is rejected because it is not consistent with the General
Plan or any applicable specific plan , the rejection of the application may be
appealed by the applicant in accordance with Section
3.9.2, Mayor and Council Appeal Procedure.
   D.   Suspension and Withdrawal of a Rezoning or Plan Amendment Application
      1.   For rezoning and plan amendments only, an applicant may suspend an
application at any time prior to the date published notice is given for the
public hearing before the Planning Commission or the Zoning Examiner. When
requested in writing by the applicant, the PDSD Director may authorize a delay
of the plan amendment process for a maximum of 90 days . The applicant may
request in writing an additional delay(s). The PDSD Director may delay the
amendment process to permit a number of related plan amendment applications to
be considered at the same time. An application shall not be suspended for more
than one year from the date of acceptance of the application.
      2.   The PDSD Director may withdraw a plan amendment application at any
time and at the request of the applicant and/or the party who paid the filing
fee. PDSD shall determine if the applicant is eligible for a refund, and if so,
the amount of fees to be refunded.
TABLE 3.2-1 PUBLIC NOTICE AND PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS
                  Pre-                     NOTICE**
Procedure Section Application Neighborhood Mailing/                   Neighborhood Application Notice   Decision Appeal
                  Conference  Meeting      Distance* Posted Published Association  Acceptance  of       Maker
                                                                      / Distance               Decision
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR INTERPRETATION
TABLE 3.2-1 PUBLIC NOTICE AND PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS
                                       Pre-                     NOTICE**
Procedure                      Section Application Neighborhood Mailing/                   Neighborhood Application Notice of Decision Appeal
                                       Conference  Meeting      Distance* Posted Published Association  Acceptance  Decision  Maker
                                                                                           / Distance
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR INTERPRETATION
ZA Interpretation of UDC      1.5.1                                                                    R           See Sec.  ZA       B/A
                                                                                                                    1.5.1
ZONING COMPLIANCE REVIEW
100' Notice                    3.3.4.E                          R/100'                     R/NA of the  R           R         PDSD     B/A
                                                                                           site                               Director
400' Notice                    3.3.5   R           R            R/400'                     R/1 mile     R           R         PDSD     M/C
                                                                                                                              Director
NPZ Design Review              5.10.3  R                        R/100'                     R/NA of the              R         PDSD     DRB
                                                                                           site                               Director
PDSD ADMINISTRATIVE APPROVAL
Minor Subdivision & Block Plat 8.4.3.E R                                                                                      M/C
                                                                                                                              Varies
FLD Subdivision  Plat or Site 8.7.3.P             R            R/400'                     R/1 mile     R                     (see
Plan                                                                                                                          Sec.
                                                                                                                              8.7.3.P)
                                                                                                                              Varies
CCT, Except Master Plan        5.11    R                       R/400'                   R/1 mile                         (see      
                                                                                                                              Sec.
                                                                                                                              5.11)
CCT Master Plan                5.11.8  R           R            R/400'                   R/1 mile                         PDSD      
                                                                                                                              Director
SPECIAL EXCEPTION LAND USES
PDSD Director SE               3.4.2                            R/100'                     R/NA of the  R           R         PDSD     B/A
                                                                                           site                               Director
ZE SE                          3.4.3   R           R            R/400'    R      R         R/1 mile     R                     ZE       M/C
M/C SE                         3.4.4   R           R            R/400'    R      R         R/1 mile     R                     M/C
REZONING/ZONING EXAMINER LEGISLATIVE PROCEDURE
RZ/ To Establish PAD           3.5     R           R            R/400'    R      R         R/1 mile     R           R         M/C
Rezoning to Establish a PCD    3.5.6.E R           R            R/1/      R      R         R/2 mile     R           R         M/C
                                                                2 mile
Major Change to RZ condition;
Site Specific Establishment of 3.5     R           R            R/400'    R      R         R/1 mile     R           R         M/C
an Overlay Zone ; Major
amendments to PAD, PCD
LAND USE PLAN ADOPTION AND AMENDMENT
Readoption of General Plan     3.6     Notice is in conformance with the requirements of A.R.S. § 9-461.06                   M/C
Adoption of MS&R, Redev. or            Notice is in conformance with the requirements of A.R.S. § 9-461.06. For Redevelopment
Specific Plan                  3.6     Plans, notice must be published for 2 consecutive weeks in compliance with A.R.S. §   M/C
                                       36-1479
Site -Specific Amendment to
Gen. Plan, MS&R, Redevelopment 3.6     R           R            R/400'           R         R/1 mile                           M/C
or Specific Plan
UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE TEXT AMENDMENT
                                                                                 R/1/8th
Text Amendment, General        3.7                                               page                                         M/C
                                                                                 display
                                                                                 ad
                                                                R/400' &
                                                                all              R/1/8th   R/All NA
Text Amend. Creating or        3.7                 R            owners           page      registered                         M/C
Amending an Overlay zone                                        within           display   with the
                                                                Overlay          ad        City
                                                                Zone
APPEALS PROCEDURES
DRB Appeal                     3.9.1                            R/100'                     R/NA of the              R         M/C
                                                                                           site
M/C Appeal                     3.9.2                            R/400'    R      R         R/1 mile                 R         M/C
                                                                                                                    R/
Takings Appeal                 3.9.3.C                                                                              Applicant ZA
                                                                                                                    only
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT APPEAL AND VARIANCE
B/A Appeal                     3.10.2                           R/400'    R      R         R/1 mile                 R         B/A
B/A Variance                   3.10.3  R           R            R/400'    R      R         R/1 mile     R           R         B/A
ADMINISTRATIVE MODIFICATIONS
DDO                            3.11.1                           R/100'                     R/NA of the  R           R         PDSD     B/A
                                                                                           site                               Director
MISCELLANEOUS APPROVALS
                                                                                                                    R to
Protected Development Right    3.12.2                                                                               applicant M/C
                                                                                                                    only
B/A=Board of Adjustment                            MS&R=Major Streets and Routes Plan      RND=Rio Nuevo District
DDO=Development Design Option                      NA=Neighborhood Association             RZ=Rezoning
DRB=Design Review Board                            PDSD=Planning & Development Services    ZA=Zoning Administrator
M/C=Mayor and Council                              Department                              ZE=Zoning Examiner
MDR= Modification of Development Regulations       PH=Public Hearing                       **See also Special Notice Requirements in Section
                                                                                           3.2.4.B.6 & 7
 
(Am. Ord. 11070, 5/14/2013; Am. Ord. 11127, 11/6/2013; Am. Ord. 11171, 5/20/
2014; Am. Ord. 11732, 2/19/2020; Am. Ord. 11996, 3/21/2023; Am. Ord. 12152, 3/
18/2025)
3.2.4.   PUBLIC NOTICE
   A.   Purpose
   The purpose of public notice is to inform interested members of the public
and those who may be affected by a proposed development , or text or plan
amendment , of the proposed action to allow and encourage timely public comment
to the decision-making body.
   B.   Mailed Notice
   Mailed notices shall comply with the requirements of
Table 3.2-1 and Section
3.2.4.
      1.   Applicability
      Mailed notice is required in accordance with the applicable review
procedure detailed in this Article.
      2.   Notices of Acceptance of Application
      The PDSD is responsible for sending a notice of acceptance of application
for the application review procedures identified in
Table 3.2-1.
      3.   Content of Notices of Application Acceptance and Public Hearing
      Notices of acceptance of application and public hearing notices shall
contain the following:
         a.   A general description of the type, size, and location, as
applicable, of the matter to be considered;
         b.   A general description of the area affected;
         c.   An advisory that public comments regarding the matter may be
submitted prior to the public hearing, or if no public hearing is required,
that public comments may be submitted within the comment period for notice
procedures.
            1.   Exception
               Flexible Lot Design acceptance letters do not include a public
comment period and are for information only.
         d.   Whether a proposed rezoning is within the high-noise or accident
potential zone of the Airport Environs Zone (See Section
5.6); and,
         e.   If the notice is for a public hearing, the time, date, and
location of the hearing.
      4.   Content of Notice of Decision
      Notices of decision are required for the application review procedures
identified in
Table 3.2-1. Notices of decision shall contain the following:
         a.   The decision rendered; and,
         b.   When applicable, information pertaining to appeals of the
decision, such as when the intent to appeal is due and to whom it is submitted.
         c.   Recipients of notice of decisions of the Zoning Examiner and/or
the Mayor and Council in the Zoning Examiner Legislative Procedure shall be
provided with a web link to the decision, with the option to request a hard
copy of the decision from PDSD.
      5.   Preparation of Notice
         a.   The PDSD will use the latest Pima County Assessor records to
determine the property owners to be notified;
         b.   Mailed notices must use mailing labels generated within 60 days
of mailing; and,
         c.   Mailed notices for rezonings must be sent as first class mail.
Other mailings shall be per PDSD policy.
      6.   Recipients of Notice
      Mailed notice must be sent to:
         a.   The applicant and all property owners within the distance
specified in
Table 3.2-1, whether or not the properties are within the corporate limits of
the City ;
         b.   Any other persons the Director determines are affected by the
application or has an interest in the matter;
         c.   Pima County and other municipalities where the subject property
being reviewed adjoins their boundaries;
         d.   All persons who have registered their names and addresses with
the municipality as being interested in receiving notice of UDC text
amendments;
         e.   Ward offices pursuant the PDSD policy; and,
         f.   Neighborhood associations as provided for in
Table 3.2-1.
      7.   Special Notice Requirements
      In addition to the persons and entities entitled to receive notice listed
in
Table 3.2-1, notice also must be sent to the following, as applicable:
         a.   Tucson International Airport or the Davis-Monthan Air Force Base,
as applicable for sites within the Airport Environs Zone and for all procedures
using the Zoning Examiner legislative or special exception procedures;
         b.   Public service agencies affected by the application as determined
by the PDSD Director ;
         c.   Council Ward office for General Plan amendments, UDC text
amendments, text amendments creating an overlay zone ; and the creation and/or
amendment to specific plans such as area, sub-area, neighborhood, major streets
and routes , and redevelopment plans;
         d.   For appeals, except takings appeals pursuant to Section
3.9.3, notice to the applicant, the same parties notified to the original
application, and those who provided oral or written comments on the
application; and,
         e.   For takings appeals pursuant to Section
3.9.3, notice to applicant and to the person or body which made the
administrative decision that is being appealed.
   C.   Timing of Notice
      1.   General
      Published notice, posted notice, and mailed notice shall be provided at
least 15 days prior to the public hearing. Specific requirements for published
and posted notice are set forth in Sections
3.2.4.E and F. For procedures which do not require a public hearing, notice
shall be sent or posted in accordance with PDSD policy.
      2.   Exception
      For takings appeal procedure applications, required public notice is
mailed only to the appellant and to the parties entitled to notice of the
administrative decision.
   D.   Calculation of Notice Area
      1.   General
      The required distance for notification is in accordance with the
requirements of
Table 3.2-1 for the applicable procedure.
      2.   Measurement
         a.   The distance of the required notice area is measured from the
property lines of the applicant’s property.
         b.   Adjoining property under the same ownership as the subject site
must be combined with the property to determine the boundaries from which the
notice is measured.
   E.   Published Notice
   When required by the applicable procedure, published notice must be provided
at least once in a newspaper with general circulation in the City . Notice
shall contain the following: time, date and location of the hearing, general
explanation of the matter to be considered, and if applicable, general
description of the affected area. For UDC text amendments, notice must be
published in a one-eighth page display advertisement.
   F.   Posted Notice
      1.   Applicability
      When required by the applicable procedure in
Table 3.2-1, posted notice must be in accordance with this section.
      2.   Location
      Notice shall be posted on the affected property. At least one notice
shall be posted for each street the property adjoins. Notice must be posted in
accordance with the PDSD policy.
      3.   Content
      At a minimum, the notice shall include the following:
         a.   The type of action (e.g., rezoning, special exception, text
amendment/overlay zone , or variance, etc.);
         b.   The case name;
         c.    For a rezoning, the word “Zoning” visible from a distance of 100
feet and the existing and proposed zoning districts ;
         d.   For B/A, description of the request;
         e.   The date, time, and location of the public hearing, if
applicable; and,
         f.   The telephone number for the PDSD or other applicable City
department.
   G.   Failure of Notice to Adequately Describe the Project
   If, upon receiving a complaint, the responsible City agency determines that
the notice required by this section failed to accurately or adequately describe
the proposed development in a manner that substantially informs how the project
will affect other property owners, PDSD may determine that the approval is
invalid and that the application must obtain a new approval through the same
process as required originally. The City ’s decision to invalidate an approval
may be appealed by the applicant in accordance with Sections
3.10.1 and
3.10.2, Board of Adjustment Appeal Procedure.
   H.   Public Comments to Public Notice
   Public comments shall be submitted to the PDSD Director . Comments involving
a public hearing shall be forwarded to the appropriate officials conducting the
public hearing (e.g., the Mayor and Council, Planning Commission, Zoning
Examiner, and the Board of Adjustment).
      1.   All Procedures Requiring Public Comment
      For all review procedures that require a public comment period, comment
period is 20 days following the date that notice is mailed, except as provided
below.
      2.   Exception
      For the 100' Notice Procedure and neighborhood preservation zone design
review, the comment period is ten days .
      3.   Approval-Protest forms for the Zoning Examiner Legislative Procedure
can be submitted from the time of mailed notice until one day before the
scheduled date of Mayor and Council action.
(Am. Ord. 11070, 5/14/2013; Am. Ord. 11127, 11/6/2013; Am. Ord. 11732, 2/19/
2020)
3.3.   ZONING COMPLIANCE REVIEW PROCEDURES
3.3.1.   PURPOSE
   The purpose of the Zoning Compliance Review is to determine whether an
application conforms to applicable zoning regulations.
3.3.2.   REVIEW PROCEDURES
   Compliance with all applicable zoning regulations is verified in accordance
with one of the following review procedures:
   A.   PDSD Director approval procedure;
   B.   100' Notice Procedure;
   C.   400' Notice Procedure;
   D.   Zoning Administrator approval procedure in accordance with Section
1.5.1;
   E.   Historic Preservation Zone design review procedure in accordance with
Section
5.8.8;
   F.   Neighborhood Preservation Zone design review procedure in accordance
with Section
5.10.3; or,
   G.   Rio Nuevo District design review and minor Modification of Development
Regulations procedures in accordance with Sections
5.11.8 and
5.11.9, respectively.
(Am. Ord. 11732, 2/19/2020)
3.3.3.   PDSD DIRECTOR APPROVAL PROCEDURE
   A.   Applicability
   Applications that are processed in accordance with the Planning and
Development Services (PDSD) Director approval procedure include, but are not
limited to:
      1.   Business licenses;
      2.   Changes of use;
      3.   Downtown Area Infill Incentive District - projects within the
Downtown Core Sub-District requesting a Modification of Development Regulations
(Note: projects within the Greater Infill Incentive Subdistrict are processed
in accordance with the 400' Notice Procedure, Section
3.3.5);
      4.   Electrical connections (certain types);
      5.   Expansion of existing premises;
      6.   Home occupations ;
      7.   Individual Parking Plans for projects greater than 400 feet from R-
3 or more restrictive  zoning districts or Historic Preservation Zones;
      8.   New construction;
      9.   Nonconforming same land use class substitution;
      10.   Nonconforming parking areas ;
      11.   Parking Design Modification Requests (except requests to modify the
number of bicycle or motor vehicle parking spaces );
      12.   Projects within certain overlay zones ;
      13.   Restricted adult activities;
      14.   Site plans (except for projects within overlay zones that require a
different procedure);
      15.   Land divisions, land splits , and subdivisions (see Article 8 for
detailed procedures);
      16.   Temporary uses or structures (see Section
4.11 for additional requirements);
      17.   Tenant improvements ;
      18.   Wireless communication uses (certain types);
      19.   Zoning compliance for site  improvements in existence on May 1,
2005 (see Section
3.3.3.H below); and,
      20.   Other applications, such as blood donor centers and circus,
carnival and tent shows.
   B.   Site Plans
   Some of the above listed application types may also require submission of a
site plan with the application (see Section
3.3.3.G for the requirements for site plans ).
   C.   Pre-Application Conference
   A pre-application conference is recommended, but not required, except as
provided below (see Section
3.2.1 for details on pre-application conferences).
   D.   Application
   Submittal of an application to the PDSD is required in order to process the
request. (See the Administrative Manual for application submittal
requirements.) Applications are reviewed for completeness in compliance with
Section
3.2.3, Application Requirements, and compliance with the neighborhood meeting
requirements of Section
3.2.2, Neighborhood Meeting.
   E.   Review of Accepted Applications
   Applications are reviewed for compliance with applicable zoning regulations
by the PDSD staff and other agencies, committees or advisory boards as required
by the UDC and as deemed necessary or appropriate by the PDSD Director .
   F.   Decision
      1.   The PDSD Director decides whether to approve or deny an application.
      2.   The Director is not required to make a decision on an amended
application until after the required recommendation on the amended application
by an applicable advisory body is received by the PDSD.
   G.   Site Plans
      1.   Purpose
      Certain types of applications listed in Section
3.3.3.A, Applicability (PDSD Director Approval Procedure), may require the
submission of a site plan . This section sets forth the requirements of the
PDSD Director  approval procedure as they pertain to the processing of site
plans . These procedural requirements ensure that an applicant provides
sufficient information to enable the City  to determine compliance with all
applicable UDC  requirements and other applicable City  ordinances, standards,
policies, and special conditions.
      2.   Applicability
      A site plan is required for the following types of development :
         a.   All new non-residential development ;
         b.   All residential development with three or more dwelling units on
one lot ;
         c.   Existing development undergoing a change of use , building or
structure additions, and/or a reconfiguration of an area outside a building ;
         d.   Flexible Lot Developments not required to be processed in
accordance with Article 8, Land Division, Land Split , and Subdivision
Standards; and,
         e.   A residential, commercial, or industrial use reviewed as a
subdivision  plat , but no building permits may be issued until a site plan is
approved for all or a portion of the subject subdivision  plat . Any other
application type listed in Section
3.3.3.A, Applicability (PDSD Director Approval Procedure), where a site plan
submittal is determined by the PDSD Director  to be necessary for adequate
review of the application.
      3.   Application Processing
      Site plans are processed in accordance with the applicable requirements
of Sections
3.3.3.B through F, PDSD Director Approval Procedure.
      4.   Review
      City departments and applicable outside public agencies shall review an
application and return comments on the application.
      5.   Approval
         a.   When a determination has been made that an application complies
with all applicable regulations, the PDSD Director shall send a written
approval confirmation to the applicant and sign the site plan . An approved
site plan indicates that all reviews have occurred and all conditions have been
met.
         b.   In the case of a rezoning, a written confirmation is used to
initiate the preparation of the rezoning ordinance for Mayor and Council
consideration. The PDSD Director shall sign the site plan once the rezoning
ordinance is adopted and becomes effective.
         c.   An applicant has one year from the date of application to obtain
approval of a site plan that complies with zoning and other development
requirements in effect at the time of application, unless an ordinance adopted
by Mayor and Council during this period states otherwise. A site plan
application that has been in review for a period of one year and has not yet
been approved is considered denied. To continue the review of a site plan for
the property, a new site plan must be submitted that complies with regulations
in effect at the time of re-submittal. The new submittal initiates a new one-
year review period.
         d.   Approved site plans shall be filed with the official building
records for the site and shall be the basis for the issuance of building
permits.
      6.   Expiration of Approval
      Expiration dates for site plans are listed below. For the purposes of
this section, “construction or building permits” are those permits issued for
the construction of the project , such as, but not limited to, infrastructure
 improvements , building foundations, buildings , paving vehicular use areas ,
or similar types of improvements related to the construction and implementation
of the project . Permits for: a) clearing, grubbing, and grading of a site ; b)
construction of a section of sidewalk ; c) installation of screening; d) paving
of an access driveway but not the parking associated with the use; or e) any
similar type of work are not considered “construction or building permits” for
purposes of this section, unless specifically stated otherwise by this section
or the process requiring the applicability of this section.
         a.   Site Plan Approval Period and Expiration
   Except in the case of a Protected Development Right Plan, Section
3.12.2, an approved site plan remains valid for a period of three years from
the date of approval, subject to the following.
            (1)   If, at the end of three years, a building permit has not been
obtained, a new site plan application must be submitted that complies with the
regulations in effect at the time of the re-submittal.
            (2)   If the project is being developed in phases and permits have
not been issued for all phases within the three-year period, developers of
subsequent phases have one additional year to obtain permits. If, at the end of
the four-year period, permits have not been issued, review and approval of a
revised site plan for the undeveloped portion(s), in compliance with all
applicable requirements in effect at the time of re-submittal, are required
prior to the issuance of building permits.
            (3)   If construction permits are issued within the required time
period, but the construction of the project has not commenced and the permit
and site plan approval periods expire, the approval of the site plan is
considered expired. Review and approval of a revised site plan , in compliance
with all applicable requirements in effect at the time of re-submittal, are
required prior to the issuance of building permits.
            (4)   If construction permits are applied for but not issued within
the time period required by this section, the time period is extended an
additional three months to allow for completion of the review and for the
issuance of permits.
            (5)   If the approval period has expired, the re-submittal to
obtain approval of a new site plan initiates a new review period in accordance
with Section
3.3.3.B through F.
      7.   Issuance of Permits
      The following provisions apply to review and approval for the issuance of
permits for site plans :
         a.   Approved Site Plan
         The approved site plan on file with the PDSD is the basis for issuance
of building permits. If the building plans differ from the approved site plan
on file with the PDSD, a revised site plan will be required prior to issuance
of the building permits.
         b.   Minor Changes
         The PDSD Director may approve minor changes from the approved building
or site plan without processing the plan through the entire review process.
Determination as to whether the change is minor or major is made by the PDSD
Director on a case-by-case basis. Changes in site design include, but are not
limited to, minor changes to building height , density , land use , parking,
and traffic circulation.
         c.   Major Changes
         Major changes from the approved building or site plan require review
and approval by the PDSD Director and affected review agencies. If the building
or site plan is required as a special requirement imposed by the Mayor and
Council as a condition of rezoning or special exception approval, a major
change requires approval by the Mayor and Council prior to review of the
revised plan.
         d.   Change From, or Expiration of, an Approved Site Plan
         Building permit applications must be accompanied by a copy of an
amended site plan bearing the approval of the PDSD Director for construction
that is not consistent with the approved site plan or for which the initial
approval has expired.
   H.   Zoning Compliance for Site Improvements in Existence on May 1, 2005
   This section encourages the re-use of and re-investment in older,
nonconforming uses and buildings , and facilitates the issuance of a
Certificate of Occupancy (C of O) or a Certificate of Zoning Compliance for a
non-legally permitted use or building . The owner of property, at the time of a
request for a certificate of occupancy or certificate of zoning compliance may
concurrently request that site  improvements , including outdoor activity
areas, in existence as of May 1, 2005 (“existing site  improvements ”) be
granted zoning compliance subject to the following.
      1.   This section only applies to developed property with nonresidential
zoning that is not subject to any of the Overlay Zones in Sections
5.2 (Hillside Development Zone),
5.3 (Scenic Corridor Zone),
5.6 (Airport Environs Zone),
5.7 (Environmental Resource Zone),
5.8 (Historic Preservation Zone) ,
5.9 (Drachman School Overlay),
5.10 (Neighborhood Preservation Zone),
5.11 (Rio Nuevo District), or any change of zoning (rezoning), variance, or
special exception approved subject to conditions, or the subject of an unabated
zoning violation .
      2.   Existing site  improvements are determined by referring to May 2005
aerial photography administered by the Pima Association of Governments (PAG)
and available on the PAG and PDSD websites.
      3.   Existing site  improvements are not subject to compliance with the
following:
         a.   Access, Section
7.8;
         b.   Accessory Uses , Buildings , and Structures, Section
6.6;
         c.   Dimensional standards as provided in
Tables 6.3-1 through
7 in Article 6;
         d.   Height, Section
6.4.4;
         e.   Landscaping and Screening, Section
7.6;
         f.   Lot Coverage, Section
6.4.3;
         g.   Motor Vehicle and Bicycle Parking, Section
7.4;
         h.   Native Plant Preservation, Section
7.7;
         i.   Off-Street Loading, Section
7.5; and,
         j.   Perimeter Yards, Section
6.4.5.
      4.   Properties granted zoning compliance under the provisions of this
section may be used for all principal permitted land uses based on the zoning
of the site subject to the applicable general restrictions in each zone ,
except for the following prohibited uses:
         a.   Alcoholic Beverage Service uses unless continuously licensed
through the Arizona Department of Liquor Licenses and Control from May 1, 2005,
to the present, Section
11.3.4.B;
         b.   Billboard, Section
11.3.4.F;
         c.   Correctional Use, Section
11.3.3.C;
         d.   Family Dwelling, Section
11.3.7.A;
         e.   Food Service uses unless continuously licensed through the Pima
County Health Department from May 1, 2005, to the present, Section
11.3.4.N;
         f.   Group Dwelling, Section
11.3.7.B;
         g.   Mobile Home Dwelling, Section
11.3.7.C;
         h.   Residential Care Services, Section
11.3.7.D;
         i.   Restricted Adult Activities Use Group, Section
11.3.8;
         j.   In the C-2 and C-3 Districts, Medical Marijuana Designated
Caregiver Cultivation Location, Medical Marijuana Dispensary, Medical Marijuana
Dispensary Off-site Cultivation Location; and,
         k.   In the I-1 and I-2 Districts, Medical Marijuana Designated
Caregiver Cultivation Location, Medical Marijuana Dispensary Off-site
Cultivation Location.
      5.   Required drop-off areas must be provided.
      6.   Use of the property must be in compliance with all applicable use-
specific standards in Section
4.9.
      7.   This section is applied to single or multiple parcels of land but
may not be applied to partial parcels .
      8.   Changes to parking lot striping, maintaining the same number of
parking spaces, or increasing the number of parking spaces, are permitted in
compliance with Section
7.4.6 (Motor Vehicle Use Area Design Criteria) so long as no existing elements
such as loading zones  or dumpsters  are deleted except as permitted under
current standards.
      9.   The owner of the property shall:
         a.   Submit a sworn affidavit that the use of the property will be in
compliance with the section; or,
         b.   Include the following in any lease/rental agreement for the
property: “Tenant shall not cause or permit the Property to be used in any way
which constitutes a violation of any law, ordinance, or governmental
regulation. Notwithstanding any contrary provision of this lease agreement, any
occupancy or use of the premises in violation of this paragraph constitutes a
material breach of this lease agreement entitling Lessor to invoke all remedies
provided hereunder including termination.”
      10.   A site inspection to verify that the use of the property is in
compliance with this Section may be conducted at the discretion of the PDSD
Director .
      11.   Applications are reviewed in accordance with the PDSD Director
approval procedure, Section
3.3.3.
      12.   Zoning compliance granted pursuant to this section shall be valid
only so long as the property and site  improvements thereon remain in the same
condition as on the date the zoning compliance is granted. Any subsequent
development or modification to the property or site  improvements will render
zoning compliance under this section void and of no effect. Any modification or
improvement not shown on May 2005 aerial photography administered by the Pima
Association of Governments (PAG) will be considered a subsequent development of
the property.
      13.   Requests for zoning compliance pursuant to this section must be
submitted to the PDSD, and all applicable fees must be paid, prior to the
expiration date of the ordinance adopting this Section
3.3.4.G, as provided herein.
(Ord. 11070, 5/14/2013; Am. Ord. 11201, 9/23/2014; Am. Ord. 11732, 2/19/2020;
Am. Ord. 11922, 7/12/2022)
3.3.4.   100' NOTICE PROCEDURE
   A.   Purpose
   Proposed development that involves minor modifications including increases
to food producing animals , small deviations to design criteria, or minor
construction subject to design review shall comply with the following general
procedures. This procedure is intended to provide notice to parties who may be
affected by the development .
   B.   Applicability
   The 100' Notice Procedure applies to the following applications:
      1.   Approval of resident artisan uses in the Historic Preservation Zone
;
      2.   Certain wireless facilities;
      3.   Design Development Options (DDO) in accordance with Section
3.11.1;
      4.   Parking Design Modification Requests to the required number of
bicycle and motor vehicle parking spaces ;
      5.   PDSD Director Special Exception applications;
      6.   Requests for demolition of contributing, non-historic structures in
Historic Preservation Zones ;
      7.   Requests to increase the permitted number of food producing animals
or decrease the setback for a food producing animal  shelter at a community
garden , an urban farm, or a residential property; and,
      8.   Other types of applications if the PDSD Director makes one of the
following findings:
         a.   There is a minor change in the development criteria that is
requested;
         b.   There are few, if any, changes in the physical attributes of the
property;
         c.   There is a potential for impact upon the neighborhood or the
adjacent properties;
         d.   Where there are commercial and office developments , (1) through
(3) above apply and there is a benefit to area properties from the proposed
redevelopment of the property; or,
         e.   There is an administrative Special Exception Land Use designated
in the UDC related to the proposed development .
   C.   Pre-Application Conference Recommended
   A pre-application conference with City staff is recommended, but not
required. See Section
3.2.1 for details on the pre-application conference.
   D.   Neighborhood Meeting Recommended
   The applicant is recommended, but not required, to conduct a neighborhood
meeting with surrounding property owners and neighborhood association
representatives.
   E.   Application and Notice of Application Required
   Submittal of an application to the PDSD is required in order to process the
request. See the Administrative Manual for application submittal requirements.
Applications shall be reviewed for completeness in compliance with Section
3.2.3.A, Application Required. Following acceptance by the PDSD, notice of the
application is required in accordance with Section
3.2.4.B, Mailed Notices.
   F.   Public Comment Period
   For ten days following the date on which notice is provided, the public may
submit comments on the proposal to the PDSD.
   G.   Review
   Review is conducted by the PDSD staff and other agencies, committees or
advisory boards as required by the UDC , and others as may be deemed
appropriate by the PDSD Director .
   H.   Decision and Notice of Decision
   The PDSD Director shall approve or deny an application and send written
notice of the decision in accordance with Section
3.2.4.B. The PDSD Director may impose conditions for approval of the
application or may require further processing of the application in accordance
with Section
3.3.5, 400' Notice Procedure.
   I.   Appeals
   A party of record may appeal the PDSD Director ’s decision to the Board of
Adjustment (B/A). Appeals must be filed in accordance with Section
3.10.1 and .
2. A notice of intent to appeal must be received by the PDSD within five days
of the effective date of the decision. The complete appeal materials must be
filed within 30 days of the effective date of the decision.
   J.   Waiver of Comment, Notice of the Decision and Right to Appeal
   The required time period for public comment, for notice of the decision, and
for the filing of an appeal may be waived, if the applicant provides written
documentation that all parties of record have waived one or more of these
provisions.
(Am. Ord. 11328, 12/8/2015; Am. Ord. 11732, 2/19/2020)
3.3.5.   400' NOTICE PROCEDURE
   A.   Purpose
   The purpose of this procedure is to require notice to parties who may be
affected by the development .
   B.   Applicability
   The 400' Notice Procedure applies to the following applications:
      1.   Mitigation plans for restaurants that are located within 300 feet of
R-3 or more restrictive  zoning district and that serve alcohol;
      2.   Projects within the Greater Infill Incentive Subdistrict of the
Downtown Area Infill Incentive District requesting a Modification of
Development Regulations; and,
      3.   Individual Parking Plans for projects within 400 feet of R-3 or more
restrictive  zoning districts or Historic Preservation Zones.
   C.   Pre-Application Conference Required
   A pre-application conference with City staff is required in accordance with
Section
3.2.1.
   D.   Neighborhood Meeting Required
   The applicant is required to conduct a neighborhood meeting and shall
provide notice of the neighborhood meeting in accordance with Section
3.2.2.C.
   E.   Application and Notice of Application Required
   Submittal of an application to the PDSD is required in order to process the
request. See the Administrative Manual for application submittal requirements.
Applications are reviewed for completeness in compliance with Section
3.2.3.A. Following acceptance by the PDSD, notice of the application is
required in accordance with Section
3.2.4.B.
   F.   Public Comment Period
   For 20 days following the date on which notice is mailed, the public may
submit comments on the proposal to the PDSD.
   G.   Review
   Review is conducted by the PDSD staff and other agencies, committees or
advisory boards as required by the UDC , and others as may be deemed
appropriate by the PDSD Director .
   H.   Decision and Notice of Decision
   The PDSD Director shall approve or deny an application and send written
notice of the decision in accordance with Section
3.2.4.B.
   I.   Appeals
      1.   The PDSD Director ’s decision may be appealed to the Mayor and
Council on the grounds that the decision is not in conformance with the
criteria established by the UDC ;
      2.   Appeals are processed in accordance with Section
3.9.2, Mayor and Council Appeal Procedure;
      3.   The notice of intent to appeal must be filed with the City Clerk no
later than 14 days after the effective date of the decision;
      4.   The complete appeal materials must be filed with the City Clerk
within 30 days of the effective date of the decision; and,
      5.   A copy of the appeal is provided to the PDSD Director at the time it
is filed.
   J.   Site Inspection
   Prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit, the site shall be inspected by
the PDSD for compliance with the plans approved for the issuance of building
permits and any changes authorized by the PDSD Director to those approved plans
during construction.
(Am. Ord. 11201, 9/23/2014; Am. Ord. 11732, 2/19/2020; Am. Ord. 11922, 7/12/
2022)
3.3.6.   ZONING ADMINISTRATOR APPROVAL PROCEDURE
   The following applications shall be processed in accordance with the Zoning
Administrator approval procedure provided in Section
1.5.1 (Zoning Interpretations and Zoning Certifications):
   A.   Compliance with certification of existing premises;
   B.   Interpretations of the Unified Development Code ;
   C.   Planned area development interpretation; and,
   D.   Zone boundary conflicts.
3.3.7.   HISTORIC PRESERVATION ZONE (HPZ) DESIGN REVIEW PROCEDURE
   Applications for projects within an HPZ are processed in accordance with
Section
5.8.8, Design Review Required.
3.3.8.   NEIGHBORHOOD PRESERVATION ZONE (NPZ) DESIGN REVIEW PROCEDURE
   Applications for applicable projects within an NPZ are processed in
accordance with Section
5.10.3, NPZ Design Review Procedure.
3.3.9.   [RESERVED]
(Rep. Ord. 11246, 2/18/2015)
3.4.   SPECIAL EXCEPTION LAND USES
3.4.1.   GENERAL
   Special Exception Land Uses are often desirable but may have detrimental
effects on adjacent properties or neighborhoods or on the surrounding community
if not properly designed and controlled. Special Exception Land Uses are uses
that are not allowed by right within a zone but are permitted if approved
through a particular review process. A special review of these land uses is
necessary to ensure that avoidable problems or hazards are not created and that
such uses are consistent with the intent of this section and the zones under
which they are permitted.
   Depending on the proposed use, a Special Exception Land Use application is
processed in accordance with the PDSD Director , Zoning Examiner, or the Mayor
and Council Special Exception Procedure.
3.4.2.   PDSD DIRECTOR SPECIAL EXCEPTION PROCEDURE
   A.   Applicability
   The PDSD Director Special Exception Procedure applies to those uses
identified in Section
4.8 (Use Tables) as requiring processing in accordance with the PDSD Director
Special Exception Procedure.
   B.   Application
   An application must be submitted to the PDSD to process the request. See the
Administrative Manual for application submittal requirements. Applications
shall be reviewed for completeness in compliance with Section
3.2.3.A.
   C.   Review and Decision
   PDSD Director Special Exceptions are processed in accordance with the 100'
Notice Procedure, Section
3.3.4. Approval shall be granted if the PDSD Director finds the proposal is in
compliance with the findings provided in Section
3.4.5. The approval may be subject to conditions as provided in Section
3.4.6.
   D.   Appeals
   A party of record may appeal the PDSD Director ’s decision to the Board of
Adjustment (B/A). Appeals must be filed in accordance with Sections
3.10.1 and
3.10.2. A notice of intent to appeal must be received by the PDSD within five
days of the effective date of the decision. The complete appeal materials must
be filed within 30 days of the effective date of the decision.
   E.   Projects Within the Airport Environs Zone (AEZ)
      1.   Special exception uses within the AEZ and projects within the AEZ
requesting to exceed the limits of the performance standards as set forth in
Section
5.6.8.A, B, and C are processed in accordance with the PDSD Director Special
Exception Procedure; and,
      2.   These special exception applications shall be analyzed for:
         a.   Land use  compatibility with Tucson airport or DM base
operations;
         b.   Proximity to the end of the runway;
         c.   Location in relationship to major flight tracks; and,
         d.   Compliance with the intent of the DM Joint Land Use Study.
(Am. Ord. 11732, 2/19/2020)
3.4.3.   ZONING EXAMINER SPECIAL EXCEPTION PROCEDURE
   A.   Applicability
   The following uses are processed in accordance with the Zoning Examiner
Special Exception Procedure:
      1.   Those uses identified in Section
4.8 (Use Table) as requiring processing in accordance with the Zoning Examiner
special exception procedure;
      2.   Expansions of nonconforming uses ; and,
      3.   Substitutions of nonconforming uses if the proposed use is not
within the same land use class as the existing use.
   B.   Pre-Application Conference Required
   A pre-application conference with City staff is required in accordance with
Section
3.2.1.
   C.   Neighborhood Meeting Required
   The applicant is required to conduct a neighborhood meeting and provide
notice of the meeting in accordance with Section
3.2.2.
   D.   Application and Notice (Mailed and Posted) Required
   Submittal of an application to the PDSD is required in order to process the
request. See the Administrative Manual for application submittal requirements.
Applications shall be reviewed for completeness in compliance with Section
3.2.3.A and for compliance with the neighborhood meeting requirements of
Section
3.2.2. Following acceptance by the PDSD, mailed and posted notice of the
application is required in accordance with Section
3.2.4.
   E.   Review
   Review is conducted by the PDSD staff and other agencies, committees or
advisory boards as required by the UDC , and others as may be deemed
appropriate by the PDSD Director .
   F.   PDSD Director Recommendation
   The PDSD Director shall prepare a recommendation and forward it to the
applicant and the Zoning Examiner.
   G.   Zoning Examiner’s Public Hearing
   A public hearing must be held before the Zoning Examiner within 70 days of
acceptance of the application. Public hearings are held in accordance with the
following and the Zoning Examiner’s rules and procedures.
      1.   The Zoning Examiner shall administer oaths and may compel the
attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant information, including
witnesses requested by any party .
      2.   The Zoning Examiner may impose any reasonable limitations on the
number of speakers heard and may establish the nature and length of testimony
by speakers.
      3.   Comments may be given by any person , either verbally or in writing.
      4.   A record of the hearing must be made and retained as a public
record.
      5.   The Zoning Examiner may close the public hearing, or continue the
public hearing to a specified time, date, and place. A continuance may not be
for more than 30 days .
   H.   Zoning Examiner’s Decision
   Within five days after the close of a hearing, the Zoning Examiner shall
make a decision to approve, approve with conditions as provided in Section
3.4.6, or deny the application. Approval shall be based on the findings as
provided in Section
3.4.5.
   I.   Appeal
   The Zoning Examiner’s decision may be appealed to the Mayor and Council by
any party of record in accordance with Section
3.9.2 by submitting a notice of intent to appeal to the City Clerk within 14
days from the effective date of the decision with a copy delivered to the PDSD.
The complete appeal materials must be filed with the City Clerk within 30 days
of the effective date of the decision.
   J.   Change in Condition of Approval
   An applicant may request a change in a condition of approval of a Zoning
Examiner Special Exception Land Use. The request must be submitted to the PDSD
and reviewed by the PDSD staff for recommendation to the Zoning Examiner. The
request is then considered at a public hearing in accordance with procedures in
this Section
3.4.3.
(Am. Ord. 11127, 11/6/2013)
3.4.4.   MAYOR AND COUNCIL SPECIAL EXCEPTION PROCEDURE
   A.   Applicability
   The Mayor and Council Special Exception Procedure applies to those uses
identified in Section
4.8 (Use Table) as requiring processing in accordance with the Mayor and
Council Special Exception Procedure.
   B.   Application Processing
      1.   Mayor and Council special exceptions applications are processed in
accordance with the Zoning Examiner special exception procedure, Sections
3.4.3.B - H, and the following.
      2.   The Zoning Examiner shall forward a recommendation with findings,
and when applicable, conditions on the proposed use to the Mayor and Council
for decision.
      3.   Any person may request that the application be heard at a public
hearing before the Mayor and Council if the request is filed with the City
Clerk within 14 days after the date of the Zoning Examiner’s public hearing or
reconsideration public hearing. Notice of the public hearing must be provided
in the same manner as the notice provided for the Zoning Examiner’s public
hearing.
      4.   The Mayor and Council shall make a decision to approve, approve with
conditions as provided in Section
3.4.6 below, or deny the application.
(Am. Ord. 11127, 11/6/2013)
3.4.5.   FINDINGS
   A.   Findings for all PDSD Director and Zoning Examiner Special Exceptions
   To grant a special exception the PDSD Director and the Zoning Examiner must
find that the requested special exception:
      1.   Meets the standard expressly applied by all adopted by all codes and
regulations for that type of land use or for the land use class applicable to
the proposed use;
      2.   Does not adversely affect adjacent  land uses or the surrounding
neighborhood or that such adverse effects can be substantially mitigated
through the use of additional conditions as provided in Section
3.4.6;
      3.   Provides for adequate and efficient vehicular and pedestrian access
and circulation and vehicular parking;
      4.   Can be adequately and efficiently served by public facilities and
services, such as water, storm water drainage, fire and police protection, and
solid and liquid waste disposal and/or collection as may be required by the
various public and private agencies; and,
      5.   Complies with the General Plan and any applicable sub-regional,
area, or neighborhood plan.
3.4.6.   CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL
   A.   Authority to Apply Conditions
   In approving an application, the PDSD Director , the Zoning Examiner, or the
Mayor and Council may impose such reasonable and appropriate conditions and
safeguards as are be necessary to ensure compliance with the criteria for
approval. Conditions and safeguards may also be imposed to reduce or minimize
any potentially injurious effects on adjacent properties; the character of the
neighborhood; or the health, safety, or general welfare of the community. Such
conditions may include, but are not limited to:
      1.   Structural or vegetative screening greater than that required by the
landscaping and screening standards of the UDC to buffer the surrounding land
uses from the proposed use;
      2.   Limitations on the height, size, or illumination of signs more
restrictive than the applicable requirements of the Tucson Sign Code;
      3.   Limitations on the conduct of the proposed use, such as, but not
limited to, hours of operation, or use of loudspeakers or external lighting, as
necessary to protect adjacent  land uses ; and,
      4.   Dedication of necessary right-of-way for streets , alleys,
drainageways, and utilities .
3.5.   REZONING (CHANGE OF ZONING)
3.5.1.   GENERAL
   Changes to zoning boundaries are considered in accordance with the Zoning
Examiner Legislative Procedure as provided in the section. The procedure
requires a public hearing conducted by the Zoning Examiner (ZE) and a final
decision by the Mayor and Council.
3.5.2.   TYPES OF REZONING ORDINANCES
   All rezoning ordinances require compliance with one or more conditions of
rezoning including substantial compliance with the preliminary site plan
submitted in support of the rezoning application. The three types of rezoning
ordinances, all considered final actions, are as follows.
   A.   Building Permit
   This is the standard type of rezoning ordinance. In addition to other
conditions of rezoning, a building permit rezoning ordinance requires issuance
of a building permit for construction of the principal structure(s) on the
rezoning site to effectuate the rezoning. Permits issued for grading ,
electrical, sidewalks , patio walls, fences, storage buildings , and other
similar types of improvements will not effectuate the rezoning. The building
permit must be secured within the time period allowed for the rezoning case. If
all conditions of rezoning are met prior to expiration of the rezoning
approval, the new zoning becomes effective, and the zoning map is changed to
reflect the new zoning.
   B.   Subdivision  Plat
      1.   This type of rezoning ordinance requires compliance with the
conditions of rezoning, including the completion of the rezoning process
through the recordation of a subdivision  plat . Where the plat demonstrates
compliance with the conditions and the subdivision  plat is approved and
recorded within the time period allowed, the new zoning becomes effective, and
the zoning base maps are changed to reflect the new zoning.
      2.   The use of this type of ordinance is generally limited to single-
family residential projects , where division of lots is such that the property
cannot be used for other purposes without replatting. Staff may recommend the
use of this type of ordinance for other forms of development where, in staff’s
opinion, the same intent can be accomplished. In such instances where there is
a site plan approved for the project , and the project is a large multi-use
development with phased construction, the subdivision  plat can be a block (or
master) subdivision  plat , with each block encompassing each land use area.
      3.   Under this option, a rezoning ordinance may be forwarded to the
Mayor and Council based on an approved tentative plat , provided it can be
shown that all conditions of rezoning have been met, with the exception of the
recordation of the plat . The effectuation of the rezoning is subject to the
recordation of the final plat prior to the expiration of the time period
applicable to the rezoning. Although an ordinance may be adopted based on the
approved tentative plat , no permits may be issued on the project until the
plat has been recorded and the new zoning has become effective.
   C.   Site Inspection
   This type of rezoning ordinance applies to those rezoning applications where
the eventual improvements to the property do not require the issuance of a
building permit or the recordation of a subdivision  plat . The rezoning
ordinance requires conditions of rezoning, including the requirement that a
site inspection be conducted to verify that the Mayor and Council conditions of
rezoning have been met. The purpose of the site inspection is to verify that
site  improvements have been installed on the rezoning site within the time
period allowed, in accordance with an approved site plan . Once the site is
inspected and compliance is confirmed, the new zoning becomes effective, and
the zoning base maps are changed to reflect the new zoning.
3.5.3.   ZONING EXAMINER LEGISLATIVE PROCEDURE
   A.   Applicability
   The Zoning Examiner legislative process includes both Zoning Examiner review
and Mayor and Council actions. The following applications are processed in
accordance with the Zoning Examiner Legislative Procedure:
      1.   Original City zoning for newly annexed areas;
      2.   Amendments to the zoning of specific properties including changes in
the zoning classifications (rezoning);
      3.   Rezonings to the Planned Area Development (PAD) zone (see Section
3.5.5 for additional requirements);
      4.   Rezonings to the Planned Community District (PCD) (see Section
3.5.6 for additional requirements);
      5.   Rezoning of properties to establish an overlay zone (e.g.,
Neighborhood Preservation Zone and Urban Overlay District); and,
      6.   Certain special exceptions.
   B.   Pre-Application Conference Required
      1.   A pre-application conference with City staff is required in
accordance with Section
3.2.1.
      2.   City staff will also make a preliminary determination of whether the
proposal complies with the goals and policies of the General Plan and any
applicable Specific Plan , including Area and Neighborhood Plans. The applicant
may request that the PDSD Director provide the determination of plan compliance
in writing prior to submittal of an application.
      3.   Review is on a conceptual basis, therefore, comments made at a pre-
application conference are advisory and do not constitute approval or denial of
the project .
   C.   Neighborhood Meeting Required
      1.   The applicant shall offer to meet at a specified time and place to
discuss the proposed project in compliance with Section
3.2.2. For rezonings initiated by the Mayor and Council, a neighborhood meeting
may be conducted as part of a broader public outreach process facilitated by
the PDSD and other departments as needed.
      2.   For Concurrent Plan Amendment and Rezoning Applications, a
representative of PDSD staff shall attend the Neighborhood Meeting to provide
an overview of the Concurrent Plan Amendment and Rezoning process and the area
and/or neighborhood plans affected.
      3.   Exception. For the designation or amendment to a Historic
Preservation Zone , the offer to meet shall be made no more than one year
before the Zoning Examiner public hearing;
   D.   Application Requirements
      1.   General
      See the Administrative Manual for application submittal requirements.
Applications are reviewed for completeness in compliance with Section
3.2.3.A.
      2.   Initiation
      A rezoning may be initiated by the property owner or the owner’s agent
upon submittal of a written application to amend the zoning on the property. A
rezoning may also be initiated by a majority vote of the Mayor and Council.
      3.   Plan Amendment Determination
      Rezoning applications must be in conformance with adopted plan policies
before a rezoning application may be accepted for processing. A determination
of plan compliance shall be made in one of the following three ways.
      Rezoning applications must be in conformance with adopted plan policies
before a rezoning application may be accepted for processing; except for
Concurrent Plan Amendment and Rezoning Applications, as provided in Section
3.5.3.D.3.d below. A determination of plan compliance shall be made in one of
the following three ways.
         a.   Plan Compliance Determination
            (1)   Prior to submittal of a rezoning application, the PDSD
Director will provide the applicant with a preliminary determination of plan
compliance at the pre-application conference.
            (2)   Prior to submittal of a rezoning application, the applicant
may request in writing that the PDSD Director provide a written determination
of plan compliance.
         b.   Determination by the PDSD after Application for Rezoning
         Upon submittal of an application for rezoning, the PDSD Director shall
provide a written determination of land use plan compliance to the applicant.
If the proposal is found to comply with the applicable plans, the rezoning
application is formally accepted. If the Director determines a plan amendment
is necessary, no further formal processing of the application may occur until
the applicant requests a plan amendment in accordance with Section
3.6, Land Use Plan Adoption and Amendment Procedures. A written notice of
decision shall be provided if it is determined that a plan amendment  is
required.
         c.   Appeal of Plan Amendment Determination
   The PDSD Director ’s decision that a plan amendment is required may be
appealed to the Mayor and Council. The appeal must be submitted in writing to
the PDSD within ten days of the effective date of the PDSD Director ’s
decision. Appeals shall be processed in accordance with Section
3.9.2, Mayor and Council Appeal Procedure. An appeal stays all processing until
the appeal is heard and decided.
         d.   Applicant's Option for Concurrent Plan Amendment and Rezoning
Applications
            In any instance where the PDSD Director determines that a plan
amendment is necessary for a rezoning application to proceed, the applicant may
elect to proceed with concurrent applications for a plan amendment and
rezoning. An applicant who elects to proceed with concurrent plan amendment and
rezoning applications shall submit documentation to PDSD of the intent to
utilize this option prior to the required combined Neighborhood Meeting, and is
responsible for all fees associated with each process, and the applications are
subject to all of the requirements of each process, unless stated otherwise. An
applicant who elects to proceed with concurrent applications is deemed to
acknowledge that the rezoning application cannot be approved unless the plan
amendment application is approved; and that approval of the plan amendment
application does not guarantee approval of the rezoning application, which is a
separate legislative decision.
         4.   Staff will determine whether a zoning application is
administratively complete within 30 days after receiving an application.
            a.   If the application is not administratively complete, staff
will provide notice to the applicant, either in writing or electronically,
including a comprehensive list of the specific deficiencies.
            b.   An application will not be deemed administratively complete
until all requested information has been received by the City.
            c.   Staff will determine if a re-submitted application is complete
within 15 days of resubmittal. The City will follow the procedures prescribed
in A.R.S. 9-835(E), until the incomplete application is deemed administratively
complete. An application will be considered withdrawn, if by 15 days after the
date of the notice of deficiencies in subsection a. above or any subsequent
notice of deficiencies, the applicant does not supply the documentation or
information requested or an explanation of why the information cannot be
provided within the 15 days.
            d.   The above requirements do not apply to land that is designated
as a Historic Landmark, Historic Preservation Zone, an area that is designated
as historic on the National Register of Historic Places, or Planned Area
Developments.
   E.   Notice of Application
   Notice is required as follows:
      1.   Mailed Notice
         a.   Notice must be sent to those individuals and neighborhood
associations in accordance with Section
3.2.4.B.6. Notice shall also be sent to all parties of record on a previous
hearing on the same application.
         b.   See Section
3.2.4.B.3 for the mailed notice’s content requirements.
      2.   Posted Notice
      Notice shall be posted on the subject site in accordance with Section
3.2.4.F, Posted Notice.
   F.   Review
   Review is conducted by the PDSD staff and other agencies, committees or
advisory boards as required by the UDC and as may be deemed appropriate by the
PDSD Director .
   G.   Changes to the Rezoning Application
   If the applicant proposes changes to the rezoning application, including any
supporting materials, after the application has been accepted for processing,
the PDSD Director shall determine whether or not the proposed changes are
significant enough to require additional staff or agency review.
      1.   If the changes require additional review, the changes may be
accepted only if the revised application is submitted prior to the legal
advertisement and public notification of the public hearing and the changes are
accompanied by the applicant’s written consent to begin anew the process from
the date of submittal of the revised application.
      2.   Upon submitting a significant change to the rezoning application,
the applicant shall also submit a signed letter waiving the 70-day public
hearing requirement to allow for proper staff evaluation of the new
information.
      3.   Once the public hearing has been advertised, any request to delay
the public hearing or to change the application must be submitted to the Zoning
Examiner for determination. If the public hearing is delayed, the applicant
shall remit to the City an additional rezoning public notice label fee to
provide mailed notice to neighbors of canceled public hearing and the
rescheduled public hearing date), and an additional public hearing legal
advertisement fee. If the rescheduled public hearing date cannot be determined
when the notice of cancellation is mailed to neighbors, a second public hearing
notice label fee must be paid by the applicant to provide the required notice
to the neighboring property owners.
   H.   Planning and Development Services Department (PDSD) Recommendation
   After City departments and public service agencies have reviewed and
provided comment on the application, a staff report is prepared by the PDSD.
The report is distributed to the Zoning Examiner and the principals named in
the application. Owners of property located within 400 feet of the rezoning
site are notified of the public hearing and provided a web link to the staff
report and other materials associated with the case. The staff report and the
notice of public hearing are made available to the public at least 15 days
prior to the public hearing.
   I.   Public Hearing
      1.   Applications reviewed under this procedure are considered by the
Zoning Examiner at a public hearing(s) for recommendation to the Mayor and
Council.
      2.   Original City Zoning 
      Upon the effective date of annexation of property into the City , the
City may adopt original City zoning or may continue the existing county zoning
for a period not to exceed six months. The original City zoning shall only be
initiated by the Mayor and Council. Notice of initiation must be provided in
conformance with A.R.S. § 9-462.04.A and the notice requirements of Section
3.2.4. A case that establishes original City zoning may be initiated any time
after the filing of a blank petition for annexation of the subject property
with the office of the Pima County Recorder in accordance with state law.
      3.   Zoning Examiner Public Hearing
      The Zoning Examiner shall hold a public hearing on behalf of the Mayor
and Council on applications for a change of zoning and on applications for
Mayor and Council Special Exception Land Uses in accordance with the Zoning
Examiner's Rules and Procedures and as provided below. The public hearing
procedures set forth in this section is used for both types of applications.
The public hearing must be held within 70 days of acceptance of the
application, except for applications for original City zoning. For Concurrent
Plan Amendment and Rezoning applications the public hearing must be held within
180 days of acceptance of the application.
         a.   Conduct of the Public Hearing
            (1)   The Zoning Examiner is empowered to obtain information from
all parties and interested persons , including public agencies, prior to the
public hearing, provided all requests for information are in writing and the
request and information are included as part of the public record. The Zoning
Examiner also has the authority, after the close of the public hearing, to
obtain additional information or clarification of information that has been
presented. Any such request shall be in writing and the request and response
shall be included as part of the record or report to the Mayor and Council. The
Zoning Examiner may close the public hearing, or may continue the hearing to a
specified date, time and place. However, a continuance may not be for more than
30 days .
            (2)   Except as permitted in subsection (1) above, the Zoning
Examiner shall not communicate, directly or indirectly, with any party , any
party ’s representative or any interested person in connection with any issue
involved with a particular request, except upon notice and opportunity for all
parties to participate, or, use, or rely upon any communication, report, staff
memorandum, or other material prepared in connection with the particular case,
unless it is made part of the record. Any and all written information received
by the Zoning Examiner in the case must be made a part of the record. The
Zoning Examiner may inspect the site provided all parties are given an
opportunity to be present.
         b.   Zoning Examiner’s Preliminary Recommendation
         The Zoning Examiner shall issue a report with preliminary findings and
a preliminary recommendation within five days after the close of a hearing. The
preliminary recommendation is provided to the applicant, the PDSD Director and
to any person who has requested a copy of the preliminary recommendation.
         c.   Reconsideration
         Any party of record may request that the preliminary recommendation be
reconsidered or that the public hearing be reopened if there are errors of fact
or procedure. The request shall state the alleged errors of fact or procedure
and must be submitted to the Zoning Examiner within five days after the date of
the preliminary recommendation. The Zoning Examiner must take action on the
request within five days following the receipt of a request for
reconsideration. Action on the request includes revising the preliminary
recommendation, reopening the public hearing, or denying the request.
         d.   Final Recommendation
         Within 14 days (or 19 days if a reconsideration of the preliminary
recommendation is requested in accordance with Section 3.5.3.J.3.c) following
the close of the public hearing or the re-opened public hearing, the Zoning
Examiner shall issue and transmit a final recommendation to the Mayor and
Council for final action. If the Zoning Examiner determines that minor
corrections to the preliminary recommendation are appropriate in response to a
request for reconsideration, such corrections may be incorporated into the
final recommendation without further proceedings. No further requests for
reconsideration are permitted. If the Zoning Examiner determines that a
significant change to the preliminary recommendation is appropriate, the public
hearing must be reopened with notice provided to all persons who received the
previous preliminary recommendation.
         e.   Reopening of the Public Hearing
         If the public hearing is reopened, the new hearing must be held within
40 days of the close of the last public hearing. Notice of the reopened hearing
is the same as the notice for the original public hearing. If the public
hearing is reopened at the request of a party , or to consider new information
from a party , the Zoning Examiner may require that the party pay the costs for
the re-opened public hearing. At the conclusion of the reopened hearing, the
issuance of a preliminary recommendation, the time period for reconsideration,
the issuance of a final recommendation and the time periods for each shall be
the same as for the original hearing.
         f.   Mayor and Council Public Hearing Request
         Any person may request that the application be heard at a public
hearing before the Mayor and Council if the request is filed with the City
Clerk within 14 days after the date of the Zoning Examiner’s public hearing or
reconsideration public hearing. The Mayor and Council may also decide to
conduct a public hearing without a specific request. If a public hearing is
requested, notice must be provided in the same manner as the notice provided
for the Zoning Examiner’s public hearing.
   J.   Mayor and Council Action
      1.   Mayor and Council Public Hearing Request
      Any person may request that the application be heard at a public hearing
before the Mayor and Council if the request is filed with the City Clerk within
14 days after the date of the Zoning Examiner’s public hearing or
reconsideration public hearing. The Mayor and Council may also decide to
conduct a public hearing. If a public hearing is requested, notice must be
provided in the same manner as the notice provided for the Zoning Examiner’s
public hearing.
      2.   Authorization for Change of Zoning (Rezoning)
      Where a change in zoning is requested based upon a preliminary site plan
, the Mayor and Council may make a preliminary determination to authorize the
applicant to proceed with the case.
         a.   Authorization for the Application to Proceed
         A vote by the Mayor and Council to authorize a change of zoning case
constitutes authorization for the applicant to proceed, subject to the
applicant’s subsequent demonstration of compliance with any special conditions
that may have been established by the Mayor and Council. Unless the Mayor and
Council state a shorter time period, the applicant must complete all conditions
of approval within five years from the date the request is authorized.
         b.   Discretion of the Mayor and Council
         An authorization for a change of zoning is preliminary and does not in
any way limit the legislative discretion of the Mayor and Council to determine
whether or not to adopt a change of zoning ordinance or to add conditions
thereto at the time an ordinance is presented for adoption. Authorization does
not establish any vested right to the authorized zoning prior to ordinance
adoption.
      3.   Direct Ordinance Adoption
      Where a change of zoning application includes a site plan or a proposed
plat that provides sufficient specific details to demonstrate compliance with
all conditions that may be required by the Mayor and Council and is in
compliance with this Section, the application may proceed from staff review to
Mayor and Council ordinance adoption without a separate Mayor and Council
authorization to proceed with the application.
         a.   Mayor and Council Actions
         The Mayor and Council shall consider the change of zoning application,
the Zoning Examiner’s recommendation, and the City Manager’s recommendation in
a public meeting or a public hearing. The Mayor and Council may authorize the
case to proceed; may modify, delete or add to the proposed conditions for
approval; may remand the case to the Zoning Examiner for further proceedings;
may adopt an ordinance changing the zoning, deny the application; or may take
other appropriate action.
         b.   Davis Monthan AEZ Comments
         If Davis Monthan Air Force Base submits comments to the City on any
application concerning the compatibility of the proposed rezoning with the
high-noise, accident potential zone , or approach-departure corridor that may
have an adverse impact on the operation of the base or upon public health and
safety, a public hearing shall be held to consider these and other comments per
requirements of the A.R.S.
      4.   Mayor and Council Adoption of the Change of Zoning
         a.   If an application substantially demonstrates compliance with the
conditions for a change of zoning, staff shall prepare an ordinance to be
submitted to the Mayor and Council for adoption enacting the change in zoning.
         b.   For a project that is to be completed in phases, the Mayor and
Council may adopt a separate ordinance for each phase of the project , but only
if each phase submitted for approval can meet all required conditions and codes
without reliance on future phases.
      5.   Voting Requirements for Adoption of Ordinance
      Ordinance adoption of a change of zoning is granted by a simple majority
vote of the governing body unless the requirements of A.R.S. 9-462.04(H) are
met. If the requirements of A.R.S. 9-462.04(H) are met, then a three-fourths
vote of the governing body is required for adoption of the ordinance.
         a.   The entire area of the lot or lots within the subject site ; or,
         b.   Property in any one of the following quadrants: north, south,
east, west, that is located within 150 feet of the rezoning site , excluding
public right-of-way  abutting the subject site .
         c.   Mayor and Council Action Timeline
            (1)   The Mayor and Council shall approve or deny the application
within 180 days of the determination that the application is administratively
complete.
            (2)   For extenuating circumstances, the PDSD Director may grant a
onetime extension of not more than 30 days.
            (3)   If an applicant requests an extension, the PDSD Director may
grant extensions of 30 days for each extension granted.
            (4)   The requirements of subsections (1), (2) and (3) above do not
apply to land that is designated as a Historic Landmark, Historic Preservation
Zone, an area that is designated as historic on the National Register of
Historic Places, or Planned Area Developments.
      6.   Ordinance Effective Date
      Ordinances granting changes in zoning are, by state statute, subject to
referendum and shall not become effective until 30 days after the date of
adoption or the date the final ordinance is available from the City Clerk,
whichever is later. The effective date of the ordinance is not necessarily the
effective date of the change of the zoning (rezoning). The effective date of
the change of zoning is when compliance with conditions of approval is
completed and certified by the PDSD Director . No permits or development
approvals may be granted that are in furtherance of the rezoning request until
the 30 days have lapsed and the conditions of rezoning have been met.
      7.   Reconsideration
      A member of the Mayor and Council may request the reconsideration of an
authorization decision or decision on a proposed ordinance provided the vote to
reconsider is made within 30 days of the date of decision. A hearing for
reconsideration will be scheduled upon a majority vote in favor of the
reconsideration. If the reconsideration occurs after the meeting when the
decision is initially made, then public notice of the reconsideration must be
given in the same manner as for the initial decision.
(Am. Ord. 11070, 5/14/2013; Am. Ord. 11127, 11/6/2013; Am. Ord. 11729, 2/19/
2020; Am. Ord. 11732, 2/19/2020; Am. Ord. 12131, 10/22/2024)
3.5.4.   CHANGE IN CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL AND COMPLETION OF CONDITIONS
   An applicant may request a change to conditions of approval. The PDSD
Director shall make a determination as to whether a proposed change to the
conditions of rezoning, to the preliminary site plan , or to the approved site
plan is major, minor, or administrative. A request to change conditions of
approval is considered as follows:
   A.   Types of Changes
   The three types of changes are as follows:
      1.   Major Change
         a.   Density or increase in non-residential floor area condition
         This change involves, 1) if the number of residences increases by 10%
or greater; or in any case increases by 50 or more units; or 2) if the non-
residential floor area increases by 10% or greater;
         b.   Design condition
         This change involves a quantified physical dimension established in a
condition to adapt to specific site characteristics or mitigate development
impacts on the site and surrounding land uses . Examples of such dimensions
include setbacks , heights, landscape buffers, natural areas, or areas to be
disturbed, when these are illustrated on the preliminary site plan or stated in
a condition;
         c.   Use condition
         This change involves an illustration on the preliminary site plan or a
change stated in a condition that only a specific set of uses are permitted on
the site ; or,
         d.   A change in a preliminary site plan when the building area is
substantially reconfigured such that traffic generated by the new layout will
increase 10% or greater over the previous layout’s proposed traffic generation.
      2.   Minor Change
      A change in the rezoning conditions or preliminary site plan that is not
a major change or an administrative change.
      3.   Administrative Change
      A change in a feature of a preliminary site plan for an approved rezoning
when the result is still in substantive compliance with the approved rezoning.
Administrative changes are approved by the PDSD Director . The Director shall
make a finding that the change will not create a nuisance on adjoining  land
uses or cause a safety hazard.
   B.   Procedures for Changes
      1.   Minor Amendment to a Preliminary Site Plan
      A request for a minor amendment to a preliminary site plan that was
approved by the Mayor and Council is considered a change to conditions of
approval that may be granted by the PDSD Director .
      2.   Major Amendment to Conditions or the Preliminary Site Plan
            a.   A request for a major amendment to the conditions of approval
or the approved preliminary site plan is subject to either the Zoning Examiner
Legislative Procedure, per UDC Section
3.5.3, or Mayor and Council approval at a public hearing.
            b.   A neighborhood meeting is required per the requirements of
Section
3.2.2.
            c.   After the required neighborhood meeting the PDSD Director will
determine which process the request will follow. The PDSD Director's
determination is not subject to appeal.
               1.   The request shall follow the Zoning Examiner Legislative
Procedure if the PDSD Director determines, after the neighborhood meeting, that
the application presents issues that would be appropriate for review and
recommendation from the Zoning Examiner prior to Mayor and Council
consideration.
               2.   The request is subject only to Mayor and Council approval
at a public hearing if the PDSD Director determines that no review by the
Zoning Examiner is needed to inform the Mayor and Council's consideration of
the application. The Mayor and Council may proceed to make that decision after
a Public Hearing; and also have the option to remand the application to the
Zoning Examiner for the Zoning Examiner's review and recommendation.
            d.   The same voting requirements as for the original adoption
shall apply to the request for a substantial change of conditions.
         3.   Minor Changes to Conditions
            Minor amendments to conditions of approval must be considered by
the Mayor and Council in a public meeting.
   C.   Time Period for Completion of Conditions
      1.   The Mayor and Council, when authorizing a rezoning request, shall
establish a time period to meet all conditions of rezoning. The time period
shall begin the day after the date of authorization.
      2.   The required length of the time period to complete conditions of
rezoning may range from one day to five years. By Mayor and Council policy, the
staff recommendation for rezoning requests that involve a zoning violation is a
one-year period. For rezoning requests that do not involve a zoning violation ,
a five-year period is recommended.
   D.   Extension of Time
      1.   When a rezoning request has been authorized or an ordinance adopted
and the specified time period within which to complete all conditions of
rezoning has lapsed, the case file shall be closed. A closed case may be
reactivated only by the Mayor and Council after a public hearing on the
reactivation of the case.
      2.   A time extension may be requested before the time period for
completion of the ordinance conditions expires. The request must be filed prior
to the expiration date so Mayor and Council can take action on the request
prior to the expiration of rezoning.
      3.   The filing of a time extension request initiates a staff review to
determine whether the request should be approved or denied, and whether
conditions should be revised to reflect new conditions, or practice. New
conditions may be added as part of the staff review. At the end of the staff
review period, a communication to Mayor and Council is drafted and forwarded to
the City Clerk for City Manager review and Mayor and Council consideration.
      4.   The Mayor and Council shall consider the time extension request
after a public hearing, in the circumstance where the time extension request
does not extend the expiration period beyond five years from the most recent
public hearing on the case. However, no time extension may be granted beyond
ten years from the original date of approval.
      5.   Where an ordinance has been adopted, the last public hearing before
the ten-year limitation shall provide for the repeal of the adopted ordinance
if the conditions are not completed prior to the expiration of the ten-year
period.
   E.   Completion and Certification
   A case is deemed complete and final when the conditions of approval are
verified as complete by the PDSD Director . The conditions may include, but are
not limited to the issuance of a building permit, the recording of legal
documents, such as a subdivision  plat , or issuance of a zoning compliance
certificate upon a site inspection. When completion of the conditions has been
verified, the PDSD Director shall certify completion of the conditions and the
zoning on the property shall be changed in accordance with the adopted
ordinance.
   F.   Time Limitations on Re-filing
      1.   Mayor and Council policy and the rules and procedures of the Zoning
Examiner require that a new request for rezoning on property previously denied
rezoning by the Mayor and Council may not be accepted for a period of one year
from the date of denial, except:
         a.   When the new case does not involve a request for a zone that was
denied or recommended as a substitute zone and rejected by the original
applicant;
         b.   When a substantial change in the use of adjacent property has
occurred since the previous case was heard that could not have been
anticipated; or,
         c.   When there has been a change in ownership and a substantially
modified site plan is presented.
      2.   Mayor and Council policy recognizes the Pima County Board of
Supervisors’ one-year policy with respect to rezoning applications that have
been denied, where these properties are later annexed into the City . The one-
year waiting period begins on the day after the date the Board of Supervisors
denied the application.
(Am. Ord. 11996, 3/21/2023)
3.5.5.   PLANNED AREA DEVELOPMENT (PAD) ZONE
   A.   General
      1.   The purpose of the Planned Area Development (PAD) zone is to enable
and encourage comprehensively planned development in accordance with adopted
plans and policies.
      2.   The PAD is a zoning classification which provides for the
establishment of zoning districts with distinct standards.
   B.   Distinct Land Use Regulations Permitted
      1.   A PAD may have land use regulations different from the zoning
regulations in the UDC , any other PAD District , or other zoning districts .
      2.   When a provision in a PAD varies from the UDC , the provisions in
the PAD shall govern.
      3.   Signs shall be in compliance with Section
7A.11.4, Planned Area Development (PAD) District. A Master Sign Program, in
accordance with
7A.7, Sign Design Options, may be submitted concurrently with a PAD.
   C.   Application Processing and PAD Establishment
      1.   Each PAD must be in compliance with the General Plan and applicable
sub-regional and neighborhood plans.
      2.   A PAD is processed and established in accordance with Section
3.5.3, Zoning Examiner Legislative Procedure, and the following additional
requirement.
      3.   Within 30 days after the PDSD Department recommends approval, the
PAD rezoning request is scheduled for a public hearing before the Zoning
Examiner.
   D.   Established Districts
      1.   PADs are identified on the City Zoning Maps by the letters “PAD”
followed by a number, such as “PAD-1,” signifying the set of standards adopted
and applicable to that planned area development .
      2.   The PDSD is responsible for maintaining the list of established
PADs.
   E.   Initiation of a PAD District.  
      A PAD District is initiated by filing an application with the Planning
and Development Services Department. The application may be filed by the owners
of the subject property, an agent for the property owners, or the Mayor and
Council. The application will be accepted for processing only if the following
requirements are met:
      1.   The site is under single ownership or control except when initiated
by the Mayor and Council;
      2.   The PAD District shall be configured to accommodate a well-
integrated project. A PAD District may include existing rights-of-way provided
the district is planned and developed on a unified basis.
   F.   PAD Implementation
   PADs are implemented in accordance with the procedures in this Section
3.5.5. PADs may establish additional implementation procedures, provided such
methods are not in conflict with required procedures and are fully described by
the PAD document.
   G.   Site Plan Review
   No development may occur within a PAD until a site plan for the development
is approved by the City in accordance with Section
3.3.3, PDSD Director Approval Procedure.
   H.   Enforcement
   Standards adopted for each PAD are enforced in the same manner as the
enforcement of any zoning violation as provided in Section
10.2.
   I.   Interpretation
   The Zoning Administrator shall interpret a PAD in accordance with Section
1.5.1, Zoning Determinations and Zoning Certifications by the Zoning
Administrator. Interpretations of UDC  zoning provisions may be applied to
similar PAD provisions.
   J.   Amendment to an Adopted PAD
      1.   PAD amendments must be in substantial conformance with the
objectives of the PAD. Changes to conditions and terms of a PAD that affect the
overall density , intensity, and classifications of land uses must be processed
as a new change of zoning. Changes to other conditions of a PAD must comply
with the procedures for changes of conditions in this section.
      2.   Amendment Application
         a.   An amendment to a PAD may be initiated by the property owner, the
owner’s agent, or the Mayor and Council upon submittal of a written application
to amend one or more of the PAD standards.
         b.   The application must be accompanied by a statement documenting
the need for the amendment.
         c.   The PDSD Director shall determine if the amendment would result
in a major change in the PAD. A major change is one which:
            (1)   Allows uses not otherwise permitted in the PAD or a section
of the PAD;
            (2)   Varies or changes a PAD policy;
            (3)   Increases the number of proposed residences per acre by more
than 10% or exceeds the maximum number of dwelling units permitted within the
adopted PAD;
            (4)   Changes designated buffers or perimeter landscaping , as
delineated in the PAD, which was established to adapt the PAD to specific site
characteristics or mitigate development impacts on the site and surrounding
area;
            (5)   Varies the building height , lot coverage , or building
setbacks by more than 10% of that delineated in the adopted PAD;
            (6)   As a consequence of more than one non-substantial change
submitted concurrently, cumulatively results in a significant change in the
objectives or goals of the PAD; or,
            (7)   Results in a significant change in pedestrian or traffic
circulation within the PAD or in the surrounding area.
         d.   Major changes to a PAD are processed in accordance with Sections
3.5.3, Zoning Examiner Legislative Procedure. A major change may require, as
determined by the PDSD Director , submittal of amended items, such as a site
analysis.
         e.   The PDSD Director may approve changes determined to be minor or
administrative.
         f.   When requested in writing by the applicant, the PDSD Director may
authorize a delay in the PAD amendment process.
(Am. Ord. 11070, 5/14/2013; Am. Ord. 11127, 11/6/2013; Am. Ord. 11386, 7/6/
2016; Am. Ord. 11508, 12/5/2017; Am. Ord. 11803, 12/8/2020)
3.5.6.   PLANNED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT (PCD) ZONE
   A.   Purpose
      1.   Accommodate large-scaled, unified planned developments that conform
to the best practices, policies and programs within the City ’s General Plan ,
applicable specific plans , and other sustainability and conservation programs;
      2.   Provide an alternative zoning district and development process to
accommodate large master-planned developments that allow development
flexibility not otherwise attainable under conventional zoning districts and
allow for adjustments to changing community and market conditions;
      3.   Provide a framework to promote sustainable land use patterns and
mobility options while being responsive and sensitive to the natural features
and topography of the desert environment;
      4.   Provide within such developments a variety of housing, including
affordable housing, and combination of land uses with sound site planning
principles and development techniques; and,
      5.   Promote the timely planning, funding and development of public
facilities designed to serve the projected population.
   B.   General Provisions
      1.   Conformance with the General Plan
         a.   Each PCD must be in compliance with the General Plan and
applicable specific plans .
         b.   Specific Plans
         A PCD is permitted only in areas where there is an existing specific
plan . In areas where there is no existing specific plan , an applicant may
submit an application for a PCD so long as an application for a specific plan ,
consistent with the application for the PCD, has already been submitted
pursuant to Section
3.6. The application for the PCD will be processed concurrently with the
application for the specific plan , but the PCD may not be adopted until after
the adoption of a specific plan .
      2.   Ownership of the PCD
      Upon application for and approval of the PCD, the site of the PCD, with
the exception of public rights-of-way , must be under single ownership or
control of a single entity with legal authority to conduct the application
process on behalf of all the landowners.
      3.   Minimum PCD Area
         a.   A PCD must be the minimum size as required in the applicable
General Plan , specific plan , or a minimum of 500 contiguous  acres ,
whichever is greater.
         b.   Public rights-of-way located within the interior of a PCD may be
included in calculating the minimum 500 acres .
         c.   A PCD may include areas that contain existing development .
         d.   The Mayor and Council may authorize the initiation of a PCD less
than the size required by this section if the size of the proposed PCD is
consistent with the intent of the applicable general plan or specific plan .
      4.   Major Streets and Routes Plan Amendment
      The Major Streets and Routes Plan will be amended, as needed, to add,
delete, or modify a roadway within a PCD concurrently through the approval
process for the PCD.
   C.   Identification of the PCD
      1.   PCDs are identified on the City Zoning Maps by the letters “PCD”
followed by a number and the name of the District , such as “PCD-1, XYZ Planned
Community Development (PCD) District,” signifying the set of standards adopted
and applicable to that District . PDSD shall administratively update the list
upon the adoption of each new PCD.
      2.   Within a PCD, development must be divided into development areas
(DA). DAs shall establish the permitted density and intensity of land uses
within the PCD. Permitted land uses in a DA are those that are identified in
the implementation plan.
      3.   Within a DA, one or more zoning districts may be established and
contain one or more land uses listed in the Project Development Standards and
Design Guidelines.
   D.   Development Standards
   A PCD provides for the establishment of development areas (DAs) and zoning
districts with distinct standards within the boundary of the PCD as adopted by
the Mayor and Council.
      1.   A PCD may incorporate land use classifications and standards from
the UDC or other City  development ordinances and standards with modifications
as necessary to provide for a master planned community. The standards must be
consistent with policies in the general plan and applicable specific plan .
      2.   A PCD may include standards that are different from the standards in
the UDC that apply in, but are not limited to permitted, special exception,
secondary and accessory land uses ; building heights ; lot coverage and lot
size ; cluster development ; building and perimeter setbacks ; parking and
loading; landscaping and other development standards. The PCD may not change or
alter the provisions for impact fees in Article III, Impact Fees of the
Development Compliance Code, Chapter 23A of the Tucson Code.
      3.   Where a provision in a PCD varies from the UDC standard, the
provisions in the PCD shall govern. Where standards in a PCD are silent or do
not address an issue, the applicable codes and ordinances shall govern.
Amendments to the UDC enacted subsequent to the adoption of the PCD shall apply
to the PCD. If an amendment adopted subsequent to the PCD conflicts with an
express provision of the PCD, the PCD shall govern unless the adopting
ordinance expressly states that the amendment supersedes the PCD provision.
   E.   Review and Establishment Procedure
   A PCD shall be established in accordance with Section
3.5.3, Zoning Examiner Legislative Procedure. Notice must be sent in accordance
with the requirements of
Table 3.2-1 , except that notice must be sent to all property owners within
2,640 feet (one-half mile) from the boundaries of the proposed PCD and to all
neighborhood associations  within two miles of the boundary.
   F.   Amendment Procedures
   The Director of Planning and Development Services Department (PDSD) shall
determine if the proposed amendment constitutes an administrative, minor, or
major amendment according to the criteria set forth in this section. The
Director shall evaluate a proposed change for its compliance with the intent of
the approved PCD and any impact that may cause a public health or safety risk.
These amendment procedures do not preempt an applicant’s ability to apply for
other modification procedures available within the UDC . The following
procedures shall be followed for an amendment to the PCD.
      1.   Administrative Amendment
      An administrative amendment is one that does not create a substantial
change to the Master Site Plan (MSP), an overall district area (DA), or the
overall PCD. The PDSD Director shall determine if the potential impacts to the
PCD are a substantial or insubstantial change after review of the requested
changes. Insubstantial changes are administratively decided by the PDSD
Director .
         a.   Process
         An administrative amendment requires no public hearing unless one is
required as part of the PCD adoption. Administrative amendments include the
following:
            (1)   The categories of changes listed in subsection b.;
            (2)   Other changes specifically identified as administrative
amendments in the PCD approved by the Mayor and Council; and,
            (3)   Categories of changes deemed by the PDSD Director to be
comparable to those identified in (1) or (2) or otherwise to have no negative
potential impacts on the PCD.
         b.   Administrative Amendment Categories
         The following changes and comparable changes are presumed to be
administrative unless they significantly affect the PCD or property owners
other than the master developer .
            (1)   Changes that enhance or refine the original vision and/or
purpose and intent statements expressed in the original PCD application. The
applicant shall present information regarding the size and extent of the
development activity that supports the change;
            (2)   Changes that continue to support specific plans or applicable
City policies affecting the diversity of housing type and mixed use . The
applicant shall present information showing how the proposal strengthens the
creation of a sense of place in the neighborhoods and communities.
Administrative amendments may be based upon new market design requirements or
technological advances in architecture and infrastructure engineering design
and construction;
            (3)   A transfer of commercial square footage or number of
dwellings from one mixed use  parcel to another that stays within the maximum
and minimum ranges established by the PCD or the DA;
            (4)   A transfer involving a change in total number of dwellings or
gross leasable floor area among DAs or zoning districts where the transfer
amount stays within the minimum and maximum ranges established by the PCD;
            (5)   Changes in configurations of individual DA boundaries to
include modifications of boundaries, division of larger parcels , or
combinations of parcels , that do not result in any loss in open space or
change the overall permitted land uses and density and intensity of land uses
of DAs within the PCD;
            (6)   Changes in parcels , preservation of environmentally
sensitive lands, or open space that are necessitated by the need to accommodate
final engineered infrastructure as approved by the City , within the minimum
and maximum range of density and intensity of development and there is no
reduction in open space areas as established in the MDP ;
            (7)   Adjustments or modifications to the number and order of
phasing as long as the related infrastructure  development is precedent to or
concurrent with the development the infrastructure is to serve;
            (8)   Change of number, location or sites designated for schools,
parks, or other public, government, or quasi-governmental facilities which
either enhance the opportunity to create a sense of neighborhood and community,
to better centralize such sites based on actual development densities and with
the approval of the governmental unit that owns or will own the facility;
            (9)   Modifications in the design and construction of proposed
infrastructure based upon technological advances when such modifications are
accepted by the controlling City and/or Pima County agencies (including but not
limited to transportation, water and wastewater, and flood control).
infrastructure capacity shall be adequate to provide service for the planned
densities and intensities of use and phasing;
            (10)   Minor modifications or adjustments to intrusions ,
encroachments, proposed easements, proposed right-of-ways or open spaces , so
long as the modifications fall within the general overall range and target
densities and intensities for the PCD or DA;
            (11)   Changes in infrastructure that do not increase the cost or
reduce the benefit to the public;
            (12)   Interpretation by the PDSD Director of terms and provisions
of the PCD and MSP that may result in insubstantial changes to the PCD;
            (13)   Placement and/or construction of identity or character
features such as community art, entry monuments, mailboxes and neighborhood
signage in compliance with the PCD standards unless there is a safety concern;
and,
            (14)   Other insubstantial changes deemed to be administrative
amendments by the PDSD Director , as long as the amendments do not negatively
impact the general health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the City and
do not modify the overall intent of the approved PCD, including the compliance
with the general plan and specific plan policies for this area.
      2.   Minor Amendment
      A minor amendment is one that does not substantially change the MSP, DAs,
or the overall PCD. A minor amendment includes changes that have greater
potential impacts on the intensity of land use mix of the PCD than the
categories of changes that qualify as administrative changes for the adopted
PCD.
         a.   Procedure
         A minor amendment requires a public hearing review and decided in
accordance with Section
3.5.3, Zoning Examiner Special Exception Procedure. Minor amendments include
(i) the categories of changes listed in Subsection b, (ii) changes specifically
identified as minor amendments in the PCD approved by the Mayor and Council,
and (iii) categories of changes deemed by the PDSD Director  not to change
substantially the overall PCD but that have potential impacts on the intensity
of land use  mix of the PCD than the categories of changes that qualify as
administrative changes.
         b.   Minor Amendment Categories
         The following changes and comparable changes are presumed to be minor
unless they significantly affect the PCD or property owners other than the
master developer .
            (1)   A change of up to 10% in the number of units or gross
leasable floor area in the DA or zoning district that is an increase or
decrease in the overall PCD’s minimum or maximum ranges.
            (2)   Multiple proposed administrative amendments or any single
proposed administrative amendment that is viewed by the PDSD in relation to a
series of past administrative amendments may be determined by the PDSD Director
to be a minor amendment pursuant to this section if they have the cumulative
effect of contradicting the policies, spirit, and intent of the underlying
General Plan documents.
            (3)   Other changes deemed to be minor amendments by the PDSD
Director that do not qualify as administrative or major amendments within this
section or within the subject PCD.
      3.   Major Amendment
      A major amendment is one that substantially changes the MSP, a DA, or the
overall PCD or substantially changes the application of the PCD to a limited
area.
         a.   Process
         A major amendment is processed pursuant to the Zoning Examiner
Legislative Procedure, Section
3.5.3. Major amendments include (i) those categories of changes listed in
Subsection b, (ii) other changes specifically identified as major amendments in
the PCD approved by the Mayor and Council, and (iii) those categories of
changes that do not qualify as administrative or minor amendments for the
adopted PCD and that are deemed by the PDSD Director to change substantially
the overall PCD or the application of the PCD to a limited area.
         b.   Major Amendment Categories
         The following changes and relative changes are major amendments:
            (1)   A reduction in open space other than as defined as an
administrative amendment in Section
3.5.6.F.;
            (2)   Changes in configurations of individual DA boundaries to
include modifications of boundaries, division of larger parcels , or
combinations of parcels that result in a net loss in open space or a change to
the minimum and maximum number of DAs proposed within the PCD;
            (3)   Change that would allow uses not otherwise permitted in the
PCD, zoning district , or DA;
            (4)   A change of greater than 10% in the number of dwellings or
gross leasable floor area in a DA or zoning district that is an increase or
decrease in the overall PCD’s minimum or maximum ranges;
            (5)   A change that alters a design element and substantially
reduces the mitigation of the intensity of development  adjacent to an existing
residential development outside of the PCD; and,
            (6)   A change that locates a more intense land use or increases
the residential density  adjacent to an existing residential development
outside of the PCD or a change adjacent to existing residential development in
the PCD where the intensity of development exceeds 10% in the number of units
or gross leasable floor area in the DA or zoning district .
   G.   Annual Report
   At the request of the PDSD Director , the PCD property owner shall submit an
annual progress report. The report shall begin to be submitted to PDSD once the
issuance of building permits within the subject PCD commences. The report may
include the following elements as requested by PDSD: phasing and completion
update report on horizontal infrastructure , public facilities, open space
dedication, number of housing units and nonresidential square footage,
installation of trails, parks, and any other development activity requested by
the department. The report shall be submitted by February 15 of the following
year.
3.6.   LAND USE PLAN ADOPTION AND AMENDMENT PROCEDURES
3.6.1.   PURPOSE
   This section establishes a public process Land Use Plan adoption and
amendment.
3.6.2.   APPLICABILITY
   The following applications are processed in accordance with the requirements
of this section:
   A.   Re-adoption of or amendment to the General Plan ;
   B.   Adoption of or amendment to specific plans , such as, but not limited
to sub-regional, area, and neighborhood plans;
   C.   Adoption of or amendment to the Major Streets and Routes (MS&R) Plan ;
and,
   D.   Adoption of or amendment to redevelopment plans.
3.6.3.   INITIATION
   A.   General Plan
   The re-adoption of the General Plan may only be initiated by the Mayor and
Council. Amendments to the adopted General Plan may be initiated by the Mayor
and Council or privately initiated by the owner of the property for which the
amendment is sought. Notice of initiation must be provided in conformance with
A.R.S. §9-461.06.
   B.   Redevelopment Plans
   Prior to initiating the creation of a redevelopment plan, the Mayor and
Council must approve a resolution declaring that the subject area is subject to
redevelopment in accordance with A.R.S. §36-1479. Amendments to an adopted
redevelopment plan may be initiated by the Mayor and Council or privately
initiated by the owner of the property for which a plan amendment is sought.
   C.   Specific and MS&R Plans
   The creation of a specific plan shall only be initiated by the Mayor and
Council. Amendments to a specific plan or the MS&R Plan may be initiated by the
Mayor and Council or privately initiated by the owner of property for which an
amendment is sought.
3.6.4.   PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE REQUIRED
   For site specific, privately initiated plan amendments , a pre-application
conference with City staff is required to review requirements for the proposal
in accordance with Section
3.2.1 and other applicable policies and regulations.
3.6.5.   PUBLIC OUTREACH AND NEIGHBORHOOD MEETINGS
   A.   Re-Adoption of the General Plan
   Public outreach for the re-adoption of the General Plan shall be conducted
in accordance with state statute and adopted City policies.
   B.   Plan Amendments
      1.   A neighborhood meeting in accordance with Section
3.2.2 is required for privately initiated, site specific plan amendments .
Mailed notice of the neighborhood meeting in accordance with Section
3.2.2 and
3.2.4 is required. Exception: A neighborhood meeting is not required for City -
initiated amendments to the General Plan .
      2.   For Concurrent Plan Amendment and Rezoning Applications, a
representative of PDSD staff shall attend the Neighborhood Meeting to provide
an overview of the Concurrent Plan Amendment and Rezoning process and the area
and/or neighborhood plans affected.
      3.   Exception: A neighborhood meeting is not required for City -
initiated amendments to the General Plan .
(Am. Ord. 11729, 2/19/2020)
3.6.6.   APPLICATION
   A.   Applicants of privately-initiated plan amendments requests are required
to submit an application to the PDSD. See the Administrative Manual for the
plan amendment application submittal requirements. Applications are reviewed
for completeness in accordance with Section
3.2.3.A.
   B.   Applications must be in conformance with the General Plan , applicable
specific plans , the UDC , other pertinent codes and regulations.
   C.   Applications for an amendment to a specific plan within two years of
the date of adoption of the specific plan may not be processed unless the Mayor
and Council consent to the application.
3.6.7.   STAFF REVIEW AND RECOMMENDATION
   City staff shall review each application to determine, to the extent
applicable, compliance with the General Plan , specific plans , the UDC , and
any other code or regulation that may pertain to the application. When
appropriate, City staff may request comments from other agencies, committees or
advisory boards. Staff shall prepare and submit a report and recommendation to
the Planning Commission and shall make copies available to the public prior to
the public hearing.
3.6.8.   PLANNING COMMISSION PUBLIC HEARING REQUIRED
   A.   Study Session
   The Planning Commission may conduct a study session to determine the merits
of a proposed amendment. The Planning Commission may remand an amendment to the
PDSD for further development or set it for public hearing.
   B.   Public Hearing
   At least one public hearing before the Planning Commission on the request is
required. Exception: For the re-adoption of or a major amendment to the General
Plan , at least two Planning Commission public hearings, each at a different
location in the City are required. Additional consultation and public notice in
accordance with A.R.S. §9-461.06 are required.
   C.   Mailed and Published Notice
   For site -site specific plan amendments , mailed notice must be mailed to
all property owners within 400 feet of the subject property. Mailed and
published notice of the public hearing(s) is required in accordance with
Sections
3.2.4.B and E, respectively.
(Am. Ord. 11732, 2/19/2020)
3.6.9.   PLANNING COMMISSION RECOMMENDATION AND RECONSIDERATION
   A.   General
      1.   Except for redevelopment plans, the Planning Commission may close a
public hearing or may decide to continue a public hearing to a future time and
place provided the hearing is closed and a recommendation, including a
statement of the reasons for the recommendation, is issued within 180 days of
the date of the initial hearing. The PDSD shall transmit to the Mayor and
Council the application, Planning Commission’s recommendation and findings or
other action of the Planning Commission, and the City Manager’s recommendation.
      2.   If the Planning Commission fails to issue a recommendation within
the prescribed time, the application will be forwarded to the Mayor and Council
for a decision together with a statement of the reasons for the positions taken
by members of the Planning Commission.
   B.   Redevelopment Plans
   For redevelopment plans, the Planning Commission reviews the plan for
compliance with the General Plan and any applicable specific plan at a public
meeting or a public hearing. The Planning Commission shall forward a
recommendation to Mayor and Council within 30 days from the date of its receipt
of the plans for review. If no recommendation is forwarded within 30 days , the
Mayor and Council may proceed with the public hearing on the redevelopment
plan.
   C.   Reconsideration
   The Planning Commission may, by majority vote of all members, choose to
reconsider a decision made on a plan amendment , provided the vote to
reconsider is made within 30 days of the date of the original decision.
Reconsideration may not take place earlier than 14 days from the date of the
original decision, unless reconsideration occurs at the same meeting as the
original decision. If the reconsideration occurs at a different meeting, all
persons noticed for the public hearing before the Planning Commission must be
notified prior to the reconsideration. This notification shall include the
time, date, and location of the reconsideration. If the Planning Commission’s
decision is not reconsidered within the specified time period and the decision
was to deny, the case shall be closed administratively. If, after
reconsideration, the decision is to reaffirm a denial, the case shall be closed
administratively immediately after the reconsideration.
3.6.10.   MAYOR AND COUNCIL’S PUBLIC HEARING AND DECISION
   A.   Public Hearing
      1.   The Mayor and Council shall hold a public hearing prior to making a
decision. The notice for the public hearing before the Mayor and Council shall
be the same as the notice before the Planning Commission except for
redevelopment plans.
      2.   For redevelopment plans, notice must be published once each week for
two consecutive weeks, the last publication to be at least ten days before the
date set for the hearing.
   B.   Decision
      1.   The Mayor and Council may adopt, deny, continue the item, or remand
the item to the Planning Commission. The Mayor and Council shall consider the
application, the Planning Commission’s recommendation and the City Manager’s
recommendation, and public comments when making their decision.
      2.   Adoption and re-adoption of an amendment to the General Plan shall
be in conformance with A.R.S. §9-461.06(G) and (K) and other applicable
provisions.
   C.   Reconsideration by Mayor and Council
   The Mayor or a member of the Council may request the reconsideration of an
authorization decision or a decision on a proposed ordinance provided the vote
to reconsider is made at the original hearing or within 30 days of the date of
the decision. A consideration shall be scheduled upon a majority vote in favor
of the reconsideration. If the reconsideration occurs after the time when the
decision is initially made, then public notice of the reconsideration must be
given in the same manner as for the initial decision.
3.6.11.   RE-APPLICATION
   New plan amendment applications may not be accepted for any property that
had a previous application acted upon by the Mayor and Council within one year
of the date of that action, except as follows:
   A.   The application does not involve a request for a plan designation that
was denied;
   B.   There has been substantial change in the use of the property adjacent
to the plan amendment  site since the previous case was heard; or,
   C.   There has been an ownership change on the plan amendment  site and a
substantially modified development concept is presented.
3.7.   UDC TEXT AMENDMENT PROCEDURE
3.7.1.   PURPOSE
   This section establishes a public process for amending the Unified
Development Code (UDC) .
3.7.2.   APPLICABILITY
   The procedure provided in this Section
3.7 applies to text amendments to the UDC , including text amendments to create
or amend the regulations of an overlay zone affecting a specific area, but
whose provisions are located within the UDC .
   The establishment, amendment, or dissolution of overlay zones involving a
rezoning of specific properties, as is the case with the Neighborhood
Preservation Zone and the Historic Preservation Zone , is processed in
accordance with Section
3.5.3, Zoning Examiner Legislative Procedure. (Refer to Article 5: Overlay
Zones to determine which overlay zones  must be established, amended and
dissolved in accordance with the Zoning Examiner legislative process.)
3.7.3.   INITIATION
   Text amendments may only be initiated by the Mayor and Council. The Mayor
and Council may initiate a text amendment on their own initiative or at the
request of the Planning Commission, City staff, or a private individual who has
submitted evidence that a public benefit would result from such an amendment.
The PDSD is responsible for the development and coordination of a text
amendment.
3.7.4.   DEVELOPMENT OF A TEXT AMENDMENT
   A.   Department Responsible
   The PDSD is responsible for the development and coordination of a text
amendment. Staff shall submit a report and recommendation to the Planning
Commission and make copies available to the public prior to the public hearing.
   B.   Public Outreach and Neighborhood Meeting Required
      1.   Text Amendments Creating or Enabling an Overlay Zone
      A neighborhood meeting in accordance with Section
3.2.2 is required for text amendments to the UDC that propose creating or
enabling an overlay zone to apply to specific properties.
      2.   Text Amendments with Citywide Application
      The PDSD staff shall seek input on a proposed text amendment to the UDC
from the public. The manner and extent to which public input is conducted shall
be determined by the PDSD Director on a per text amendment basis.
   C.   Application
   UDC text amendments do not require submittal of an application.
   D.   Staff Review and Recommendation
   City staff shall review each proposed amendment to determine, to the extent
applicable, compliance with the General Plan , specific plans , the UDC , and
any other code or regulation that may pertain to the application. When
appropriate, City staff may request comments from other agencies, committees or
advisory boards. Staff shall prepare and submit a report and recommendation to
the Planning Commission and shall make copies available to the public prior to
the public hearing. UDC text amendments are not required to submit an
application.
3.7.5.   PLANNING COMMISSION PUBLIC HEARING REQUIRED
   A.   Study Session
   The Planning Commission may conduct a study session to determine the merits
of a proposed amendment. The Planning Commission may remand an amendment to the
PDSD for further development or set it for public hearing.
   B.   Public Hearing and Public Notice (Mailed and Published) Required
   At least one public hearing with the Planning Commission on the request is
required. Mailed and published notice of the public hearing(s) is required in
accordance with Sections
3.2.4.B and E, respectively.
3.7.6.   PLANNING COMMISSION RECOMMENDATION AND RECONSIDERATION
   A.   General
      1.   The Planning Commission may close a public hearing or may decide to
continue a public hearing to a future time and place provided the hearing is
closed and a recommendation, including a statement of the reasons for the
recommendation, is issued within 180 days of the date of the initial hearing.
The PDSD shall transmit to the Mayor and Council the application, Planning
Commission’s recommendation and findings or other action of the Planning
Commission, and the City Manager’s recommendation.
      2.   If the Planning Commission fails to issue a recommendation within
the prescribed time, the application, will be forwarded to the Mayor and
Council for a decision, together with a statement of the reasons for the
positions taken by members of the Planning Commission.
   B.   Reconsideration
   By majority vote of all the members, the Planning Commission may choose to
reconsider a decision made on a UDC text amendment application, provided the
vote to reconsider is made within 30 days of the date of the original decision.
Reconsideration may not take place earlier than 14 days from the date of the
original decision, unless reconsideration occurs at the same meeting as the
original decision. If the reconsideration occurs at a different meeting, all
persons noticed for the public hearing before the Planning Commission must be
notified prior to the reconsideration. This notification shall include the
time, date, and location of the reconsideration. If the Planning Commission’s
decision is not reconsidered within the specified time period and the decision
was to deny, the case shall be closed administratively. If, after
reconsideration, the decision is to reaffirm a denial, the case shall be closed
administratively immediately after the reconsideration.
3.7.7.   MAYOR AND COUNCIL’S PUBLIC HEARING AND DECISION
   A.   Public Hearing
   The Mayor and Council shall hold a public hearing prior to making a
decision. The notice for the public hearing before the Mayor and Council shall
be the same as the notice before the Planning Commission.
   B.   Decision
   The Mayor and Council may adopt, deny, continue the item, or remand the item
to the Planning Commission. The Mayor and Council shall consider the
application, the Planning Commission’s recommendation and the City Manager’s
recommendation, and public comments when making their decision.
   C.   Reconsideration by Mayor and Council
   The Mayor or a member of the Council may request the reconsideration of an
authorization decision or decision on a proposed ordinance provided the vote to
reconsider is made at the original hearing or within 30 days of the date of the
decision. A consideration shall be scheduled upon a majority vote in favor of
the reconsideration. If the reconsideration occurs after the time when the
decision is initially made, then public notice of the reconsideration shall be
given in the same manner as for the initial decision.
3.8.   LAND DIVISION AND SUBDIVISION
   See Article 8: Land Division, Land Split , and Subdivision Standards.
3.9.   APPEALS
   The Board of Adjustment, Design Review Board (DRB), the Mayor and Council,
and the Zoning Examiner, as applicable, hear and decide on appeals in which it
is alleged there is an error or abuse of discretion in any order, requirement,
decision, interpretation, or other determination made by a City official in the
enforcement of the UDC . Appeals are limited to review of substantive zoning
regulations, such as development standards and use specific standards and
required findings for approval. This section provides the appeals to the DRB,
the Mayor and Council and the Zoning Examiner. For Board of Adjustment appeals,
see Section
3.10.1 and
3.10.2.
3.9.1.   DESIGN REVIEW BOARD (DRB) APPEAL PROCEDURE
   A.   Applicability
   Appeals to the DRB may be made by and party of record from the following
decisions by the PDSD Director :
      1.   Neighborhood Preservation Zone (NPZ) design review applications. An
appeal under this section must be based upon an error in the Director ’s
decision finding compliance or noncompliance with the neighborhood specific
design manual and compatibility review standards; and,
      2.   Architectural Variation and Privacy Mitigation Plans associated with
a Flexible Lot Development.
   B.   Appeal to the Design Review Board (DRB)
      1.   Filing an Appeal
      A notice of intent to appeal must be filed with the PDSD within 14 days
of the effective date of the PDSD Director ’s decision. The complete appeal
materials must be filed with the PDSD within 30 days of the effective date of
the decision. An appeal will be scheduled for consideration by the DRB at the
next regular meeting that is at least 30 days following the filing of the
appeal. PDSD may, for good cause, grant one extension to the second regular
meeting after the filing of the appeal. The filing of an appeal stays the
issuance of permits and approvals and all formal land use action on the
development proposal subject to the appeal.
      2.   Limitation on Contact With The Design Review Board
      Except for duly noticed site inspection, study and public hearing, no
person shall contact or discuss the merits of any appeal with any members of
the DRB between the filing of the appeal and the final determination by the
DRB.
      3.   PDSD Director ’s Report
      The PDSD Director shall forward the appeal to the DRB any additional
materials provided by the appellant, any materials provided by any other party
, and the Director ’s report and recommendation.
      4.   Public Hearing and Public Notice Required
         a.   The DRB shall conduct a public hearing on the appeal. The DRB may
hold a prior study session but the application for appeal must be scheduled for
public hearing within 30 days of acceptance. Mailed notice of the appeal is
required in accordance with Section
3.2.4.B, and must be sent not less than 15 days and not more than 30 days prior
to the hearing. The public hearing on the appeal is conducted in accordance
with the rules and regulations of the DRB.
         b.   The DRB may continue the public hearing for up to 45 days . The
public hearing shall not be continued for more than 45 days without the consent
of the applicant, regardless of who is the appellant.
      5.   Decision
         a.   The DRB shall reach a decision following the close of the public
hearing.
         b.   The DRB may affirm, reverse or modify the decision subject to
appeal and may impose conditions necessary and appropriate to implement the UDC
and other pertinent regulations. The decision by the DRB shall be announced and
is final at the time the decision is made following the public hearing.
         c.   The DRB in formulating its preliminary findings and
recommendations shall apply the same standards applied by the design
professional .
         d.   Written confirmation of the decision shall be provided within
three days of the date of decision to all parties of record.
      6.   Reconsideration
      The appellant, the applicant, or the PDSD Director may request
reconsideration of a decision on an appeal provided the request is filed with
the PDSD Director within 14 days of the effective date of the decision is
announced. A request for reconsideration may be made only where there is an
error in fact or law in the decision, or where a party has new evidence that
was not available at the time of the public hearing. The request shall be
scheduled for the next regular meeting of the DRB.
      7.   Issuance of Permits and Approvals
      No permits or development approvals based on the decision shall be
issued, no inspections performed or other formal action taken, while the appeal
is pending before the DRB or before the expiration of the period for
reconsideration where no request is filed. If a request for reconsideration is
filed, no permits or development approvals based on the decision shall be
issued, or other formal action taken until completion of action on the request
for reconsideration is announced by the DRB.
3.9.2.   MAYOR AND COUNCIL APPEAL PROCEDURE
   A.   Applicability
   Appeals to the following decisions are processed in accordance with the
Mayor and Council Appeal procedure:
      1.   Decision by the Zoning Examiner on a Special Exception Land Use;
      2.   Decisions on the 400' Notice Procedures; and,
      3.   Other matters as designated in the UDC .
   B.   Filing of an Appeal
   Appeals must be filed with the City Clerk’s office with a copy to the PDSD
within the time provided by the procedure from which the decision is appealed.
The filing of an appeal stays the issuance of any permits or development
approvals based on the decision and all formal land use action on the
development proposal subject to the appeal.
   C.   Limitation on Contact with the Mayor and Council
   No person shall contact or discuss the merits of any appeal with the members
of the Mayor and Council between the filing of the appeal and the final
determination by the Mayor and Council.
   D.   City Manager’s Communication
   The PDSD Director shall forward to the Mayor and Council the appeal, any
additional materials provided by the appellant, the recommendations of the
applicable advisory body(ies), any materials provided by any other party and
the City Manager’s report and recommendation.
   E.   Public Hearing and Public Notice Required
      1.   The Mayor and Council may hold a study session and shall hold a
public hearing on the appeal in accordance with the rules and standards of the
Mayor and Council. The Mayor and Council shall reach a decision following the
close of the public hearing. The Mayor and Council may continue the public
hearing for up to 45 days . The public hearing shall not be continued for more
than 45 days without the consent of the property owner of the subject site .
      2.   Public notice of the public hearing shall be provided not less than
15 days and not more than 30 days prior to the hearing. Public notice shall be
to the applicant, the same parties notified of the initial application and
those who provided oral or written comments in the course of the prior
procedure. Notice shall be provided in the same manner as for the procedure
from which the appeal is filed.
   F.   Mayor and Council Decision
      1.   The Mayor and Council shall decide the appeal based upon the
application, testimony, evidence and other materials considered in the prior
proceeding, the City Manager’s communication and the testimony and evidence
presented in the public hearing. Mayor and Council shall consider the
provisions, purpose and intent of the plans and standards that apply to the
appeal.
      2.   The Mayor and Council may affirm, reverse or modify the decision
that is appealed and may establish such conditions as are appropriate to
implement the UDC and other pertinent standards.
      3.   The decision by the Mayor and Council shall be announced and is
considered a final action for the purposes of the UDC .
   G.   Issuance of Permits and Approvals
   No permits or development approvals based on the decision shall be issued or
other formal action taken, while the appeal is pending before the Mayor and
Council or before the expiration of the period for reconsideration where no
request is filed. If a request for reconsideration is filed, no permits or
development approvals based on the decision shall be issued, or other formal
action taken until completion of action on the request for reconsideration is
announced by the Mayor and Council.
(Am. Ord. 11732, 2/19/2020)
3.9.3.   TAKINGS AND EXACTIONS APPEAL PROCEDURE
   Appeals to final discretionary decisions that require a dedication or an
exaction as a condition for granting a development approval and appeals to the
adoption or amendment of a zoning regulation on the grounds that the regulation
creates an unconstitutional “taking” of private property in violation of the
Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution (a “takings appeal”) shall be
processed in accordance with this section.
   A.   Decisions Subject to Appeal
      1.   A takings appeal may be filed by a property owner as follows:
         a.   Where the property owner has a legally recognized property
interest in the property that is subject to the City decision;
         b.   Where a final discretionary administrative decision has been made
by the PDSD Director , Zoning Examiner, or the Mayor and Council to require the
dedication of property or the payment of a monetary exaction as a condition for
the approval of the development application in a manner that is alleged to
constitute a taking of property; or,
         c.   A zoning regulation has been adopted or amended and is alleged to
constitute a taking of property.
      2.   A takings appeal may not be filed by a property owner regarding the
application of fees, assessments, taxes, or any other dedication or exaction
required by a legislative act that does not give discretion to the
administrative agency or official to determine the nature or extent of the
requirement.
   B.   Filing of Appeal
   An appeal must be in writing and filed with or mailed to the Zoning Examiner
within 30 days after the final action is taken. Final action on a zoning
regulation is the effective date of the regulation. No fee is charged for an
appeal under this section.
   C.   Public Hearing
      1.   Public notice shall be mailed to the appellant and to the parties
entitled to notice of the administrative decision at least ten days before the
appeal is heard.
      2.   The Zoning Examiner shall schedule a public hearing on the appeal to
be held no later than 30 days after receipt of the appeal.
   D.   Statement of City Authority
   In all proceedings under this section, the City shall provide the Zoning
Examiner with a statement of the City ’s authority to require the dedication or
exaction or to adopt or amend the zoning regulation. The City has the burden to
establish in its statement of authority the nexus between the dedication or
exaction and a legitimate governmental interest, and that the proposed
dedication, exaction or zoning regulation is roughly proportional to the impact
of the proposed use, improvement or development or, in the case of a zoning
regulation, that the zoning regulation does not create a taking of property in
violation of the Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution.
   E.   Zoning Examiner’s Decision
   The Zoning Examiner shall decide the appeal within five days after the
appeal is heard. If the City has met its burden set forth in subsection D
above, the appeal shall be denied. If the City has failed to meet its burden as
set forth in subsection D above, the Zoning Examiner shall:
      1.   In the case of a dedication or exaction, modify or delete the
requirement appealed under this section; or,
      2.   In the case of a zoning regulation, transmit a recommendation for
further action to the Mayor and Council.
   F.   Appeal of Zoning Examiner’s Decision
   At anytime within 30 days after the Zoning Examiner renders a decision an
individual may file a complaint for trial de novo in the superior court,
pursuant to A.R.S. §9-500.12.G.
3.10.   BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT APPEALS AND VARIANCES
3.10.1.   GENERAL BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT PROCEDURES
   A.   Applicability
   The procedures in this Section
3.10.1, apply to both Board of Adjustment hearing on appeals and requests for
variances. Appeals and applications for variances are filed with the PDSD.
   B.   Director of Planning and Development Services Department (PDSD)
Recommendation
   The PDSD Director prepares a recommendation and forwards it, together with
any additional materials provided by the applicant or any other party to the
applicant and the B/A not less than five days prior to the scheduled public
hearing. The recommendation shall be in the form of a written report that
includes the request and present plans, policies, standards, and other
information relating to the request. The recommendation shall include a
recommended action by the B/A or a statement that the PDSD has no objection to
the request. The PDSD Director shall also solicit a recommendation from the
Design Review Board or the Stormwater Technical Advisory Committee (STAC) if a
recommendation from either of these bodies is required by Section
3.10.2.A or Section
3.10.3.G.2.
   C.   Notice
   Notice of public hearings is required in accordance with Section
3.2.4.
   D.   Limitation on Contact with the Board of Adjustment
   Except for a duly noticed site inspection, study, and public hearing, no
person shall contact or discuss the merits of any case with the members of the
B/A between the filing of the appeal or variance and the final determination by
the B/A.
   E.   Board of Adjustment Public Hearing
   The B/A may hold a study session and shall hold a public hearing on an
application in accordance with the rules and standards of the Board of
Adjustment and the requirements listed below.
      1.   Except as permitted in the public hearing and the procedures for
submission of written materials, no person shall communicate with a member of
the B/A regarding a matter to be decided by the Board any time prior to the
expiration of the time for reconsideration of a decision.
      2.   The chair of the B/A or person presiding may administer oaths and
may compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant
information, including witnesses requested by any party .
      3.   The chair or person presiding may impose any reasonable limitations
on the number of speakers heard and may establish the nature and length of
testimony by speakers.
      4.   Comments may be given by any person , either verbally or in writing.
      5.   Following the close of the hearing and prior to making a decision or
recommendation, the B/A may discuss the matter and further question staff or
any party submitting comment.
      6.   A record of the hearing must be made and retained as a public
record.
   F.   Decision
   Following the public hearing, the decision by the B/A is announced and is
final at the time the decision is made.
   G.   Reconsideration
   The B/A may consider one request for reconsideration by the applicant or a
party of record , if:
      1.   A written request is filed with the Zoning Administrator within 14
calendar days after the Board has rendered its decision; and,
      2.   A request for reconsideration may be made only where there is an
error in fact or law in the decision or where a party has new evidence or
material that was not available at the time of the public hearing. The request
shall be scheduled for the next regular meeting of the Board of Adjustment.
   H.   Issuance of Permits and Approvals
   No permits or development approvals based on the decision shall be issued,
no inspections shall be performed, nor other formal action shall be taken while
the case is pending before the B/A or before the expiration of the period for
reconsideration if no request is filed. If a request for reconsideration is
filed, no permits or development approvals based on the decision shall be
issued, or other formal action taken until completion of action on the request
for reconsideration is announced by the Board of Adjustment.
3.10.2.   APPEALS
   A.   Decisions Subject to B/A Appeal
   Appeals to the following decisions are processed in accordance with the B/
A appeal procedure:
      1.   Decisions by the Zoning Administrator, including interpretations of
the UDC , notices of violations of the UDC , and determinations of violations
of conditional uses consistent with Section
10.3.3;
      2.   Decisions by the PDSD Director on applications processed in
accordance with the 100' Notice Procedure, Section
3.3.4;
      3.   Decisions by the PDSD Director on a Special Exception Land Use ;
      4.   Review decisions where the PDSD Director has challenged the historic
designation of a structure proposed for demolition;
      5.   Decisions of the Design Review Board (DRB) pertaining to
applications in Neighborhood Preservation Zones as permitted in Section
5.10.3.I;
      6.   Decisions by the PDSD Director on Design Development Option
applications;
      7.   Decisions by the PDSD Director on Minor and Major Project Design
Review applications in the Rio Nuevo District; and,
      8.   Other determinations in accordance with the UDC .
   B.   Filing of an Appeal
   Appeals must be filed with the Zoning Administrator within 14 days of the
effective date of the decision, or within the time provided by the individual
procedure from which the decision is appealed. An appeal shall be scheduled for
consideration by the B/A at the next regular meeting that is at least 35 days
following the filing of the appeal. The Zoning Administrator may, for good
cause, grant one extension to the second regular meeting after the filing of
the appeal. The filing of an appeal stays the issuance of permits and approvals
and all formal land use action on the development proposal subject to the
appeal.
   C.   Public Hearing and Public Notice Required
   A public hearing with the B/A is required. The B/A may continue the public
hearing for up to 45 days . The public hearing shall not be continued for more
than 45 days without the consent of the applicant, regardless of who is the
appellant. Public notice of the public hearing is required in accordance with
Table 3.2-1 and Sections
3.2.4.A-G.   
   D.   Decision
   The B/A may affirm, reverse, or modify the decision being appealed, and may
impose conditions necessary and appropriate to implement the UDC and other
pertinent standards.
   E.   Reconsideration
   The appellant, the applicant, the Zoning Administrator, or in the case of a
decision relating to NPZ design review, the PDSD Director , may request
reconsideration of a decision on an appeal as provided in Section
3.10.1.G.
(Am. Ord. 11070, 5/14/2013; Am. Ord. 11732, 2/19/2020)
3.10.3.   VARIANCES
   A.   Applicability
   The following applications are processed in accordance with the B/A Variance
procedure:
      1.   Variances from the requirements of the UDC ; and,
      2.   Requests for major Modifications of Development Regulations (MDR) in
the Rio Nuevo District (see Section
5.11.9 for the minor and major MDR criteria).
   B.   Pre-Application Conference Required
   A pre-application conference with City staff is required in accordance with
Section
3.2.1.
   C.   Neighborhood Meeting Required
   The applicant is required to conduct a neighborhood meeting and provide
notice of the meeting in accordance with Section
3.2.2.
   D.   Application
   Submittal of an application to the PDSD is required in order to process the
request. See the Administrative Manual for the application submittal
requirements. Applications shall be reviewed for completeness in compliance
with Section
3.2.3.A.
   E.   Notice of Application
   The PDSD Director shall mail and post notice of the application in
accordance with Section
3.2.4.B & F.
   F.   Public Comment Period
   For 20 days following the date on which notice is mailed, the public may
submit comments on the proposal to the PDSD.
   G.   Review
      1.   Review is conducted by the PDSD staff and other agencies, committees
or advisory boards as required by the UDC , and others as may be deemed
appropriate by the PDSD Director .
      2.   Variance requests from the Environmental Resource Zone standards
require review by the Design Review Board and the Stormwater Technical Advisory
Committee as provided in Section
5.7.7. Variance requests from Scenic Corridor Zone , the Gateway Corridor Zone
, the landscaping and screening regulations, and the native plant protection
standards require DRB review as provided in Sections
5.3.14,
5.5.6,
7.6.9.D, and
7.7.6.B respectively.
   H.   Public Hearing and Public Notice Required
   A public hearing with the B/A on the request is required. Mailed notice of
the public hearing is required in accordance with Section
3.2.4.B. The notice of the public hearing may be consolidated with the notice
of the application submittal.
   I.   Advisory Board Review
   Variance requests from the Environmental Resource Zone standards require
review by the Design Review Board and the Stormwater Technical Advisory
Committee as provided in Section
5.7.7. Variance requests from the Scenic Corridor Zone , the Gateway Corridor
Zone , the landscaping and screening regulations, and the native plant
preservation standards require DRB review as provided in Sections
5.3.14,
5.5.6,
7.6.9.D, and
7.7.6.B, respectively.
   J.   Board of Adjustment Decision
   The B/A may close the public hearing or continue it to a specific date,
time, and place provided the continuance is not for more than 120 days . The B/
A shall issue a decision in accordance with the findings required for approval
of the application at the conclusion of the public hearing.
   K.   Findings for Approval
   The B/A may approve a variance only if it finds:
      1.   That, because there are special circumstances applicable to the
property, strict enforcement of the UDC will deprive such property of
privileges enjoyed by other property of the same classification in the same
zoning district ;
      2.   That such special circumstances were not self-imposed or created by
the owner or one in possession of the property;
      3.   That the variance granted is subject to such conditions as will
assure that the adjustment authorized shall not constitute a grant of special
privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the
vicinity and zone in which such property is located;
      4.   That, because of special circumstances applicable to the property,
including its size, shape, topography, location, and surroundings, the property
cannot reasonably be developed in conformity with the provisions of the UDC ;
      5.   That the granting of the variance shall not be detrimental to the
public welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the
neighborhood in which the property is located;
      6.   That the proposed variance shall not impair an adequate supply of
light and air to adjacent property, substantially increase congestion, or
substantially diminish or impair property values within the neighborhood; and,
      7.   That the variance, if granted, is the minimum variance that will
afford relief and is the least modification possible of the UDC provisions that
are in question.
   L.   Variance Powers Not Granted to Board of Adjustment
   The B/A may not:
      1.   Make any changes in the uses permitted in any zoning classification;
      2.   Grant a variance if the special circumstances applicable to the
property are self-imposed by the property owner;
      3.   Grant a variance to any administrative requirement of the UDC or to
any requirement which is not a specific development regulation or use-specific
standards required of a land use ;
      4.   Grant a variance to the use-specific standards required of
Educational Uses as provided in Section
4.9.3.E.; or,
      5.   Delete or vary any use-specific standards applicable to a Special
Exception Land Use as required by the UDC , unless specifically allowed by the
UDC , or as established as a condition by the decision-making body in granting
the use.
   M.   Notice of Decision Required
   Notice of the decision shall be mailed within three days of the decision to
the applicant and persons who received notice of acceptance of application.
   N.   Reconsideration
   The B/A may consider one request for reconsideration by the applicant or a
party of record , in accordance with Section
3.10.1.G.
   O.   Change of Condition
   After a variance has been granted by the B/A, the property owner/applicant
may request a change to a condition for approval imposed by the B/A based upon
changed circumstances that affect the condition. The request shall be heard by
the B/A. The B/A shall initially determine whether the request is for a minor
change of condition that does not materially alter the variance and does not
materially affect any other properties. If the B/A determines that the request
is for a minor change of condition, it may decide whether to approve or deny
the change. If the B/A determines that the request is not a minor change of
condition and there are reasonable grounds for the request, the case shall be
scheduled for a public hearing and notice provided in accordance with Section
3.2.4.
   P.   Expiration of Approval
   Any variance granted through this process or on appeal is null and void if
building permits are not issued or compliance with conditions of approval does
not occur within 180 days from the date of approval. A shorter time period for
compliance may be required as a condition of approval. Two extensions of up to
180 days each may be granted by the PDSD Director for good cause. A plat that
has been recorded in compliance with the variance is exempt from the expiration
period in this section.
(Am. Ord. 11070, 5/14/2013; Am. Ord. 11127, 11/6/2013)
3.11.   ADMINISTRATIVE MODIFICATIONS
3.11.1.   DESIGN DEVELOPMENT OPTION (DDO)
   A.   Purpose
   This section is established to provide an administrative process by which
specific development and dimensional standards of the UDC may be modified under
certain criteria applicable to a land use within a zone . A Design Development
Option (DDO) is intended to encourage the following:
      1.   Flexible design solutions that are within the intent of the
regulation, encourage efficient use of land, do not create a nuisance on
adjacent property, and address situations where strict application of a
requirement may not be practical;
      2.   Energy conservation through site and building design;
      3.   Innovation in site planning and architectural design; and,
      4.   Enhancement of community aesthetics.
   B.   Applicability
   The following dimensional, screening, and landscaping standards may be
considered for modification under this Section:
      1.   Setbacks ;
      2.   Height of accessory walls and fences when the wall and fence heights
do not exceed two feet above the maximum height permitted;
      3.   Landscaping and screening standards when the modification does not
decrease the required area in square footage of landscaping or height of a
screening feature; and,
      4.   Structural setback and parking space length requirements for
carports only in single-family and duplex development .
   C.   PDSD Review and Decision
      1.   The PDSD Director shall review and make a final decision on a DDO in
accordance with Section
3.3.4, 100' Notice Procedure. Approval of a DDO request may only occur based on
the findings in Section
3.11.1.D below.
      2.   For landscaping and screening modification requests as provided in
Section
3.11.1.B.3 above, the Design Review Board shall review the request and make a
recommendation prior to a decision by the PDSD Director .
      3.   Only one application is required when more than one DDO is being
requested and may be processed concurrently in accordance with the most
restrictive applicable procedure. For example, applications requesting a
modification to the setback and landscaping standards shall go to the Design
Review Board for a recommendation prior to a decision by the PDSD Director .
   D.   Findings for Approval
      1.   General Findings for All Modification Requests
      For all modification requests, the PDSD Director may approve a DDO
request only if the request meets all of the following findings:
         a.   Is not a request previously denied as a variance;
         b.   Does not modify a conditional requirement or finding to determine
whether the use should be allowed in the zone ;
         c.   Is not to a condition of approval for a rezoning or Special
Exception Land Use application;
         d.   Does not modify a requirement of an overlay zone , such as, but
not limited to, Scenic Corridor, Environmental Resource, Major Streets and
Routes  Setback , or Airport Environs;
         e.   Does not result in deletion or waiver of a UDC requirement;
         f.   The modification applies to property that cannot be developed in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter due to physical circumstances or
conditions of the property, such as irregular shape, narrowness of lot ,
exceptional topographic conditions, or location;
         g.   Does not create a situation where proposed development
substantially reduces the amount of privacy that would be enjoyed by nearby
residents any more than would be available if the development was built without
the modification;
         h.   Does not create a situation where proposed development will block
visibility within the required visibility triangle on adjoining  streets for
either vehicular or pedestrian traffic;
         i.   Does not create a situation where the proposed development will
cause objectionable noise, odors, trespass lighting, or similar adverse impacts
adjacent properties or development ; and,
         j.   Does not create a situation where the development will result in
an increase in the number of residential dwelling units or the square footage
of nonresidential buildings greater than would occur if the development was
built without the modification.
      2.   Specific Findings for Setback and Wall Height Modification Requests
      In addition to the findings in Section
3.11.1.D.1, the PDSD Director shall find, in the case of setback and wall
height only, that the modification:
         a.   Does not create a situation where proposed development will
obstruct significant views of dramatic land forms, unusual stands of
vegetation, or parks from nearby properties substantially more than would occur
if the development were built without the modification;
         b.   Provides design alternatives to better integrate the development
into the design character of the immediate neighborhood;
         c.   Does not apply to a setback requirement of a Flexible Lot
Development (FLD);
         d.   Does not create a situation where the proposed development will
interfere with the optimum air temperature or solar radiation orientation of
buildings on adjoining properties substantially more than would occur if the
building or structures were built without the modification; and,
         e.   Does not create a situation where the proposed use of the
property will impose objectionable noise levels on adjoining properties greater
than would occur if the buildings or structures were built without the
modifications.
         f.   The modification is not for an increase in height of more than
two feet to an accessory wall or fence, except that an increase of up to four
feet may be considered for entry features on walls and fences.
      3.   Specific Finding for Screening Modification Requests
      For screening modifications, in addition to the findings in Section
3.11.1.D.1, the PDSD Director shall make a finding that the modification does
not lower the height of a required screening device to a point where it does
not accomplish its purpose.
   E.   Appeals
   A party of record may appeal the PDSD Director ’s decision on DDO
applications. Appeals are considered by the Board of Adjustment in accordance
with Sections
3.10.1 and
3.10.2, Board of Adjustment Appeal Procedure. Appeals must be filed within five
days  of the effective date of the decision. The complete appeals material must
be filed within 30 days  of the effective date of the decision. An appeal under
this section shall be based upon an error in the Director ’s decision finding
compliance or noncompliance with the applicable findings. The Board of
Adjustment shall apply the applicable findings as provided in Section
3.11.1D, Findings for Approval, when rendering its decision.
   F.   Expiration of Approval
   Any Design Development Option (DDO) approval granted by the Planning and
Development Services Department (PDSD) Director shall be null and void if
building permits are not issued implementing the DDO or compliance with
conditions of approval does not occur within 180 days from the date of
approval. One extension of up to 180 days may be granted by the PDSD Director
for good cause.
(Am. Ord. 11070, 5/14/2013; Am. Ord. 11127, 11/6/2013; Am. Ord. 11732, 2/19/
2020))
3.12.   MISCELLANEOUS PERMITS AND APPROVALS
3.12.1.   ARCHITECTURAL DOCUMENTATION PRIOR TO DEMOLITION OF HISTORIC BUILDINGS
   A.   Applicability
   These regulations apply when an application for a demolition permit involves
the complete or partial demolition of a building that is partially or in its
entirety 50 or more years old.
   B.   Required Documentation
   Applications for permits for the demolition of buildings that are partially
or in their entirety 50 or more years old must include architectural
documentation to provide a permanent record of buildings of historical
significance before their loss. Demolition applications are available from
PDSD.
      1.   Minor Documentation
      Minor Documentation is required for demolition permit requests for all
buildings that are partially or in their entirety 50 or more years old, but are
not contributing properties within designated or pending National Register
Historic Districts; are not individually listed on the National Register of
Historic Places; and do not meet the eligibility criteria for the National
Register of Historic Places. For buildings that otherwise meet the criteria for
full documentation, only Minor Documentation is required if the demolition will
be limited to an addition that is less than 50 years old.
      2.   Full Documentation
      Full documentation is required for demolition permit requests for all
buildings that are partially or in their entirety 50 or more years old and are:
         a.   Contributing properties within designated or pending National
Register Historic Districts;
         b.   Individually listed on the National Register of Historic Places;
or,
         c.   Meet the criteria for eligibility for the National Register of
Historic Places.
      3.   Additional Documentation
      If the building to be completely or partially demolished is located in a
Historic Preservation Zone (HPZ) or the Rio Nuevo District (RND) overlay zone ,
compliance with the applicable demolition review and approval requirements
contained in Section
5.8.10 through Section
5.8.12 and Section
5.11.7 is required in addition to the provisions contained in this section.
   C.   Review Required
   The applicant shall submit minor or full architectural documentation to PDSD
for review before issuance of a demolition permit.
   D.   Application and Review Process
      1.   Prior to the submittal of a demolition permit application, the
applicant may meet with the PDSD. At that time, the PDSD shall determine
whether the application requires Minor or Full Documentation.
      2.   At the time of submittal, the applicant shall submit two copies of
the demolition permit application and all required architectural documentation
to the PDSD. All new photos must be printed on photographic paper.
      3.   If Minor Documentation is required, the PDSD reviews and approves
the applications for completeness in accordance with Section
3.2.3.A. The PDSD determines and informs the applicant that the Minor
Documentation is complete, or of any additional documentation which is
required.
      4.   If full documentation is required, the Historic Preservation Officer
(HPO) reviews and approves the applications for completeness, and informs the
applicant that full documentation is complete or informs the applicant of any
additional documentation which is required.
      5.   If the PDSD or the HPO determine that the required architectural
documentation is complete, then a demolition permit application may be
processed. The applicant must demonstrate compliance with all provisions of the
Tucson Code before a demolition permit will be issued.
   E.   Minor Documentation Required
   Minor Documentation shall include:
      1.   Current photographs of the front, rear and sides of the building to
be completely or partially demolished (printed on photographic paper); and,
      2.   Documentation from the County Assessor’s records, the State Historic
Preservation Office, or other official government records confirming the year
of construction and dates of additions to the building to be demolished. Some
of this documentation of construction dates may be available at the PDSD.
   F.   Full Documentation Required
   Full documentation shall include:
      1.   Floor plans with measured dimensions;
      2.   Photographs of the front, rear and sides of the building to be
completely or partially demolished, and all interior rooms;
      3.   A ‘context photograph’ illustrating the relationship between the
building to be completely or partially demolished and the nearest adjacent
 buildings in the Development Zone . The Development Zone is defined in Section
11.4.5;
      4.   Copies of old photographs of the building to be completely or
partially demolished (taken at least 20 years prior to the demolition
application), if in the possession of the applicant;
      5.   Documentation from the County Assessor’s records, the State Historic
Preservation Office, or other official government records confirming the year
of construction and dates of additions to the building to be demolished. Some
of this documentation of construction dates may be available at PDSD;
      6.   A general description of construction materials, such as exterior
walls, roofing, windows, porches, and carports of the building to be
demolished; and,
      7.   A list of any important historical events or historically
significant persons related to the building to be demolished, if known to the
applicant.
   G.   Documentation Retention
   Upon approval of the demolition permit, the HPO shall retain one copy as a
record of a lost historic resource and forward one copy to the Tucson-Pima
County Historical Commission for their records.
3.12.2.   PROTECTED DEVELOPMENT RIGHT
   A.   General
      1.   After a site plan or tentative or final plat has been approved, an
applicant may apply for a protected development right (PDR). A PDR is a right
granted to undertake and complete the development and use of property as shown
on the PDR Plan without needing to comply with subsequent changes in zoning
standards and technical standards adopted during the period of the PDR, except
as provided by A.R.S. §9-1204. In the event of a conflict between the
provisions of the UDC and A.R.S. §§9-1201 through 9-1205 inclusive, as they may
be amended, the statutory provisions shall govern.
      2.   The protected development right also precludes the enforcement
against the development of any City  land use regulation that would change,
alter, impair, prevent, diminish, delay, or otherwise impact the development or
use of the property as set forth in the approved plan except as provided
herein.
      3.   The protected development right does not vest until the Mayor and
Council approve the plan or plat as a protected development right plan at
public hearing.
   B.   Applicability
   The Mayor and Council may consider granting a PDR to the following:
      1.   An approved plat or site plan provided the PDR is granted prior to
the plat or site plan expiring; or,
      2.   Concurrent with the initial approval of a plat or site plan upon a
finding that granting a protected development right to undertake and complete
the development shown on the plan will promote reasonable certainty, stability
and fairness in the land use planning and regulatory process and secure the
reasonable investment-backed expectations of the owner.
   C.   Application
   Submittal of an application to the PDSD is required in order to process the
request. The PDR application requirements are provided in Section
2-12.0.0 of the Administrative Manual. Applications are reviewed for
completeness in compliance with Section
3.2.3.A, Application Required. Following acceptance of the application, it will
be scheduled for consideration by the Mayor and Council.
   D.   Nonphased and Phased Development Standards
   Applications may be filed for nonphased or phased protected development
right plans as follows:
      1.   Nonphased Development
      Nonphased developments are developments constructed in one phase. An
application for a protected development right for a nonphased development ,
must comply with the requirements in accordance with:
         a.   Article 8, Land Division, Land Split , and Subdivision Standards,
and applicable standards of the Administrative and Technical Standards Manuals
for a subdivision  plat ; or
         b.   Section
3.3.3.G, Site Plans, and applicable standards of the Administrative and
Technical Standards Manuals for a site plan .
      2.   Phased Development
         a.   For consideration and approval as a protected development right
plan, a phased development shall be a master planned development which:
            (1)   Consists of at least 40 acres depicted on a single master
subdivision  plat for a residential development ;
            (2)   Consists of at least 20 acres depicted on a single master
subdivision  plat or site plan for a nonresidential development ;
            (3)   Is a Planned Area Development (PAD) zone ; or,
            (4)   The Mayor and Council have identified as a phased development
for the purposes of protected development rights .
         b.   An application for a protected development right for a phased
development , must comply with the requirements set forth in:
            (1)   Article 8, Land Division, Land Split , and Subdivision
Standards, and applicable standards of the Administrative and Technical
Standards Manuals, if the master planned development  consists of at least 40
acres  depicted on a single master subdivision  plat  for a residential
development ;
            (2)   Article 8, Land Division, Land Split , and Subdivision
Standards, and applicable standards of the Administrative and Technical
Standards Manuals, if the master planned development  consists of at least
twenty (20) acres  depicted on a single master subdivision  plat  for a
nonresidential development ;
            (3)   Section
3.3.3.G, Site Plans, and applicable standards of the Administrative and
Technical Standards Manuals, if the master planned development  consists of at
least 20 acres  depicted on a single master site plan  for a nonresidential
development ; or,
            (4)   Section
3.5.5, Planned Area Development (PAD) Zone, and applicable standards of the
Administrative and Technical Standards Manuals for a master planned development
which is a PAD.
   E.   Granting of a PDR
      1.   A PDR shall be granted upon approval by the Mayor and Council.
      2.   The Mayor and Council may impose terms and conditions of approval.
      3.   Upon Mayor and Council approval, the landowner has the right to
undertake and complete the development only to the extent of the specific
elements and details shown on the plan.
      4.   Approval of a protected development right plan for one phase of a
phased development is not approval of a protected development right plan for
any other phase.
   F.   Effective Date
      1.   A PDR shall be deemed established with respect to a property on the
effective date of Mayor and Council approval of the PDR Plan, except as
follows.
      2.   Exception. A protected development right plan approved with a
condition that a variance be obtained does not confer a protected development
right until the variance is granted. Approval of a protected development right
plan does not guarantee approval of a variance.
   G.   Expiration Date and Extension
      1.   Nonphased
      A protected development right plan for a nonphased development is valid
for three years.
         a.   In its sole discretion, the Mayor and Council may extend this
time for a maximum of two additional years if it determines such extension is
warranted by all relevant circumstances, including the size and type of the
development , the level of investment of the landowner, economic cycles, and
market conditions.
         b.   If no building permit has been issued prior to expiration, no
construction shall commence under the plan.
      2.   Phased
      A protected development right plan for a phased development is valid for
five years.
         a.   In its sole discretion, the Mayor and Council may extend this
time for a maximum of two additional years if it determines such extension is
warranted by all relevant circumstances, including the size, type and phasing
of the development , the level of investment of the landowner, economic cycles,
and market conditions.
         b.   No construction shall take place on the property for any phase
for which a building permit has not been issued.
   H.   Modification of Site Plan Expiration Dates
   Notwithstanding Section
3.3.3.G.6.a, a site plan that has been designated a PDR Plan shall expire upon
termination of the PDR.
   I.   Enforcement
      1.   Subsequent Land Use Standards
      A protected development precludes the enforcement of legislative or
administrative land use regulations that would change, alter, impair, prevent,
diminish, delay, or impact the development or use of the property as approved
in the Protected Development Right Plan, except under any one of the following
circumstances:
         a.   Landowner Consent
         The affected landowner consents in writing.
         b.   Natural or Man-Made Hazard
         The Mayor and Council declare by resolution, after notice and a public
hearing, that natural or man-made hazard on or in the immediate vicinity of the
property, if uncorrected, would pose a serious threat to the public health,
safety and welfare if the project were to proceed as approved in the Protected
Development Right Plan.
         c.   Inaccurate Information
         Declaration by the Mayor and Council by resolution after notice and a
public hearing that the owner or his representative intentionally supplied
inaccurate information or made material misrepresentations that made a
difference in the approval of the Protected Development Right Plan by the City
.
         d.   Enactment of State or Federal Law
         The enactment of a state or federal law or regulation that precludes
development as approved in the Protected Development Right Plan, in which case
the Mayor and Council, after notice and a public hearing, may modify the
affected provisions, on a finding that the change in state or federal law has a
fundamental effect on the Protected Development Right Plan.
      2.   Subsequent Overlay Zoning, Development Fees, and Other Codes
      A protected development right does not preclude the enforcement of the
following:
         a.   Overlay Zone
         A subsequently adopted overlay zoning classification that imposes
additional requirements and that does not affect the allowable type or density
of use.
         b.   Development Fee
         A subsequently adopted development fee applicable to similar
properties in the City adopted pursuant to A.R.S. §9-463.05.
         c.   Other Codes
         A subsequently adopted building , fire, plumbing, electrical, or
mechanical code or other ordinance or regulation general in nature and
applicable to all property subject to land use regulation by the City .
      3.   Nonconforming Uses and Structures
      A protected development right does not preclude, change, or impair the
authority of the City to adopt and enforce zoning ordinance provisions
governing nonconforming uses or structures on the property.
      4.   Suspension and Revocation Procedures
      The City is permitted by state law to subject a Protected Development
Right Plan to subsequent reviews and approvals consistent with the original
approval. The City may revoke its approval of a Protected Development Right
Plan for failure to comply with the applicable terms and conditions of
approval. The procedure for compliance review suspension and revocation is
described as follows:
         a.   PDSD Director Monitors Compliance
         After the approval of a Protected Development Right Plan, the PDSD
Director or designee shall monitor the progress of the development to ensure
compliance with the terms and conditions of the original approval or any
development agreement applicable to the property.
         b.   Suspension or Revocation
         The PDSD Director or designee may suspend or revoke a protected
development right after notice to the applicant. The notice shall contain the
Protected Development Right Plan to be revoked, the property to which it
applies, and the reason(s) for the proposed suspension or revocation.
         c.   Appeal to Mayor and Council
         The PDSD Director ’s decision to revoke a protected development right
may be appealed to Mayor and Council in accordance with Section
3.9.2, Mayor and Council Appeal Procedure, by filing a notice of intent to
appeal with the City Clerk no later than 14 days  after the effective date of
the decision. The complete appeal materials must be filed with the PDSD within
30 days  of the effective date of the decision.
   J.   Successors
   After approval of the protected development right plan, all successors to
the original landowner are entitled to exercise the protected development
rights .
3.12.3.   MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT AND ADAPTIVE REUSE OF QUALIFIED
OBSOLETE COMMERCIAL BUILDINGS
      A.   Purpose
         This section describes application requirements, review procedures,
and approval criteria utilized by City of Tucson staff when reviewing an
application for multifamily residential development or adaptive reuse of
qualified obsolete commercial buildings pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-462.10.
      B.   Applicability
         1.   When not specifically addressed in UDC Section
3.12.3, development  standards for multifamily residential development and
adaptive reuse shall be based on development  standards for the highest density
Urban Residential Zone within one mile of the project site . Where there is a
conflict between the standards of this section and the rest of the UDC, the
standards of this section shall apply.
         2.   For the purpose of UDC Section
3.12.3, and only Section
3.12.3, the following shall be defined as:
            a.   Adaptive Reuse 
               The act of converting an existing building from the use for
which it was constructed to a new use maintaining some or all of the elements
of the building . Adaptive reuse allows for the partial, but not the complete,
demolition of an existing commercial, office, or mixed use  building . For a
project to qualify as Adaptive Reuse, it must include a multifamily residential
component.
            b.   Building Code 
               Means the federal construction codes applicable to homes
constructed after June 15, 1976, and the Arizona codes applicable to homes
constructed before that date. The Building Code may include local amendments
specific to the City of Tucson.
            c.   Moderate Income Housing
               Means housing: (a) for a person or persons whose household
income does not exceed 120% of the area median income. (b) For which the
occupant pays not more than 30% of the occupant's gross income for the
occupant's rent or mortgage, as determined by the Arizona Department of Housing
and adjusted for household size based on the United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development.
            d.   Qualified Obsolete Commercial Building
               A building which is currently zoned for and/or permitted to be
used for commercial, office, or mixed uses; and is:
               (1)   In a state of disrepair or has a 50% vacancy in the total
leasable square footage; and
               (2)   Located on a parcel or parcels of least one acre but not
more than 20 acres.
            e.   Multifamily Residential Development 
               A building or buildings that are designed and used for
residential purposes and that contain more than one apartment or dwelling unit
for sale or for rent but that are not adaptive reuse. Multifamily residential
development allows for the partial or complete demolition or renovation of an
existing commercial, office, or mixed use  building .
            f.   Rooftop Appurtenances
               Rooftop structures that primarily house air conditioning
equipment, solar panels, utilities , elevators, other energy production
facilities and other non-habitable structures . This includes open space
features, swimming pools, space for use by residents and landscaping , but does
not include open areas, spires, bell towers, domes, cupolas, pediments,
obelisks or monuments.
         3.   Multifamily Residential Development or Adaptive Reuse under this
UDC Section
3.12.3 does not apply to the following:
            a.   Land in the area that is designated a National Register
Historic District , Historic Preservation Zone , or Historic Landmark ;
            b.   Land in the territory in the vicinity of a military airport or
ancillary military facility as defined by A.R.S. § 28-8461;
            c.   Land in the territory in the vicinity of a Federal Aviation
Administration commercially licensed airport or a general aviation or public
airport as defined A.R.S. § 28-8486.
         4.   All applicable overlay zones or associated requirements addressed
elsewhere within the Unified Development Code shall apply to this Section.
      C.   Obsolete Commercial Building Redevelopment
         1.   An applicant seeking multifamily residential development or
adaptive reuse of a qualified obsolete commercial building shall submit an
application that includes the following:
            a.   Evidence satisfactory to the City of Tucson Attorney that the
existing building that is the subject of the application is economically or
functionally obsolete.
            b.   Documentation satisfactory to the City of Tucson Planning and
Development Services Department and the City Attorney that the redevelopment
will include a set aside of at least 10% of the total dwelling units for either
moderate-income or low-income housing or any combination of the two for at
least 20 years after the initial occupation of the proposed development .
            c.   A site plan in conformance with UDC Section
3.3.3.G and all other applicable UDC requirements for site plans .
            d.   Evidence of site plan review and approval by any utility
provider impacted by the proposed development .
            e.   Evidence of adequate existing public sewer and water service
for the entire proposed development .
            f.   Compliance with all applicable Building Codes and fire codes.
      D.   Mixed Use and Multi-Family Development or Adaptive Reuse
         1.   Setbacks
            Setback requirements for the redevelopment shall be the lesser of
the existing setbacks for multifamily residential buildings , or the setback
requirements that applied to the existing commercial, office, or mixed use
 building , in accordance with UDC Article 6.3. Setback may also be referred to
as a perimeter yard .
         2.   Height and Density
            Multifamily residential height and density shall not exceed:
            a.   The maximum allowable multi-family height and density for a
multi-family  zoning district in the City of Tucson, located within one mile of
the building to be developed; or
            b.   If there is no multifamily zoning district in the City of
Tucson within one mile of the building to be redeveloped, the height and
density of the multifamily zoning district located in the City of Tucson
located closest to the building to be redeveloped;
            c.   Building height is limited to no more than five stories (55
feet).
         3.   Height Exemption for existing non-conforming buildings
            If the maximum allowable height applicable to the existing
commercial, office, or mixed use  building exceeds the maximum allowable height
in the existing zone for the proposed use, the existing height may remain and
shall be considered nonconforming for height purposes and the existing building
may be expanded to the maximum allowable density for the proposed use. Any
rooftop appurtenances shall be included within the height exemption.
      E.   Multifamily Residential Development or Adaptive Reuse Cap, Tracking,
and Area Exclusion
         1.   Cap
            Not more than 1,030 of the existing commercial, office, or mixed
use  buildings may be redeveloped for multifamily residential development or
adaptive reuse under this Article.
         2.   Tracking
            The City of Tucson Planning and Development Services Department
shall keep track of the number of buildings redeveloped under this Article, and
shall stop accepting applications when the total number of the following equals
the cap established in subsection 1. above:
            a.   The number of buildings redeveloped for multifamily
residential development or adaptive reuse under this Article; plus
            b.   The number of buildings with approved building permits for
redevelopment under this Article but not yet completed; plus
            c.   The number of buildings with pending applications for
redevelopment under this article but not yet permitted.
(Ord. 12139, 12/10/2024)
ARTICLE 4: ZONES
Section
4.1.   PURPOSE
4.2.   ESTABLISHMENT OF BOUNDARIES
4.3.   CATEGORIES OF LAND USES
   
4.3.1.   Permitted Land Use
   
4.3.2.   Special Exception Land Uses
   
4.3.3.   Accessory Land Uses
   
4.3.4.   Temporary Land Use
4.4.   ORGANIZATION OF LAND USES
   
4.4.1.   General
   
4.4.2.   Land Use Group
   
4.4.3.   Land Use Class
   
4.4.4.   Land Use Type
4.5.   MORE RESTRICTIVE ZONING
4.6.   ZONING OF LAND ANNEXED INTO THE CITY
4.7.   ZONES - PURPOSE
   
4.7.1.   Open Space  Zone (OS)
   
4.7.2.   Institutional Reserve (IR)
   
4.7.3.   Rural Homestead Zone (RH)
   
4.7.4.   Suburban Ranch Zone (SR)
   
4.7.5.   Suburban Homestead Zone (SH)
   
4.7.6.   Residence Zone (RX-1)
   
4.7.7.   Residence Zone (RX-2)
   
4.7.8.   Residence Zone (R-1)
   
4.7.9.   Residence Zone (R-2)
   
4.7.10.   Mobile Home Zone (MH-1)
   
4.7.11.   Mobile Home Zone (MH-2)
   
4.7.12.   Residence Zone (R-3)
   
4.7.13.   Office Zone (O-1)
   
4.7.14.   Office Zone (O-2)
   
4.7.15.   Office Zone (O-3)
   
4.7.16.   Parking Zone (P)
   
4.7.17.   Recreational Vehicle  Zone (RV)
   
4.7.18.   Neighborhood Commercial Zone (NC)
   
4.7.19.   Rural Village Center Zone (RVC)
   
4.7.20.   Commercial Zone (C-1)
   
4.7.21.   Commercial Zone (C-2)
   
4.7.22.   Commercial Zone (C-3)
   
4.7.23.   Mixed Use  Zone (MU)
   
4.7.24.   Planned Area Development (PAD)
   
4.7.25.   Planned Community Development (PCD)
   
4.7.26.   Office/Commercial/Residential Zone (OCR-1)
   
4.7.27.   Office/Commercial/Residential Zone (OCR-2)
   
4.7.28.   Park Industrial Zone (P-I)
   
4.7.29.   Light Industrial Zone (I-1)
   
4.7.30.   Heavy Industrial Zone (I-2)
4.8.   USE TABLES
   
4.8.1.   General
   
4.8.2.   Organization
   
4.8.3.   Permitted Uses: Rural and Suburban Residential zones
   
4.8.4.   Permitted Uses: Urban Residential zones
   
4.8.5.   Permitted Uses: Office zones
   
4.8.6.   Permitted Uses: Commercial and Mixed Use  Zones
   
4.8.7.   Permitted Uses: Industrial Zones
   
4.8.8.   Permitted Uses: Special Use Zones (1) - OS, IR, R, & RV
   
4.8.9.   Permitted Uses: Special Use Zones (2) - NC, RVC, & MU
4.9.   USE-SPECIFIC STANDARDS
   
4.9.1.   General
   
4.9.2.   Agricultural Use Group
   
4.9.3.   Civic Use Group
   
4.9.4.   Commercial Services Use Group
   
4.9.5.   Industrial Use Group
   
4.9.6.   Recreation Use Group
   
4.9.7.   Residential Use Group
   
4.9.8.   Restricted Adult Activities Use Group
   
4.9.9.   Retail Trade Use Group
   
4.9.10.   Storage Use Group
   
4.9.11.   Utilities Use Group
   
4.9.12.   Wholesaling Use Group
   
4.9.13.   General Standards, Restrictions, and Exceptions
4.10.   ACCESSORY USES , BUILDINGS , AND STRUCTURES
4.11.   TEMPORARY USE OR BUILDING
   
4.11.1.   Qualification for Permit
   
4.11.2.   Bond Required
   
4.11.3.   Refund
   
4.11.4.   Removal
   
4.11.5.   Forfeiture
   
4.11.6.   Time Limit
4.1.   PURPOSE
   The zones described in this article are established to regulate and separate
the locations of land uses as appropriate.
4.2.   ESTABLISHMENT OF BOUNDARIES
   The boundaries of each zone are determined and defined in accordance with
the provisions of the Unified Development Code (UDC) .
4.3.   CATEGORIES OF LAND USES
   There are four categories of land uses : permitted, special exception,
accessory, and temporary.
4.3.1.   PERMITTED LAND USE
   A.   For the purposes of this article, a permitted land use refers to a
principal use that is permitted within a particular zone subject to compliance
with all applicable use-specific standards and other regulations as described
below and typically does not require legislative action for approval. A
principal use is the main use to which the premises is devoted and the primary
purpose for which the premises exist.
   B.   The principal permitted land uses within each zone are identified in
Tables 4.8-1 through
4.8-7.
   C.   Principal permitted land uses are subject to the following when
applicable:
      1.   UDC regulations and standards, including, but not limited to, the
zone ’s exceptions and general restrictions provided in Section
4.9.13, the use specific standards provided in
Tables 4.8-1 through
4.8-7, Article 5: Overlay Zones, Article 6: Dimensional Standards and
Measurements, and Article 7: Development Standards;
      2.   Application submittal requirements and fees provided in the
Administrative Manual; and,
      3.   Standards provided in the Technical Standards Manual.
4.3.2.   SPECIAL EXCEPTION LAND USES
   A.   Special exception land uses are typically principal uses which are not
allowed by right within a zone but are permitted if approved through a
particular review procedure. In several instances as identified in the
permitted use tables (
Tables 4.8-1 through
4.8-7), certain accessory uses require approval through one of the special
exception review procedures.
   B.   The special exception land uses permitted within each zone and their
applicable review procedure are identified in
Tables 4.8-1 through
4.8-7.
   C.   Special exception land uses are subject to the following when
applicable:
      1.   UDC regulations and standards, including, but not limited to, the
zone ’s exceptions and general restrictions provided in Section
4.9.13, the use specific standards provided in
Tables 4.8-1 through
4.8-7, Article 5: Overlay Zones, Article 6: Dimensional Standards and
Measurements, and Article 7: Development Standards;
      2.   Conditions that may be imposed as part of the use’s approval;
      3.   Requirements provided in the Administrative Manual; and,
      4.   Standards provided in the Technical Standards Manual.
4.3.3.   ACCESSORY LAND USES
   A.   Accessory land uses are those uses and structures associated with, and
incidental to, a principal land use and may be necessary for the operation of
the principal land use . Examples of accessory uses include: residences with
guest houses, restaurants with bars, and churches with a columbarium.
   B.   The permitted accessory land uses with use-specific standards are
identified in
Tables 4.8-1 through
4.8-7. Accessory land uses other than those provided in the tables may be
permitted in accordance with Section
6.6, Accessory Uses , Buildings , and Structures.
   C.   Accessory uses are subject to the following when applicable:
      1.   UDC regulations and standards, including, but not limited to:
         a.   The accessory land use and building regulations provided in
Section
6.6, Accessory Uses , Buildings , and Structures; and,
         b.   The use specific standards provided in
Tables 4.8-1 through
4.8-7.
      2.   Application submittal requirements and fees provided in the
Administrative Manual; and,
      3.   Standards provided in the Technical Standards Manual.
4.3.4.   TEMPORARY LAND USE
   Temporary land uses are those land uses and structures that are needed or
are in place for only short periods of time. The regulations governing
temporary land uses are provided in Section
4.11, Temporary Use or Building.
4.4.   ORGANIZATION OF LAND USES
4.4.1.   GENERAL
   A.   The land uses are organized into three categories from general to
specific: Land Use Group, Land Use Class, and Land Use Type.
   B.   Land uses listed within a specific Land Use Group, Class, or Type are
not listed in any other Land Use Group, Class, or Type.
4.4.2.   LAND USE GROUP
   A Land Use Group identifies the primary activity for a group of more
specific land uses (i.e., Land Use Classes). The Land Use Groups are:
   A.   Agricultural;
   B.   Civic;
   C.   Commercial;
   D.   Industrial;
   E.   Recreation;
   F.   Residential;
   G.   Restricted Adult Activities;
   H.   Retail Trade;
   I.   Storage;
   J.   Utilities ; and,
   K.   Wholesaling.
4.4.3.   LAND USE CLASS
   Each Land Use Group is further divided into more specific listings based on
their similarity of functional characteristics, such as Food and Beverage Sales
or Vehicle Rental and Sales. These specific uses are referred to as Land Use
Classes.
4.4.4.   LAND USE TYPE
   In some cases, a Land Use Class may be further divided into more specific
land uses called Land Use Types. For example, the Land Use Class, Educational
Use, includes several Land Use Types, including Elementary and Secondary,
Instructional School, and Postsecondary Institution.
4.5.   MORE RESTRICTIVE ZONING
   Within the UDC , reference is made to “more restrictive zoning ” in applying
development standards. For the purpose of application, this phrase shall apply
in the following order, which lists the zones from the most restrictive (OS) to
the least restrictive (I-2). The Planned Area Development (PAD) and Planned
Community District (PCD) zones provide for the establishment of zoning
districts with distinct regulations as adopted by the Mayor and Council and,
therefore, are exempt from the “more restrictive zoning ” hierarchy.
“OS”Open Space  Zone
“IR”Institutional Reserve Zone
“RH”Rural Homestead Zone
“SR”Suburban Ranch Zone
“SH”Suburban Homestead Zone
“RX-1�Residence Zone
“RX-2�Residence Zone
“R-1�Residence Zone
“R-2�Residence Zone
“MH-1�Mobile Home Zone
“MH-2�Mobile Home Zone
“R-3�Residence Zone
“O-1�Office Zone
“O-2�Office Zone
“O-3�Office Zone
“P” Parking Zone
“RV”Recreational Vehicle  Zone
“NC”Neighborhood Commercial Zone
“RVC�Rural Village Center Zone
“C-1�Commercial Zone
“C-2�Commercial Zone
“C-3�Commercial Zone
“MU”Mixed Use  Zone
“OCR-1Office/Commercial/Residential Zone
“OCR-2Office/Commercial/Residential Zone
“P-I�Park Industrial Zone
“I-1�Light Industrial Zone
“I-2�Heavy Industrial Zone  
 
4.6.   ZONING OF LAND ANNEXED INTO THE CITY
   The applicable zoning standards on land annexed into the City , unless
otherwise stipulated in the annexation ordinance, shall continue to be the
county zoning standards applicable to the property prior to annexation until
such time they are replaced by City standards. City zoning standards shall be
placed on annexed land within six months of the date of annexation. Zoning
standards, zones , overlay zones , and City Zoning Maps are extended to the
annexed land in accordance with Section
3.4.4, Mayor and Council Special Exception Procedure.
4.7.   ZONES - PURPOSE
   The zones provided in the section are established in the City . The
following are the purpose statements of each zone .
4.7.1.   OPEN SPACE  ZONE (OS)
   The purpose of the Open Space (OS) zone is to designate both public and
private open space resources in order to:
   A.   Preserve significant natural resources and open spaces , such as areas
of undisturbed native vegetation , major rock outcrops, major ridges and peaks
, riparian habitats, and valuable vegetated wash segments;
   B.   Promote restoration of open space to provide visual, recreational, and
habitat amenities;
   C.   Preserve vestiges of the natural desert landscape and provide
opportunities for hiking, horseback riding, bicycling, and more passive
recreation in a natural setting;
   D.   Contribute to the preservation of wildlife habitat, especially
interconnected areas that foster the free movement of wildlife within the City
;
   E.   Promote a continued economic benefit to the region by protecting open
space areas for the visual and recreational enjoyment of residents and visitors
alike; and,
   F.   Provide a mechanism for recognizing and protecting public and private
lands that have been designated for preservation by the property owner.
4.7.2.   INSTITUTIONAL RESERVE (IR)
   The purpose of this zone is to identify lands in federal , state , City ,
county , and other public ownership that are natural reserves or wildlife
refuge reserves. It is expected that these lands will remain reserves. However,
should these lands be proposed for development with other land uses , the
permitted uses in the use table and the use-specific standards apply. This zone
is solely to provide comparable zoning for annexed areas and is not intended
for rezoning.
(Am. Ord. 11328, 12/8/2015)
4.7.3.   RURAL HOMESTEAD ZONE (RH)
   This zone is intended to preserve the character and encourage the orderly
growth of rural areas. It is intended to encourage rural development in areas
lacking facilities for urban development and to provide for agriculture,
commercial and industrial development only where appropriate and necessary to
serve the needs of the rural area. This zone is solely to provide comparable
zoning for annexed areas and is not intended for rezoning.
(Am. Ord. 11328, 12/8/2015)
4.7.4.   SUBURBAN RANCH ZONE (SR)
   This zone provides for very low density , large lot , single-family ,
residential development and suburban ranch uses. Uses that would adversely
affect the open space , agricultural, or natural characteristics of this zone
shall not be permitted.
4.7.5.   SUBURBAN HOMESTEAD ZONE (SH)
   This zone provides for low density , large lot , single-family , residential
development and suburban ranch uses, including agriculture uses. This zone is
solely to provide comparable zoning for annexed areas and is not intended for
rezoning.
(Am. Ord. 11328, 12/8/2015)
4.7.6.   RESIDENCE ZONE (RX-1)
   This zone provides for suburban, low density , single-family , residential
development , agriculture and other compatible neighborhood uses.
(Am. Ord. 11328, 12/8/2015)
4.7.7.   RESIDENCE ZONE (RX-2)
   This zone provides for suburban, low density , single-family , residential
development , agriculture and other compatible neighborhood uses.
(Am. Ord. 11328, 12/8/2015)
4.7.8.   RESIDENCE ZONE (R-1)
   This zone provides for urban, low density , single-family , residential
development , together with schools, parks, and other public services necessary
for a satisfactory urban residential environment. Certain other uses, such as
day care and urban agriculture , are permitted that provide reasonable
compatibility with adjoining residential uses.
(Am. Ord. 11328, 12/8/2015)
4.7.9.   RESIDENCE ZONE (R-2)
   This zone provides for medium density , single-family and multifamily,
residential development , together with schools, parks, and other public
services necessary for an urban residential environment. Select other uses,
such as day care and urban agriculture , are permitted that provide reasonable
compatibility with adjoining residential uses.
(Am. Ord. 11328, 12/8/2015)
4.7.10.   MOBILE HOME ZONE (MH-1)
   This zone provides for low to medium density , residential development
primarily in mobile home buildings on individual lots and within mobile home
parks. Civic, educational, recreational, religious uses, and select other uses,
such as day care and urban agriculture , are also permitted that provide
reasonable compatibility with adjoining residential uses.
(Am. Ord. 11328, 12/8/2015)
4.7.11.   MOBILE HOME ZONE (MH-2)
   This zone provides for medium density , residential development in mobile
home buildings on individual lots and within mobile home parks. Civic,
educational, recreation, religious uses, and select other uses, such as day
care and urban agriculture , are also permitted that provide reasonable
compatibility with adjoining residential uses.
(Am. Ord. 11328, 12/8/2015)
4.7.12.   RESIDENCE ZONE (R-3)
   This zone provides for high density , residential development and compatible
uses. Civic, educational, recreation, religious uses, and select other uses,
such as day care and urban agriculture , are also permitted that provide
reasonable compatibility with adjoining residential uses.
(Am. Ord. 11328, 12/8/2015)
4.7.13.   OFFICE ZONE (O-1)
   This zone provides for administrative, medical outpatient, and professional
office uses that will complement the residential environment. Development
within this zone typically consists of office conversions from existing
residential uses fronting on major streets and new construction of small-scale
office projects . Consolidation of lots is encouraged in order to reduce curb
cuts on arterial streets and to assure compliance with the design and
development standards of this zone . Civic, educational, religious uses, and
select other uses, such as day care and urban agriculture , may also be
permitted that provide reasonable compatibility with adjoining residential
uses.
(Am. Ord. 11328, 12/8/2015)
4.7.14.   OFFICE ZONE (O-2)
   This zone provides for office, medical, civic, and other land uses that
provide reasonable compatibility with adjoining residential uses. Typical
development within this zone is two-story office or medical projects . Civic,
educational, recreation, religious uses, and select other uses, such as day
care and urban agriculture , may also be permitted that provide reasonable
compatibility with adjoining residential uses.
(Am. Ord. 11328, 12/8/2015)
4.7.15.   OFFICE ZONE (O-3)
   This zone provides for mid-rise, office, medical, civic, and select other
uses, such as urban agriculture and renewable energy generation, that provide
reasonable compatibility with adjoining residential uses.
(Am. Ord. 11328, 12/8/2015)
4.7.16.   PARKING ZONE (P)
   This zone provides for off-street motor vehicle parking within residential
areas to serve land uses in another zone . Select other uses, such as renewable
energy generation and urban agriculture , may also be permitted that provide
reasonable compatibility with adjoining residential uses.
(Am. Ord. 11328, 12/8/2015)
4.7.17.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE  ZONE (RV)
   The purpose of this zone is to provide for development of short-term
occupancy recreational vehicle parks and campsites while ensuring reasonable
compatibility with adjoining properties by establishing special requirements.
Select other uses, such as urban agriculture , may also be permitted that
provide reasonable compatibility with adjoining residential uses.
(Am. Ord. 11328, 12/8/2015)
4.7.18.   NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL ZONE (NC)
   This zone provides for low-intensity, small-scale, commercial and office
uses that are compatible in size and design with adjacent residential uses.
Residential and select other uses, such as urban agriculture , may also be
permitted that provide reasonable compatibility with adjoining residential
uses.
(Am. Ord. 11328, 12/8/2015)
4.7.19.   RURAL VILLAGE CENTER ZONE (RVC)
   The purpose of this zone is to provide retail shopping facilities, planned
and designed for the convenience and necessity of a suburban or rural
neighborhood. Rural village centers shall be developed according to an approved
site plan and located in accordance with adopted neighborhood, community, or
area plans. The standards are designed to maintain the suburban character of
duly designated commercial areas located along designated Scenic Routes and to
provide safe ingress and egress to and from the village center. Select other
uses, such as urban agriculture , may also be permitted that provide reasonable
compatibility with adjoining residential uses. This zone is solely to provide
for comparable zoning for areas annexed into the City limits and is not
intended for rezoning.
(Am. Ord. 11328, 12/8/2015)
4.7.20.   COMMERCIAL ZONE (C-1)
   This zone provides for low-intensity, commercial and other uses that are
compatible with adjacent residential uses. Residential and select other
agriculture, civic, recreational, and utility uses may also be permitted that
provide reasonable compatibility with adjoining residential uses.
(Am. Ord. 11328, 12/8/2015)
4.7.21.   COMMERCIAL ZONE (C-2)
   This zone provides for general commercial uses that serve the community and
region. Residential and select other agriculture, civic, recreational, and
utility uses may also be permitted that provide reasonable compatibility with
adjoining residential uses.
(Am. Ord. 11328, 12/8/2015)
4.7.22.   COMMERCIAL ZONE (C-3)
   This zone provides for mid-rise development of general commercial uses that
serve the community and region, located downtown or in other major activity
center areas. Residential and select other agriculture, civic, recreational,
and utility uses may also be permitted that provide reasonable compatibility
with adjoining residential uses.
(Am. Ord. 11328, 12/8/2015)
4.7.23.   MIXED USE  ZONE (MU)
   This zone is solely to provide for comparable zoning for areas annexed into
the City limits and is not intended for rezoning. Residential and select other
agriculture, civic, commercial, industrial, recreational, retail, storage,
utility, and wholesaling uses may also be permitted that provide reasonable
compatibility with adjoining residential uses.
(Am. Ord. 11328, 12/8/2015)
4.7.24.   PLANNED AREA DEVELOPMENT (PAD)
   The purpose, regulations, establishment and amendment procedures, and other
applicable requirements pertaining to the PAD are provided in Section
3.5.5.
4.7.25.   PLANNED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT (PCD)
   The purpose, general provisions, development standards, establishment and
amendment procedures, and other applicable requirements pertaining to the PCD
are provided in Section
3.5.6.
4.7.26.   OFFICE/COMMERCIAL/RESIDENTIAL ZONE (OCR-1)
   The purpose of this zone is to provide for high-rise development that serves
the community and region and is located in major activity centers or at transit
centers. High-density residential and including agriculture, civic, commercial,
industrial, retail, storage, utility, and wholesaling uses may also be
permitted provided design and development standards apply. A mixture of
development types is encouraged, including office, commercial, and high-density
residential uses.
(Am. Ord. 11328, 12/8/2015)
4.7.27.   OFFICE/COMMERCIAL/RESIDENTIAL ZONE (OCR-2)
   The purpose of this zone is to provide for high-rise development that serves
the community and region and is located in major activity centers. High-density
residential and select other agriculture, civic, commercial, industrial,
retail, storage, utility, and wholesaling uses may also be permitted provided
design and development standards apply. A mixture of development types is
encouraged, including office, commercial, and high-density residential uses.
(Am. Ord. 11328, 12/8/2015)
4.7.28.   PARK INDUSTRIAL ZONE (P-I)
   This zone provides for corporate business centers, wholesaling and
manufacturing activities, and select other agriculture, civic, commercial,
industrial, retail, storage, utility, and wholesaling uses may also be
permitted provided design and development standards apply that can be carried
on in an unobtrusive, controlled manner.
(Am. Ord. 11328, 12/8/2015)
4.7.29.   LIGHT INDUSTRIAL ZONE (I-1)
   This zone provides for industrial uses that do not have offensive
characteristics in addition to land uses permitted in more restrictive
nonresidential zones . Select other agriculture, civic, commercial, industrial,
retail, storage, utility, and wholesaling uses may also be permitted.
(Am. Ord. 11328, 12/8/2015)
4.7.30.   HEAVY INDUSTRIAL ZONE (I-2)
   This zone provides for industrial uses that are generally nuisances , making
them incompatible with most other land use . These nuisances may be in the form
of air pollutants; excessive noise, traffic, glare, or vibration; noxious
odors; the use of hazardous materials; or unsightly appearance. Select other
agriculture, civic, commercial, industrial, retail, storage, utility, and
wholesaling uses may also be permitted.
(Am. Ord. 11328, 12/8/2015)
4.8.   USE TABLES
4.8.1.   GENERAL
   The following use tables,
Tables 4.8-1 through
4.8-7, establish the permitted principal, special exception, and accessory uses
for each zone in the City of Tucson. The use-specific standards that apply to
uses in certain zones are included in the far right column of each table.
4.8.2.   ORGANIZATION
   A.   Zone Groups
      1.   In several instances, the order in which the zones are provided in
the permitted use tables do not relate to one particular zone ’s degree of
restrictiveness in relation to other zones . For the official hierarchy of
more- to less-restrictive zones , see Section
4.5.
      2.   For organizational, formatting, and ease of use purposes, the zones
have been grouped as shown in the following table:
Table Number Group Zones Included
Table Number Group                                Zones Included
4.8-1        Rural and Suburban Residential Zones RH  SR  SH  RX-1  RX-2
4.8-2        Urban Residential Zones              R-1 R-2 R-3 MH-1  MH-2
4.8-3        Office Zones                         O-1 O-2 O-3       
4.8-4        Commercial and Mixed Use  Zones     C-1 C-2 C-3 OCR-1 OCR-2
4.8-5        Industrial Zones                     P-I I-1 I-2       
4.8-6        Special Use Zones (1)                OS  IR  P   RV     
4.8-7        Special Use Zones (2)                NC  RVC MU        
 
   B.   Hierarchy of Uses
   The hierarchy in the use tables has Land Use Groups at the top, followed by
Land Use Classes, then Land Use Types. See Section
4.4, Organization of Land Uses, for a description of each land use category.
See the
Figure 4.8.2-1 following the written description below for an example of the
use hierarchy.
      1.   Land Use Groups
      Land Use Groups are shown in the permitted use tables as shaded rows with
a label indicating the specific Land Use Group (e.g., Civic).
      2.   Land Use Classes
      Land Use Classes are listed below their respective Land Use Group header
and are left justified in the Land Use column.
      3.   Land Use Types
      Land Use Types are listed below their associated Land Use Class in the
Land Use column and are indented in from the Land Use Class label.
      4.   Accessory Land Use
      A permitted accessory land use is listed either:
         a.   Directly below its associated Land Use Class or Type and is
labeled “[w]ith [insert use] as an accessory use ”;
         b.   At the end of the Land Use Group section when an accessory use
(s) is permitted with every permitted use within a particular Land Use Group;
or,
         c.   As a dedicated line item in a particular Land Use Group or at the
end of a Permitted Use Table when a use(s) is a permitted accessory use to
permitted land uses in multiple Land Use Groups.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2972.jpg]
Figure 4.8.2-1: Example of Hierarchy of Uses in the Permitted Use Tables
4.8.3.   PERMITTED USES: RURAL AND SUBURBAN RESIDENTIAL ZONES
TABLE 4.8-1: PERMITTED USES - RURAL AND SUBURBAN RESIDENTIAL ZONES
P = Permitted Use S = Permitted as Special Exception Use
[1] Mayor and Council Special Exception Procedure, Section
3.4.4
[2] Zoning Examiner Special Exception Procedure, Section
3.4.3
[3] PDSD Special Exception Procedure, Section
3.4.2
LAND USE RH SR SH RX-1 RX-2 USE SPECIFIC STANDARDS
Agricultural Land Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:
TABLE 4.8-1: PERMITTED USES - RURAL AND SUBURBAN RESIDENTIAL ZONES
P = Permitted Use S = Permitted as Special Exception Use
[1] Mayor and Council Special Exception Procedure, Section
3.4.4
[2] Zoning Examiner Special Exception Procedure, Section
3.4.3
[3] PDSD Special Exception Procedure, Section
3.4.2
LAND USE                                                                       RH         SR         SH         RX-1       RX-2       USE SPECIFIC STANDARDS
Agricultural Land Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:
Animal Production:                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                      SR: 4.9.2.A.1.a, 2.b,3.a
   General                                                                             P          P          P                     SH: 4.9.2.A.1.b, 2.b, 2.c, 3.b
                                                                                                                                      RX-1: 4.9.2.A.1.a, 2.a, 2.b, 3.a
   Excluding Stockyard                                                      P                                                      RH: 4.9.2.A.1.a, 2.b,3.b and 4.9.13.I
   Commercial Stables Only                                                             P          P                                SR: 4.9.2.A.1.b, & 2.b
                                                                                                                                      SH: 4.9.2.A.1.b, & 2.c
   Hog Ranch Only                                                           S [1]                                                  RH: 4.9.2.A.3.d and 4.9.13.I
   Commercial Feedlot Only                                                  S [1]                                                  RH: 4.9.2.D.1 and 4.9.13.I
   Stable or Riding School Only                                             P                                                      RH: 4.9.2.A.1.b, 2.b, & 4.b and 4.9.13.I
Community Garden                                                               P          P          P          P          P          RH: 4.9.2.B and 4.9.13.I
                                                                                                                                      SR, SH, RX-1, RX-2: 4.9.2.B
Crop Production:                                                               P          P          P          P          P          RH: 4.9.2.C and 4.9.13.I
                                                                                                                                      SR, SH, RX-1, RX-2: 4.9.2.C
   With Food & Beverage Sales as an accessory use                           P          P          P                                RH: 4.9.9.A.2.a, 3-8 and 4.9.13.I
                                                                                                                                      SR, SH: 4.9.9.A.1, 2.c, 3, 4, 7
                                                                                                                                      4.9.2.C and:
                                                                                                                                      RH: 4.9.2.A.1.a, 2.b, 3.b and 4.9.13.I
General Farming                                                                P          P          P          P                     SR: 4.9.2.A.1.a, 2.b, 3.a
                                                                                                                                      SH: 4.9.2.A.1.b, 2.b, 2.c, 3.b
                                                                                                                                      RX-1:
                                                                                                                                      4.9.2.A.1.b, 2.a, 2.b, 3.a
Farmers’ Market as an accessory use to any permitted Agricultural Land Use   P          P          P          P          P          All: 4.9.9.A.12
Group
Civic Land Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:
Cemetery                                                                       S [1]                 S [1]                            RH: 4.9.3.A.3 and 4.9.13.I
                                                                                                                                      SH: 4.9.3.A.2
Correctional:                                                                                                                          
   Supervision Facility                                                                S [1]                                       SR: 4.9.3.B.1.b, 2.a, 3.a, 4.a, 8 & 9
   Custodial Facility                                                                  S [1]                                       SR: 4.9.3.B.1.c, 2.a, 3.a, 4.b, 8 & 9
                                                                                                                                      SR: 4.9.3.B.1.d, 2.c, 3.b, 4.b, 7, 8, & 9 and
   Supervision & Custodial Facility                                                    S [1]                                       shall be located in separate and distinct
                                                                                                                                      facilities
Cultural:                                                                                                                         
   Government owned and operation only                                                 P          P          P          P           
   Nature reserve only                                                      P                                                      RH: 4.9.13.I
   Other than nature reserve or wildlife refuge                             S [1]                                                  RH: 4.9.3.C.1 and 4.9.13.I
Educational:                                                                                                                      
   Elementary & Secondary                                                              P          P          P          P          SR, SH, RX-1, RX-2: 4.9.3.D
   Elementary & Secondary, projects  requesting exceptions to 4.9.3.D       S [2]      S [2]      S [2]      S [2]      S [2]      RH: 4.9.13.I
   With Salvaging and Recycling as an accessory use  to both P & S uses     P          P          P          P          P          RH, SR, SH, RX-1, RX-2: 4.9.5.G.1 & 3
Protective Service (government owned and operated only)                        P          P          P          P          P          SH, RX-1, RX-2: 4.9.13.F
Religious:                                                                     P          P          P          P          P          RH: 4.9.3.F and 4.9.13.I
   With Columbarium as an accessory use                                     P          P          P          P          P           
                                                                                                                                      RH: 4.9.5.G.1 & 3
   With Salvaging and Recycling as an accessory use                         P          P          P          P          P          SR, SH, RX-1, RX-2:
                                                                                                                                      4.9.5.G.1 & 3
Farmers’ Market as an accessory use to any permitted Civic Land Use Group    P          P          P          P          P          All: 4.9.9.A.12
Commercial Services Land Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:
Administrative and Professional Office                                         S [2]                                                  RH: 4.9.4.A & 4.9.13.I
Alcoholic Beverage  Service                                                    S [1]                                                  RH: 4.9.4.C.1 & .3 and 4.9.13.I
Animal Service:                                                                                                                        
   General                                                                             P          P                                SR, SH: 4.9.4.D.5
   Commercial Kennel Only                                                   S [1]                                                  RH: 4.9.4.D.6 and 4.9.13.I
   Veterinary Hospital Only                                                 P                                                      RH: 4.9.4.D.3 & .5 and 4.9.13.I
Automotive Service and Repair:                                                                                                         
   Major                                                                    S [1]                                                  RH: 4.9.4.F.6, 4.9.13.I
   Minor                                                                    S [1]                                                  RH: 4.9.4.F.1 & 6 and 4.9.13.A.2 & I
Commercial Recreation                                                          S [1]                                                  RH: 4.9.13.A.2 & I
Communications:                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                      RH: 4.9.4.I.2, 3, & 4.a or 5.a or 5.b and 4.9.13.I
   Wireless Communication                                                   p          p          p          p          p          SR, SH, RX-1, RX-2: 4.9.4.I.2, 3, & 4.a or 5.a or
                                                                                                                                      5.b
                                                                                                                                      RH: 4.9.13.I and one of the following groups: S
   Wireless Communication, limited to wireless communication towers  and    S [see use S [see use S [see use S [see use S [see use [2] - 4.9.4.I.2, 3 & 7.a or S [1] - 4.9.4.I.2, 3 &
antennas                                                                       specific   specific   specific   specific   specific   8
                                                                               standards] standards] standards] standards] standards] SR, SH, RX-1, RX-2: S [2] - 4.9.4.I.2, 3 & 7.a or
                                                                                                                                      S [1] - 4.9.4.I.2, 3 & 8
   Radio or Television Station Only                                         S [1]                 S[1]                             RH: 4.9.4.I.1, 4.9.13.A.2 and 4.9.13.A.I
                                                                                                                                      SH: 4.9.4.I.1
Construction Service                                                           S [1]                                                  RH: 4.9.4.J and 4.9.13.A.2
Day Care:                                                                                                                              
   Adult Care, Maximum 10 Persons                                           P          P          P          P          P          RH: 4.9.4.B.1 and 4.9.13.I
                                                                                                                                      SR, SH, RX-1, RX-2: 4.9.4.B.1
                                                                                                                                      RH: 4.9.4.H.1-5, .6.a & .7.a and 4.9.13.I
   Child Care, Maximum of 30 Children                                       P          P          P          P          P          SR: 4.9.4.H.1-5, 6.a & .7.a
                                                                                                                                      SH & RX1: 4.9.4.H.1-5, 6.a & .7.b
                                                                                                                                      RX-2: 4.9.4.H.1-5, 6.a & .7.c
                                                                                                                                      RH: 4.9.13.I and one of the following groups:
   Child Care, Unlimited # of Children                                      S [2]      S [2]      S [2]      S [2]      S [2]      4.9.4.H.1-5, 7.f. & 8 or 4.9.4.H.1, .2, .8, & .9
                                                                                                                                      SR, SH, RX-1, RX-2: 4.9.4.H.1-5, 7.f. & 8 or
                                                                                                                                      4.9.4.H.1, .2, .8, & .9
                                                                                                                                      RH: 4.9.4.H.1-2 & H.9 and 4.9.13.I
   Child Care with Extended Hours (before 6:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m.)     S [2]      S[2]       S[2]       S[2]       S[2]       SR, SH: 4.9.4.H.1-2 & H.9
                                                                                                                                      RX-1, RX-2: 4.9.4.H. 1-2, H.8-9
Entertainment: fairground, carnival, or racetrack for the racing of animals    S [1]                                                  RH: 4.9.4.K.5 and 4.9.13.I
only
Financial Service, excluding non-chartered financial institutions              S [1]                                                  RH: 4.9.4.L.2 & .3 and 4.9.13.A.2 & I
Food Service, excluding soup  kitchens                                         S[1]                                                   RH: 4.9.4.M.3
Funeral Service, Crematorium Only                                              S [1]                 S [1]                            RH: 4.9.4.N.2 and 4.9.13.I
                                                                                                                                      SH: 4.9.4.N.1
Medical Service - Outpatient                                                   P                                                      RH: 4.9.4.O.2; 4.9.4.P.2.b, .3, & .4, and
                                                                                                                                      4.9.13.A.2 & I
Personal Service                                                               S [1]                                                  RH: 4.9.4.T.4 and 4.9.13.I
Trade Service and Repair, Minor                                                S[1]                                                   RH: 4.9.13.I
Transportation Service:                                                                                                                
   Airport  Facilities                                                      S [1]                                                  RH: 4.9.4.Y.1 & 2 and 4.9.13.I
   General Aviation Airstrip                                                S [1]                                                  RH: 4.9.4.Y.1 - 4 and 4.9.13.I
Traveler’s Accommodation, Lodging                                            S [1]      P          P          P                      
The following are permitted accessory uses  to Traveler’s Accommodation,                                                            RH: 4.9.4.AA.1, .2, .3, .4, .5, .6.b, 7, and
Lodging:                                                                                                                              4.9.13.I and the following:
•   Alcoholic Beverage Service                                            P                                                      •   For Alcoholic Beverage Service, 4.9.4.C.3
•   Civic Assembly                                                                                                               •   For Food Service, 4.9.4.M.3
•   Commercial Recreation; or, Food Service
The following are permitted accessory uses to Traveler’s Accommodation,
Lodging:
•   Administrative and Professional Office;                                                                                      SR, SH, RX-1: 4.9.4.AA.1, .2, .3, .4, .5, .6.a,
•   Alcoholic Beverage Service;                                                      P          P          P                     .6.c, 7 and the following:
•   Commercial Recreation;                                                                                                       •   For Alcoholic Beverage Service, 4.9.4.C.3
•   Food Service;                                                                                                                •   For Food Service, 4.9.4.M.3;
•   General Merchandise Sales; or,
•   Personal Service
Industrial Land Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:
Extraction                                                                     S [1]                                                  RH: 4.9.5.B and 4.9.13.I
Motion Picture Industry                                                                              S [1]                            SH: 4.9.5.D and 4.9.13.C & .I
Perishable Goods Manufacturing                                                 S [1]                                                  RH: 4.9.5.E.2 & .3 and 4.9.13.I
Primary Manufacturing: Asphalt, Cement Plants only                             S [1]                                                  RH: 4.9.5.B and 4.9.13.I
Recreation Land Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:
Golf Course                                                                               P          P          P          P          SR, SH, RX-1, RX-2: 4.9.6.A.1
The following are permitted accessory uses to a Golf Course use:
•   Alcoholic Beverage Service;                                                                                                  SR, SH, RX-1, RX-2: 4.9.6.A.2 and the following:
•   Food Service;                                                                   P          P          P          P          For an Alcoholic Beverage Service use, 4.9.4.C.3
•   General Merchandise; Sales; or,                                                                                              For a Food Service use, 4.9.4.M.3
•   Personal Services
Parks and Recreation                                                                     P          P          P          P          SR, SH, RX-1, RX-2: 4.9.13.B and C
Farmers’ Market as an accessory use to any permitted Recreation Land Use GrouP          P          P          P          P          All: 4.9.9.A.12
Residential Land Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:
Family Dwelling:                                                                                                                  
   Duplex                                                                                         P                                 
                                                                                                                                      RH: 4.9.13.I
   Manufactured Housing                                                     P          P          P          P          P          RX-1: 4.9.7.B.6, .8, & .9
                                                                                                                                      SR, RX-2: 4.9.7.B.6
   Single-Family , Detached                                                 P          P          P          P          P          RH: 4.9.13.I
                                                                                                                                      RX-1: 4.9.7.B.6, .8, & .9
   Accessory Dwelling Unit                                                  P          P          P          P          P          All: 4.9.7.B.6, 8, & 9 and 6.6.3
   Home Occupation as an accessory use to any permitted Family Dwelling use P          P          P          P          P          All: 4.9.7.D
   Home Occupation : Travelers’ Accommodation, Lodging as an accessory to use        S [2]      S [2]      S [2]      S [2]      SR, SH, RX-1, RX-2: 4.9.7.E.10, .11, & .13 and
to an permitted Family Dwelling use                                                                                                   4.9.7.H.2 & .5 - .10
Flexible Lot Development                                                                  P          P          P          P          All: 8.7.3
Mobile Home Dwelling                                                           P                     P                                RH: 4.9.13.I
With Home Occupation as an accessory use                                       P                     P                                RH, SH: 4.9.7.D
Residential Care Services, Adult Care or Physical Behavioral Health Services:                                                     
   Maximum 10 Residents                                                     P          P          P          P          P          RH: 4.9.7.J.3.a, & 4 and 4.9.13.I
                                                                                                                                      SR, SH, RX-1, RX-2: 4.9.7.J.2.a, 3.a, & 4
   Maximum 15 Residents                                                     S [2]      S [2]      S [2]      S [2]      S [2]      RH: 4.9.7.J.3.b. & 4 and 4.9.13.I
                                                                                                                                      SR, SH, RX-1, RX-2: 4.9.7.J.2.a, 3.b, & 4
                                                                                                                                      RH: 4.9.7.J.3.d, 4 & 7 and 4.9.13.I
   Unlimited Residents                                                      S [2]      S [2]      S [2]      S [2]      S [2]      SR: 4.9.7.J.2.a, 3.d, 4 & 7
                                                                                                                                      SH, RX-1, RX-2: 4.9.7.J.2.a, 3.d, 4, & 7
Retail Trade Land Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:
Artists/Artisans Workshop/Studio                                               S [2]                                                  RH: 4.9.9.B.2 and 4.9.13.I
Feed store                                                                     S [1]                                                  RH: 4.9.13.A.2 & I
Food and Beverage Sales                                                        S [1]                                                  RH: 4.9.9.A.10 and 4.9.13.I
Fuel dispensing                                                                S [1]                                                  RH: 4.9.13.A.2 & .I
General Merchandise Sales                                                      S [1]
Storage Land Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:
Hazardous Material Storage as an accessory use to any permitted principal use  P          P          P          P          P          RH: 4.9.10.B.1 & .2.a. and 4.9.13.I
in every land use group                                                                                                               SR, SH, RX-1, RX-2: 4.9.10.B.1 & .2.a
Utilities  Land Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:
Distribution System:                                                                                                              
   General                                                                            S [2]      S [2]      S [2]      S [2]      SR, SH, RX-1, RX-2: 4.9.11.A. 1, .2, .5, .8, .9,
                                                                                                                                      .11, .12
   Limited to Power Substation (Input Voltage of 115 Kilovolts or Greater)  S [2]                                                  RH: 4.9.11.A.3, .6, .7, & .10 and 4.9.13.I
   Limited to Telephone, Telegraph, or Power Substations (Input Voltage < 11S [2]                                                  RH: 4.9.11.A.2 & .8 and 4.9.13.I
Kilovolts)
   Limited to Water Pumping and Storage Facilities Serving Two or More      S [2]                                                  RH: 4.9.11.A.4 and 4.9.13.I
Properties as Public, Private, or Community Utility
Renewable Energy Generation                                                    S [2]      S [2]      S[2]       S[2]       S [2]      RH: 4.9.11.B.2, .3, .4, & .5 and 4.9.13.I
                                                                                                                                      SR, SH, RX-1, RX-2: 4.9.11.B.2, .3, .4, & .5
 
(Am. Ord. 11070, 5/14/2013; Am. Ord. 11127, 11/6/2013; Am. Ord. 11257, 4/21/
2015; Am. Ord. 11328, 12/8/2015; Am. Ord. 11409, 11/9/2016; Am. Ord. 11557, 6/
5/2018; Am. Ord. 11890, 12/7/2021; Am. Ord. 11996, 3/21/2023)
4.8.4.   PERMITTED USES: URBAN RESIDENTIAL ZONES
TABLE 4.8-2: PERMITTED USES - URBAN RESIDENTIAL ZONES
P = Permitted Use S = Permitted as Special Exception Use
[1] Mayor and Council Special Exception Procedure, Section
3.4.4
[2] Zoning Examiner Special Exception Procedure, Section
3.4.3
[3] PDSD Special Exception Procedure, Section
3.4.2
LAND USE R-1 R-2 R-3 MH-1 MH-2 USE SPECIFIC STANDARDS
Agricultural Land Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:
TABLE 4.8-2: PERMITTED USES - URBAN RESIDENTIAL ZONES
P = Permitted Use S = Permitted as Special Exception Use
[1] Mayor and Council Special Exception Procedure, Section
3.4.4
[2] Zoning Examiner Special Exception Procedure, Section
3.4.3
[3] PDSD Special Exception Procedure, Section
3.4.2
LAND USE                                                                     R-1        R-2        R-3        MH-1       MH-2       USE SPECIFIC STANDARDS
Agricultural Land Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:
Community Garden                                                             P          P          P          P          P          All: 4.9.2.B
Crop Production                                                              P          P          P          P          P          All: 4.9.2.C
Farmers’ Market as an accessory use to any permitted Agricultural Land Use P          P          P          P          P          All: 4.9.9.A.12
Group
Civic Land Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:
Cemetery                                                                                P          P                                R-2, R-3: 4.9.3.A.1
Civic Assembly (government owned and operated only)                                                P                                 
Cultural Use:                                                                                                                        
   Government owned and operated only                                     P          P          P          P          P           
   Privately-owned and operated                                           S [1]      S [1]      S [1]                            R-1, R-2, R-3: 4.9.3.C.2 -.8
   With Food Service as an accessory use  to a P or S Cultural Use        S [1]      S [1]      S [1]                            R-1, R-2, R-3: 4.9.4.M.1 & .3
   With Alcoholic Beverage  Sales as an accessory use  to a P or S CulturaS [1]      S [1]      S [1]                            R-1, R-2, R-3: 4.9.4.C.3 and 4.9.4.V.4 & .8
Use
   With Entertainment as an accessory use  to a P or S Cultural Use       S [1]      S [1]      S [1]                            R-1. R-2, R-3: 4.9.4.K.6
   With General Merchandise Sales as an accessory use  to a P or S CulturaP          P          P                                R-1, R-2, R-3: 4.9.9.B.1 & .2
Use
Educational Use:                                                                                                                     
   Elementary & Secondary                                                 P          P          P          P          P          R-1, R-2, R-3, MH-1, MH-2: 4.9.3.D.1-7
   Elementary & Secondary                                                 S [2]      S [2]      S [2]      S [2]      S [2]       
   With Salvaging & Recycling as an accessory use  to both P & S uses     P          P          P          P          P          R-1, R-2, R-3, MH-1, MH-2: 4.9.5.G.1 & 3
Postal Service (government owned and operated only)                                     P          P                                 
Protective Service (government owned and operated only)                      P          P          P          P          P          R-2, R-3, MH-1, MH-2: 4.9.13.F
Religious Use                                                                P          P          P          P          P           
   With Columbarium as an accessory use                                   P          P          P          P          P           
   With Salvaging & Recycling as an accessory use                         P          P          P          P          P          R-1, R-2, R-3, MH-1, MH-2: 4.9.5.G. 1 & 3
Farmers’ Market as an accessory use to any permitted Civic Land Use Group  P          P          P          P          P          All: 4.9.9.A.12
Commercial Services Land Use Group
Administrative and Professional Office (government owned and operated only)             P          P                     P           
Communications:                                                                                                                      
   Wireless Communication                                                 P          P          P          P          P          R-1, R-2, R-3, MH-1, MH-2: 4.9.4.I.2, .3, & .4.a or 5.a or 5.b
   Wireless Communication, limited to wireless communication towers  and  S [see use S [see use S [see use S [see use S [see use R-1, R-2, R-3, MH-1, MH-2: S[2] - 4.9.4.I.2, .3 & .7.a or S[1] - 4.9.4.I.2,
antennas                                                                     specific   specific   specific   specific   specific   .3 &.8
                                                                             standards] standards] standards] standards] standards]
Day Care:                                                                                                                       
   Adult Care                                                             P          P          P          P                     R-1, R-2, MH-1: 4.9.4.B.1
                                                                                                                                    R-3: 4.9.4.B.2
   Child Care, maximum 30 children                                        P          P                                           R-1, R-2: 4.9.4.H.1-5, .6.a & .7.d.
   Child Care, maximum 100 children                                                             P                                R-3: 4.9.4.H.1-.5, .6.b, & .7.e
   Child Care, unlimited number of children                               S [2]      S [2]      S [2]                            R-1, R-2: 4.9.4.H.1-5, .6.c, 7.f, & .8
                                                                                                                                    R-3: 4.9.4.H.1-5, .6.c, 7.g, & .8
   Child Care with extended hours (before 6:00 am or after 7:00 pm)       S [2]      S [2]      S [2]                            R-1, R-2, R-3: 4.9.4.H.1, .2, .8, & .9
Medical Services, excluding blood donor center                                          S [2]      S [2]                            R-2: 4.9.4.O.2 and 4.9.4.P.1, 2.a, 3, & .4
                                                                                                                                    R-3: 4.9.4.O.2 and 4.9.4.P.1, 2.a, .3, & .4
   Transportation Services, Air Carrier, Helipad as an accessory use to a           S [2]      S [2]                          R-2: 4.9.4.Q.2
Medical Service, Major Use                                                                                                          R-3: 4.9.4.Q.2
Recreation Land Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:
Parks and Recreation                                                         P          P          P          P          P          R-1, R-2, MH-1, MH-2: 4.9.13.B & C
                                                                                                                                    R-3: 4.9.13.B and C
Farmers’ Market as an accessory use to any permitted Recreation Land Use   P          P          P          P          P          All: 4.9.9.A.12
Group
Residential Land Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:
Family  Dwelling:                                                                                                                    
   Duplex                                                                            P          P          P                     R-2: 4.9.7.B.6, .9, & .10
                                                                                                                                    R-3: 4.9.7.B.6
                                                                                                                                    R-1: For 1 unit, 4.9.7.B.5 - 9; for 2 units (min. 10,000 sf lot size
   Manufactured Housing                                                   P          P          P          P          P          required), 4.9.7.B
                                                                                                                                    R-2: 4.9.7.B.6, .9, & .10
                                                                                                                                    R-3: 4.9.7.B.6
   Multifamily Development                                                           P          P          P                     R-2: 4.9.7.B.6, .9, & .10
                                                                                                                                    R-3: 4.9.7.B.6
   Accessory Dwelling Unit                                                P          P          P          P          P          All: 4.9.7.B.6, 8, & 9 and 6.6.3
   Single-family, Attached                                                           P          P          P          P          R-2: 4.9.7.B.6,.9, & .10
                                                                                                                                    R-3: 4.9.7.B.6.
                                                                                                                                    R-1: For 1 unit, 4.9.7.B.5 - 9; for 2 units (min. 10,000 sf lot size
   Single-family , Detached                                               P          P          P          P          P          required), 4.9.7.B.1 - .9, & .11
                                                                                                                                    R-2: 4.9.7.B.6, .9, & .10
                                                                                                                                    R-3: 4.9.7.B.6
   Home Occupation  as an accessory use  to any permitted Family  DwellingP          P          P          P          P          All: 4.9.7.D
use
   Home Occupation : Travelers’ Accommodation, Lodging as an accessory uS [2]      S [2]                                       R-1: 4.9.7.E.10, .11, & .13 and 4.9.7.H.2 & .5 - .11
to any permitted Family  Dwelling use                                                                                               R-2: 4.9.7.E.10, .11, & .13 and 4.9.7.H.3 & .5 - .11
Flexible Lot Development                                                     P          P          P          P          P          All: 8.7.3
                                                                                                                                     
Group Dwelling                                                                                     P                                R-3: 4.9.7.B.6
Mobile Home Dwelling                                                                                          P          P           
   With Home Occupation  as an accessory use                                                               P          P          MH-1, MH-2: 4.9.7.D
Mobile Home Park:                                                                                             P          P           
The following accessory uses  in Mobile Home Parks with 100 spaces or more:
•   Day Care, Child;                                                                                                           MH-2:
•   Food and Beverage Sales (limited to a delicatessen or snack bar);                                                          For Day Care, Child use, 4.9.4.H.1-5;
•   General Merchandise Sales;                                                                                      P          •   For Travelers’ Accommodation, Campsite, 4.9.4.Z;
•   Personal Service (limited to a coin-operated laundry or pick-up station                                                    •   For Food and Beverage Sales, General Merchandise Sales, and Personal
for dry cleaning);                                                                                                                  Service, 4.9.7.I.3
•   Travelers’ Accommodation; Campsite; and,                                                                                 •   Vehicle Rental and Sales, 4.9.7.I.4
•   Vehicle Rental and Sales
With Travelers’ Accommodation, Campsite as an accessory use                                                 P          P          MH-1, MH-2: 4.9.4.Z
Residential Care Services, Adult Care or Physical and Behavioral Health                                                         
Services:
   Maximum 10 Residents                                                   P          P          P          P          P          R-1, R-2: 4.9.7.J. 2.a, 3.a, 4
                                                                                                                                    R-3, MH-1, MH-2: 4.9.7.J. 3.a, .4
   Unlimited # Residents                                                             P          P                                R-2: 4.9.7.J.2.a, .3.d, .4, .7
                                                                                                                                    R-3: 4.9.7.J.2.b, 3.d, .4, .8
   Maximum 15 Residents                                                              S [2]                 S [2]                 R-1, R-2: 4.9.7.J.2.a, .3.b, .4
                                                                                                                                    MH-1: 4.9.7.J.3.b, .4
   Unlimited # Residents                                                  S [2]                            S [2]                 R-1: 4.9.7.J.2.a, 3.d, .4, .8
                                                                                                                                    MH-1: 4.9.7.J.3.d, .4, .8
Residential Care Services, Adult Rehabilitation Service or Shelter Care:                                                        
   Maximum 15 Residents                                                              S [2]                                       R-2: 4.9.7.J.1, .2.a, .3.b, .4, 9
   Maximum 20 Residents                                                                         S [2]                            R-3: 4.9.7.J.1, .2.b, .3.c, .4, 9
   Unlimited # Residents                                                             S[2]       S[2]                             R-2: 4.9.7.J.1, 2.a, 3.d, .4, 8
                                                                                                                                    R-3: 4.9.7.J.1, 2.b, 3.d, .4, .8
Residential Care Services, Child Rehabilitation Service (maximum 10                     P          P                                R-2: 4.9.7.J.1, 2.a, .3.a, .4
Residents)                                                                                                                          R-3: 4.9.7.J.1, 2.b, .3.a, .4
Residential Care Services, Shelter Care for Victims of Domestic Violence:                                                            
   Maximum 10 Residents                                                              P                                           R-2: 4.9.7.J.1, 2.a, 3.a, 4 & 9
   Maximum 20 Residents                                                                         P                                R-3: 4.9.7.J.1, 2.b, 3.c, 4 & 9
Storage Land Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:
Hazardous Material Storage as an accessory use to any permitted principal    P          P          P          P          P          R-1, R-2, R-3, MH-1, MH-2: 4.9.10.B.1 & .2.a
use in every land use group
Utilities  Land Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:
Distribution System                                                          S [2]      S [2]      S [2]      S [2]      S [2]      R-1, R-2, R-3, MH-1, MH-2: 4.9.11.A.1, .2, .5, .8, .9, .11, .12
Renewable Energy Generation                                                  S [2]      S [2]      S [2]      S [2]      S [2]      R-1, R-2, R-3 MH-1, MH-2: 4.9.11.B.2, .3, .4, .5
 
(Am. Ord. 11070, 5/14/2013; Am. Ord. 11127, 11/6/2013; Am. Ord. 11257, 4/21/
2015; Am. Ord. 11328, 12/8/2015; Am. Ord. 11409, 11/9/2016; Am. Ord. 11557, 6/
5/2018; Am. Ord. 11608, passed 12/18/2018; Am. Ord. 11890, 12/7/2021; Am. Ord.
11996, 3/21/2023)
4.8.5.   PERMITTED USES: OFFICE ZONES
TABLE 4.8-3: PERMITTED USES - OFFICE ZONES
P = Permitted Use S = Permitted as Special Exception Use
[1] Mayor and Council Special Exception Procedure, Section
3.4.4
[2] Zoning Examiner Special Exception Procedure, Section
3.4.3
[3] PDSD Special Exception Procedure, Section
3.4.2
LAND USE         O-1 O-2 O-3 USE SPECIFIC STANDARDS
Agricultural Land Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:
Community Garden P   P   P   All: 4.9.2.B
Urban Farm       P   P   P   All: 4.9.2.E
Civic Land Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:
TABLE 4.8-3: PERMITTED USES - OFFICE ZONES
P = Permitted Use S = Permitted as Special Exception Use
[1] Mayor and Council Special Exception Procedure, Section
3.4.4
[2] Zoning Examiner Special Exception Procedure, Section
3.4.3
[3] PDSD Special Exception Procedure, Section
3.4.2
LAND USE                                                                         O-1       O-2       O-3       USE SPECIFIC
                                                                                                               STANDARDS
Agricultural Land Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:
Community Garden                                                                 P         P         P         All: 4.9.2.B
Urban Farm                                                                       P         P         P         All: 4.9.2.E
Civic Land Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:
Cemetery                                                                                           P         O-3: 4.9.3.A.1
                                                                                                               and 4.9.13.K
Civic Assembly                                                                            P         P         O-2: 4.9.13.J
Cultural Use:                                                                                                
   Government owned and operated                                                       P         P          
                                                                                                               O-1, O-2:
                                                                                                               4.9.3.C.2 - 8
   Privately owned and operated                                               S [1]     S [1]     S [1]     and 4.9.13.J
                                                                                                               O-3: 4.9.3.C.2
                                                                                                               - 8 and
                                                                                                               4.9.13.K
   With Food Service as an accessory use                                      S [1]     S [1]     S [1]     O-1, O-2, O-3:
                                                                                                               4.9.4.M.1, .3
                                                                                                               O-1, O-2, O-3:
   With Alcoholic Beverage  Service as an accessory use                       S [1]     S [1]     S [1]     4.9.4.C.3 &
                                                                                                               4.9.4.V.4, .8
   With Entertainment as an accessory use                                     S [1]     S [1]     S [1]     O-1, O-2, O-3:
                                                                                                               4.9.4.K.6
   With General Merchandise Sales as an accessory use                         P         P         P         O-1, O-2, O-3:
                                                                                                               4.9.9.B.1 & .2
Educational Use:                                                                                             
                                                                                                               O-2: 4.9.3.D
   Elementary and Secondary                                                            P         P         and 4.9.13.J
                                                                                                               O-3: 4.9.3.D
                                                                                                               and 4.9.13.K
   Elementary and Secondary                                                            S [2]     S [2]      
                                                                                                               O-2: 4.9.13.J
   Postsecondary Institution                                                           P         P         O-3: 4.9.3.E
                                                                                                               and 4.9.13.K
   With Salvaging & Recycling as an accessory use  to any P or S Educational U         P         P         O-2, O-3:
                                                                                                               4.9.5.G.1&3
Postal Service (government owned and operated only)                                       P         P          
Protective Service (government owned and operated only)                                   P         P          
Religious Use                                                                             P         P         O-2: 4.9.13.J
                                                                                                               O-3: 4.9.13.K
   With Columbarium as an accessory use                                                P         P          
                                                                                                               O-2, O-3, MU,
   With Salvaging & Recycling as an accessory use                                     P         P         OCR-1, OCR-2:
                                                                                                               4.9.5.G.1 & .3
Commercial Services Land Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:
                                                                                                               O-1: 4.9.4.R
Administrative and Professional Office                                           P         P         P         and 4.9.13.J
                                                                                                               O-2: 4.9.13.J
                                                                                                               O-3: 4.9.13.K
Communications                                                                                               
                                                                                                               O-1, O-2:
                                                                                                               4.9.13.J and
                                                                                                               4.9.4.I.2, .3,
                                                                                                               & .4.a or 5.a
   Wireless Communication                                                     P         P         P         or 5.b
                                                                                                               O-3: 4.9.13.K
                                                                                                               and 4.9.4.I.2,
                                                                                                               .3, & .4.a or
                                                                                                               5.a or 5.b
                                                                                                               O-1, O-2:
                                                                                                               4.9.13.J and
                                                                                                               one of the
                                                                                                               following
                                                                                                               groups: S[2] -
                                                                                                               4.9.4.I.2, .3,
                                                                                 S [see    S [see    S [see    & .7.a or S[1]
   Wireless Communication, limited to wireless communication towers  and      use       use       use       - 4.9.4.I.2,
antennas                                                                        specific  specific  specific  .3, & .8
                                                                                 standard] standard] standard] O-3: 4.9.13.K
                                                                                                               and one of the
                                                                                                               following
                                                                                                               groups: S[2] -
                                                                                                               4.9.4.I.2, .3,
                                                                                                               & .7.a or S[1]
                                                                                                               - 4.9.4.I.2,
                                                                                                               .3, & .8
Day Care:                                                                                                    
   Adult                                                                               P         P         O-2: 4.9.13.J
   Child:                                                                                                 
                                                                                                               O-2: 4.9.4.H.1-
                                                                                                               5, 6.a & 7.d
      Maximum 30 children                                                           P         P         and 4.9.13.J
                                                                                                               O-3: 4.9.4.H.1-
                                                                                                               4, 6.a & 7.e
                                                                                                               and 4.9.13.K
                                                                                                               O-3: 4.9.4.H.
      Maximum 100 children                                                                   P         1-5, 6.b & 7.g
                                                                                                               and 4.9.13.K
   Child:                                                                                                 
                                                                                                               O-3: 4.9.4.H.1,
      Unlimited # of children                                                                S [2]     .2, & .9 and
                                                                                                               4.9.13.K
                                                                                                               O-2: 4.9.4.H.1,
                                                                                                               .2, & .9 and
                                                                                                               4.9.13.J
      With extended hours (before 6:00 am or after 7:00 pm)                         S [2]     S [2]     O-3: 4.9.4.H.1-
                                                                                                               5, .6.c, .7.g,
                                                                                                               & .8 and
                                                                                                               4.9.13.K
Medical Service:                                                                                             
                                                                                                               O-2: 4.9.13.J.1
   Extended Healthcare                                                                 P         P         & .3
                                                                                                               O-3: 4.9.13.K.1
                                                                                                               O-2: 4.9.4.P.1
   Major                                                                               P         P         and 4.9.13.J
                                                                                                               O-3: 4.9.4.P.1
                                                                                                               and 4.9.13.K
                                                                                                               O-2: 4.9.4.P.1,
                                                                                                               4.9.4.Q.1, and
      Food Service; General Merchandise Sales; or Personal Service as an            P         P         4.9.13.J
accessory use  to a Medical Service, Major use                                                                 O-3: 4.9.4.P.1,
                                                                                                               4.9.4.Q.1, and
                                                                                                               4.9.13.K
      Transportation Services, Air Carrier, Helipad as an accessory use to          P         P         O-2: 4.9.4.Q.2
Medical Service, Major Use                                                                                     O-3: 4.9.4.Q.2
                                                                                                               O-1: 4.9.4.O.1,
                                                                                                               4.9.4.P.1,
                                                                                                               4.9.4.R, and
   Outpatient (excluding blood donor centers)                                 P         P         P         4.9.13.J
                                                                                                               O-2: 4.9.4.O.1,
                                                                                                               4.9.4.P.1, and
                                                                                                               4.9.13.J
                                                                                                               O-3: 4.9.13.K
Research and Product Development                                                                   P         O-3: 4.9.4.U
                                                                                                               and 4.9.13.K
Recreation Land Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:
Parks and Recreation                                                                      P         P         O-2: 4.9.13.J
                                                                                                               O-3: 4.9.13.K
Residential Land Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:
Family  Dwelling:                                                                                            
   Duplex                                                                     P         P         P          
   Manufactured Housing                                                       P         P         P          
   Multifamily Development                                                    P         P         P          
   Single-family , Attached or Detached                                       P         P         P          
   Accessory Dwelling Unit                                                    P         P         P         All: 6.6.3
   Any Family  Dwelling with a Home Occupation  as an accessory use           P         P         P         O-1, O-2, 0-3:
                                                                                                               4.9.7.D
Flexible Lot Development                                                         P         P         P         O-1, O-2, O-3:
                                                                                                               8.7.3
Residential Care Services, Adult Care or Physical and Behavioral Health                                      
Services:
                                                                                                               O-1, O-2:
                                                                                                               4.9.13.J
   Maximum 10 Residents                                                       P         P         P         O-3:
                                                                                                               4.9.7.J.3.a, &
                                                                                                               .4 and 4.9.13.K
                                                                                                               O-1:
   Maximum 15 Residents                                                       S [2]                       4.9.7.J.3.b &
                                                                                                               .4 and 4.9.13.J
                                                                                                               O-1:
                                                                                                               4.9.7.J.3.d, .4
                                                                                                               & .8 and
   Unlimited # Residents                                                      S [2]              P         4.9.13.J
                                                                                                               O-3:
                                                                                                               4.9.7.J.3.d,
                                                                                                               .4, & .8 and
                                                                                                               4.9.13.K
Residential Care Services, Adult Rehabilitation Service or Shelter Care:                                     
                                                                                                               O-2: 4.9.7.J.1,
   Maximum 15 Residents                                                                S [2]              .2.b, 3.b, .4,
                                                                                                               & .9 and
                                                                                                               4.9.13.J
                                                                                                               O-2: 4.9.7.J.1,
                                                                                                               2.b., 3.d, 4, &
                                                                                                               .8 and 4.9.13.J
   Unlimited # Residents                                                               S [2]     P         O-3(P):
                                                                                                               4.9.7.J.1,
                                                                                                               .3.d, .4, .6, &
                                                                                                               .8 and 4.9.13.K
                                                                                                               O-3(S):
                                                                                                  S [2]     4.9.7.J.1, 3.d,
                                                                                                               .4, & .8 and
                                                                                                               4.9.13.K
                                                                                                               O-2: 4.9.7.J.1,
                                                                                                               2.b, 3.a, & .4
Residential Care Services, Child Rehabilitation Services, Maximum 10 Residents            P         P         and 4.9.13.J
                                                                                                               O-3: 4.9.7.J.1,
                                                                                                               3.a, & .4 and
                                                                                                               4.9.13.K
                                                                                                               O-2: 4.9.7.J.1,
                                                                                                               2.b, 3.b, .4, &
Residential Care Services, Shelter Care for Victims of Domestic Violence                  P         P         .7 and 4.9.13.J
                                                                                                               O-3: 4.9.7.J.1,
                                                                                                               3.c, & .4 and
                                                                                                               4.9.13.K
Retail Trade Land Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:
Farmers’ Market as an accessory use to any permitted principal use in every lanP         P         P         All:
use group                                                                                                      4.9.9.A.12.a-.e
Storage Land Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:
                                                                                                               O-1, O-2, O-3:
Hazardous Material Storage as an accessory use  to any permitted principal use   P         P         P         4.9.10.B.1 &
in every land use group                                                                                        2.a or .2.e and
                                                                                                               4.9.13.K
Utilities  Land Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:
                                                                                                               O-1, O-2:
                                                                                                               4.9.11.A.1, .5,
                                                                                                               & .9 and
Distribution System                                                              S [2]     S [2]     S [2]     4.9.13.J
                                                                                                               O-3:
                                                                                                               4.9.11.A.1, .5,
                                                                                                               & .9 and
                                                                                                               4.9.13.K
                                                                                                               O-1, O-2:
                                                                                                               4.9.11.B. 2,
                                                                                                               .3, .4, & .5
Renewable Energy Generation                                                      S [2]     S [2]     S [2]     and 4.9.13.J
                                                                                                               O-3: 4.9.11.B.
                                                                                                               2, .3, .4, & .5
                                                                                                               and 4.9.13.K
 
(Am. Ord. 11070, 5/14/2013; Am. Ord. 11235, 1/21/2015; Am. Ord. 11257, 4/21/
2015; Am. Ord. 11328, 12/8/2015; Am. Ord. 11608, passed 12/18/2018; Am. Ord.
11890, 12/7/2021; Am. Ord. 11996, 3/21/2023)
4.8.6.   PERMITTED USES: COMMERCIAL AND MIXED USE  ZONES
TABLE 4.8-4: PERMITTED USES - COMMERCIAL AND MIXED USE  ZONES
P = Permitted Use S = Permitted as Special Exception Use
[1] Mayor and Council Special Exception Procedure, Section
3.4.4
[2] Zoning Examiner Special Exception Procedure, Section
3.4.3
[3] PDSD Special Exception Procedure, Section
3.4.2
LAND USE         C-1 C-2 C-3 OCR-1 OCR-2 USE SPECIFIC STANDARDS
Agricultural Land Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:
Community Garden P   P   P   P     P     All: 4.9.2.B
Urban Farm       P   P   P   P     P     All: 4.9.2.E
Civic Land Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:
TABLE 4.8-4: PERMITTED USES - COMMERCIAL AND MIXED USE  ZONES
P = Permitted Use S = Permitted as Special Exception Use
[1] Mayor and Council Special Exception Procedure, Section
3.4.4
[2] Zoning Examiner Special Exception Procedure, Section
3.4.3
[3] PDSD Special Exception Procedure, Section
3.4.2
LAND USE                                                                      C-1        C-2        C-3        OCR-1      OCR-2      USE SPECIFIC
                                                                                                                                     STANDARDS
Agricultural Land Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:
Community Garden                                                              P          P          P          P          P          All: 4.9.2.B
Urban Farm                                                                    P          P          P          P          P          All: 4.9.2.E
Civic Land Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:
                                                                                                                                     C-1: 4.9.3.A.1
Cemetery                                                                      P                                                  & .5 and
                                                                                                                                     4.9.13.O
Civic Assembly                                                                P          P          P          P          P           
Correctional Use:                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                     C-2 & C-3:
                                                                                                                                     4.9.3.B.1.a,
                                                                                                                                     2.b, 3.b, 6, 7
   Custodial Facility                                                                 S [1]      S [1]      S [1]      S [1]      & 8
                                                                                                                                     OCR-1, OCR-2:
                                                                                                                                     4.9.3.B.1.a,
                                                                                                                                     2.b, 3.b, 6, 7
                                                                                                                                     & 8
                                                                                                                                     C-2 & C-3:
                                                                                                                                     4.9.3.B.1.a,
                                                                                                                                     2.b,3.a, 4.d, 6
   Supervision Facility                                                               P          P          P          P          & 8
                                                                                                                                     OCR-1, OCR-2:
                                                                                                                                     4.9.3.B.1.a,
                                                                                                                                     2.b, 3.a, 6 & 8
Cultural Use                                                                  P          P          P          P          P           
Educational Use:                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                     C-1: 4.9.3.D.1
                                                                                                                                     - 7 and
                                                                                                                                     4.9.13.O
   Elementary and Secondary                                                P          P          P          P          P          C-2, C-3:
                                                                                                                                     4.9.3.D.1 - 7
                                                                                                                                     OCR-1, OCR-2:
                                                                                                                                     4.9.3.D
   Elementary and Secondary                                                S [2]      S [2]      S [2]      S [2]      S [2]      C-1: 4.9.13.O
   Instructional School                                                    P          P          P          P          P          C-1: 4.9.13.O
                                                                                                                                     C-1: 4.9.3.E
   Postsecondary Institution                                               P          P          P          P          P          and 4.9.13.O
                                                                                                                                     C-2, C-3:
                                                                                                                                     4.9.3.E
   With Salvaging and Recycling as an accessory use  to both P and S                                                              C-1, C-2, C-3,
Educational Uses                                                              P          P          P          P          P          OCR-1, OCR-2:
                                                                                                                                     4.9.5.G.1 & .3
Membership Organization                                                       P          P          P          P          P          C-1: 4.9.13.O
Postal Service (government owned and operated only)                           P          P          P          P          P           
Protective Service (government owned and operated only)                       P          P          P          P          P           
Religious Use:                                                                P          P          P          P          P          C-1: 4.9.13.O
   With Columbarium as an accessory use                                    P          P          P          P          P           
                                                                                                                                     C-1, C-2, C-3,
   With Salvaging and Recycling as an accessory use                        P          P          P          P          P          OCR-1, OCR-2:
                                                                                                                                     4.9.5.G.1 & .3
Commercial Services Land Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:
Administrative and Professional Office                                        P          P          P          P          P          C-1: 4.9.13.O
                                                                                                                                     C-2: 4.9.13.P
Alcoholic Beverage  Service:                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                     C-2: 4.9.13.P
   Excluding a Large Bar                                                              P          P          P          P          OCR-1, OCR-2:
                                                                                                                                     4.9.4.C.3
                                                                                                                                     C-2: 4.9.4.C.2
                                                                                                                                     and 4.9.13.P
   Large Bar                                                                          S [1]      S [1]      S [1]      S [1]      C-3: 4.9.4.C.2
                                                                                                                                     OCR-1, OCR-2:
                                                                                                                                     4.9.4.C.2
                                                                                                                                     C-2, C-3, OCR-
   With a Microbrewery as an accessory use  to any P or S Alcoholic Beverage          P          P          P          P          1, OCR-2:
Service Use                                                                                                                          4.9.5.E.6, 7, &
                                                                                                                                     8
Animal Service                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                     C-1: 4.9.4.D.1,
                                                                                                                                     .2, .3, & .4
                                                                                                                                     and 4.9.13.O or
                                                                                                                                     4.9.4.D.7 &
                                                                                                                                     4.9.4.D.10-.15
                                                                                                                                     C-2: 4.9.4.D.1,
   General                                                                 P          P          P                                .2, .3, & .4
                                                                                                                                     and 4.9.13.P or
                                                                                                                                     4.9.4.D.7 &
                                                                                                                                     4.9.4.D.10-.15
                                                                                                                                     C-3: 4.9.4.D.1,
                                                                                                                                     .2, .3, .4 or
                                                                                                                                     4.9.4.D.7
                                                                                                                                     C-1, C-2, & C-
   General                                                                 S [2]      S [2]      S [2]                            3: 4.9.4.D.9 -
                                                                                                                                     .15
                                                                                                                                     C-1, C-2, & C-
   Boarding as an Accessory Use                                            P          P          P                                3: 4.9.4.D.3,
                                                                                                                                     D.8 &
                                                                                                                                     4.9.4.D.15
                                                                                                                                     C-1: 4.9.4.E.1,
                                                                                                                                     .2, .3, .4, &
                                                                                                                                     .5 and 4.9.13.O
                                                                                                                                     C-2: 4.9.4.E.1,
Artisan Residence                                                             P          P          P                                .2, .3, .4, &
                                                                                                                                     .5 and 4.9.13.P
                                                                                                                                     C-3: 4.9.4.E.1,
                                                                                                                                     .2, .3, .4, &
                                                                                                                                     .5
Automotive:                                                                                                                      
   Major Service and Repair (excluding bodywork and paint-booths)                     P          P                                C-2: 4.9.13.E
                                                                                                                                     C-1: 4.9.4.F.2,
   Minor Service and Repair                                                S [2]      P          P                                .3, .4, & .5
                                                                                                                                     and 4.9.13.O
                                                                                                                                     C-2: 4.9.13.E
                                                                                                                                     C-2, C-3:
                                                                                                                                     4.9.4.G &
Billboard                                                                                P          P                                Standards of
                                                                                                                                     Chapter 3 of
                                                                                                                                     the Tucson Code
Buildings and Ground Maintenance                                                         P          P                                 
Commercial Recreation                                                         P          P          P          P          P          C-1: 4.9.13.O
                                                                                                                                     C-2: 4.9.13.P
Communications:                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                     C-1: 4.9.13.O
                                                                                                                                     and 4.9.4.I.2,
                                                                                                                                     .3, & .4.a or
                                                                                                                                     5.a or 5.b
                                                                                                                                     C-2: 4.9.13.P
                                                                                                                                     and one of the
                                                                                                                                     following
                                                                                                                                     groups:
                                                                                                                                     4.9.4.I.1 &
                                                                                                                                     4.9.13.E or
   Wireless Communication                                                  P          P          P          P          P          4.9.4.I.2 & .3
                                                                                                                                     & .4.a or 5.a
                                                                                                                                     or 5.b
                                                                                                                                     C-3: 4.9.4.I.1
                                                                                                                                     or 4.9.4.I.2,
                                                                                                                                     .3, & .4.a or
                                                                                                                                     5.a or 5.b
                                                                                                                                     OCR-1, OCR-2:
                                                                                                                                     4.9.4.I.2, .3,
                                                                                                                                     & .4.a or 5.a
                                                                                                                                     or 5.b
                                                                                                                                     C-1: 4.9.13.O
                                                                                                                                     and one of the
                                                                                                                                     following
                                                                                                                                     groups: S[3] -
                                                                                                                                     4.9.4.I.2, .3,
                                                                                                                                     & 6.b or S[2] -
                                                                                                                                     4.9.4.I.2, .3,
                                                                                                                                     7.a or S[1] -
                                                                                                                                     4.9.4.I.2, .3,
                                                                                                                                     .8
                                                                                                                                     C-2: 4.9.13.P
                                                                                                                                     and one of the
                                                                                                                                     following
                                                                                                                                     groups: S[3] -
                                                                                                                                     4.9.4.I.2, .3,
                                                                                                                                     & 6.a or S[2] -
                                                                                                                                     4.9.4.I.2, .3,
                                                                              S [see use S [see use S [see use S [see use S [see use & 7.b or S[1] -
   Wireless Communication, limited to communication towers  and antennas   specific   specific   specific   specific   specific   4.9.4.I.2, .3,
                                                                              standards] standards] standards] standards] standards] & .8
                                                                                                                                     C-3: S[3] -
                                                                                                                                     4.9.4.I.2, .3,
                                                                                                                                     & .5.a or S[2]
                                                                                                                                     - 4.9.4.I.2,
                                                                                                                                     .3, & .7.b or S
                                                                                                                                     [1] -
                                                                                                                                     4.9.4.I.2, .3,
                                                                                                                                     & .8
                                                                                                                                     OCR-1, OCR-2: S
                                                                                                                                     [3] -
                                                                                                                                     4.9.4.I.2, .3,
                                                                                                                                     & .6.a or S[2]
                                                                                                                                     - 4.9.4.I.2,
                                                                                                                                     .3, .7.b or S
                                                                                                                                     [1] -
                                                                                                                                     4.9.4.I.2, .3,
                                                                                                                                     .8
Construction Service                                                                     P          P                                C-2: 4.9.13.P
Day Care                                                                      P          P          P          P          P          C-1: 4.9.13.O
Entertainment                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                     C-1: 4.9.4.C.3
                                                                                                                                     and 4.9.13.O
                                                                                                                                     C-2: 4.9.4.K.1,
                                                                                                                                     .2, .3, .4,
                                                                                                                                     4.9.4.C.3, and
                                                                                                                                     4.9.13.E and
                                                                                                                                     4.9.13.P
   Excluding Large Dance Hall                                              P          P          P          P          P          C-3: 4.9.4.K.1,
                                                                                                                                     .2, .3, .4,
                                                                                                                                     4.9.4.C.3, and
                                                                                                                                     4.9.13.E
                                                                                                                                     OCR-1, OCR-2:
                                                                                                                                     4.9.4.K.1, .2,
                                                                                                                                     .3, .4;
                                                                                                                                     4.9.4.C.3
                                                                                                                                     C-2: 4.9.4.C.2
                                                                                                                                     and 4.9.13.P
   Large Dance Hall                                                                   S [1]      S [1]      S [1]      S [1]      C-3: 4.9.4.C.2
                                                                                                                                     OCR-1, OCR-2:
                                                                                                                                     4.9.4.C.2
Financial Service:                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                     C-3: 4.9.4.L.3
                                                                                                                                     C-1: 4.9.4.L.1
                                                                                                                                     & .3 and
   Excluding non-chartered institutions                                    P          P          P          P          P          4.9.13.O
                                                                                                                                     C-2: 4.9.4.L.3,
                                                                                                                                     4.9.13.E, and
                                                                                                                                     4.9.13.P
                                                                                                                                     C-2: 4.9.4.L.4
   Non-chartered Institution                                                          S [2]      S [2]                            and 4.9.13.P
                                                                                                                                     C-3: 4.9.4.L.4
Food Service:                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                     C-1: 4.9.4.M.1
                                                                                                                                     & 5-7 and
                                                                                                                                     4.9.13.O
                                                                                                                                     C-2: 4.9.4.M.1,
   Food Court                                                              P          P          P          P          P          .6, & .7 and
                                                                                                                                     4.9.13.P
                                                                                                                                     C-3, OCR-1, &
                                                                                                                                     OCR-2:
                                                                                                                                     4.9.4.M.1., .6,
                                                                                                                                     & .7
                                                                                                                                     C-1: 4.9.4.M.1
                                                                                                                                     & 5 and
   Excluding Soup Kitchens                                                 P          P          P          P          P          4.9.13.O
                                                                                                                                     C-2: 4.9.4.M.1
                                                                                                                                     and 4.9.13.P
                                                                                                                                     C-2, C-3, OCR-
   Soup Kitchens                                                                      S [1]      S [1]      S [1]      S [1]      1, OCR-2:
                                                                                                                                     4.9.4.M.4
                                                                                                                                     C-1: 4.9.4.V.1,
   With Alcoholic Beverage  Service as an accessory use  to a Food Service P                                                      3, & 5-9,
use                                                                                                                                  4.9.4.C.3, and
                                                                                                                                     4.9.13.O
                                                                                                                                     C-1: 4.9.4.M.1
   With a Microbrewery as an accessory use  to a Food Service              S [2]                                                  & 4.9.5.E.6,
                                                                                                                                     .7, .8
Funeral Service                                                                          P          P                                C-2: 4.9.13.P
Medical Service:                                                                                                                      
   Extended Healthcare                                                     P          P          P          P          P          C-1: 4.9.13.O
                                                                                                                                     OCR-2: 4.9.13.E
   Major                                                                   P          P          P          P          P          C-1: 4.9.13.O
      Transportation Services, Air Carrier, Helipad as an accessory use to a                                                   C-1, C-2, C-3,
Medical Service, Major Use                                                    P          P          P          P          P          OCR-1, OCR-2:
                                                                                                                                     4.9.4.Q.2
                                                                                                                                     C-1: 4.9.4.O.2
                                                                                                                                     and 4.9.13.O
   Outpatient, excluding blood donor centers                               P          P          P          P          P          C-2: 4.9.4.O.2
                                                                                                                                     and 4.9.13.P
                                                                                                                                     C-3: 4.9.4.O.2
                                                                                                                                     C-1: 4.9.4.O.3
                                                                                                                                     and 4.9.13.O
                                                                                                                                     C-2: 4.9.4.O.3
   Outpatient, limited to blood donor centers                              S [1]      S [1]      S [1]      S [1]      S [1]      and 4.9.13.P
                                                                                                                                     C-3, OCR-1,
                                                                                                                                     OCR-2::
                                                                                                                                     4.9.4.O.3
Parking                                                                       P          P          P          P          P           
                                                                                                                                     C-1: 4.9.4.T.1
Personal Service                                                              P          P          P          P          P          and 4.9.13.O
                                                                                                                                     C-2: 4.9.13.P
Research and Product Development                                              P          P          P                                C-1: 4.9.13.O
                                                                                                                                     C-1: 4.9.4.W.1
                                                                                                                                     and 4.9.13.O
Technical Service                                                             P          P          P          P          P          C-2: 4.9.4.W.2
                                                                                                                                     and 4.9.13.P
                                                                                                                                     C-3: 4.9.4.W.2
Trade Service and Repair:                                                                                                             
   Major (includes automotive bodywork & paint booths)                                           P                                C-3: 4.9.4.X.1
                                                                                                                                     C-1: 4.9.4.X.2
   Minor                                                                   P          P          P                                and 4.9.13.O
                                                                                                                                     C-2: 4.9.13.P
Transportation Service                                                                                                                
   Airport  Authority                                                      P          P                                           C-1, C-2:
                                                                                                                                     4.9.13.Q.5
   Land Carrier                                                                       P          P          P          P          C-2: 4.9.13.E
Travelers Accommodation, Lodging                                              P          P          P          P          P          C-1: 4.9.13.O
                                                                                                                                     C-1: 4.9.4.C.3
With Alcoholic Beverage  Service as an accessory use                          P                                                      and 4.9.4.AA.2,
                                                                                                                                     .4, .7, .8, .9,
                                                                                                                                     .10, & .11
                                                                                                                                     C-1: 4.9.4.C.3
With Alcoholic Beverage  Service as an accessory use                          S [2]                                                  and 4.9.4.AA.2,
                                                                                                                                     .4, .7, .8, .9,
                                                                                                                                     & .11
Additional Permitted Accessory Uses
The following uses are permitted accessory uses  to any permitted Commercial
Services Uses:
•   General Manufacturing;                                                                                                      C-2, C-3:
•   Heavy Equipment Manufacturing;                                                  P          P          P          P          4.9.5.C.9
•   Perishable Goods Manufacturing (limited to baked goods and confectionary                                                    OCR-1:
products);                                                                                                                           4.9.5.C.9
•   Precision Manufacturing; or
•   Primary Manufacturing
The following are permitted accessory uses to any permitted Commercial Uses:
•   General Manufacturing;                                                                                                      OCR-2:
•   Heavy Equipment Manufacturing; or,                                                                               P          4.9.5.C.9
•   Perishable Goods Manufacturing (limited to baked goods and confectionary
products manufacturing only)
Perishable Goods Manufacturing as an accessory use to any permitted           P                                                      C-1: 4.9.5.E.4,
Commercial Services use                                                                                                              .5, & .8
Salvaging and Recycling as an accessory use to any permitted Commercial       P          P          P          P          P          C-1, C-2, C-3:
Services use                                                                                                                         4.9.5.G.1 & .3
Industrial Land Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:
Craftwork                                                                                P          P                                C-2: 4.9.13.P
                                                                                                                                     C-1: 4.9.5.G.2,
                                                                                                                                     .6 -12,
                                                                                                                                     4.9.13.A.2, .B-
                                                                                                                                     D, and 4.9.13.O
                                                                                                                                     C-2: 4.9.5.G.2,
                                                                                                                                     & .6 - .12,
Household Goods Donation Center Only                                          S [2]      S [3]      P          P          P          4.9.13.A.2,
                                                                                                                                     4.9.13.B-D, and
                                                                                                                                     4.9.13.P
                                                                                                                                     C-3, OCR-1,
                                                                                                                                     OCR-2:
                                                                                                                                     4.9.5.G.2, .6 -
                                                                                                                                     11; 4.9.13.C &
                                                                                                                                     .D
Processing and Cleaning                                                                  P          P                                C-2: 4.9.13.P
                                                                                                                                     C-2: 4.9.5.G.2,
                                                                                                                                     .3, & .5 and
Salvaging and Recycling                                                                  P          P                                4.9.13.P
                                                                                                                                     C-3: 4.9.5.G.2,
                                                                                                                                     .3, & .5
Recreation Land Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:
                                                                                                                                     C-1: 4.9.6.A.1
Golf Course                                                                   P          P          P                                and 4.9.13.O
                                                                                                                                     C-2, C-3:
                                                                                                                                     4.9.6.A.1
Parks and Recreation                                                          P          P          P                                 
Residential Land Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:
Family Dwelling:                                                                                                                 
   Duplex                                                                  P          P          P          P          P           
   Manufactured Housing                                                    P          P          P          P          P           
   Multifamily Development                                                 P          P          P          P          P           
   Single-family , Attached or Detached                                    P          P          P          P          P           
   Accessory Dwelling Unit                                                 P          P          P          P          P          All: 6.6.3
                                                                                                                                     C-1, C-2, C-3,
   with Home Occupation as an accessory use to any permitted Family DwellinP          P          P          P          P          OCR-1, OCR-2:
                                                                                                                                     4.9.7.D
                                                                                                                                     C-2, C-3:
   with General Farming as an accessory use to any permitted Family Dwelling          P          P                                4.9.2.A.1.a, &
use                                                                                                                                  .3.a and
                                                                                                                                     4.9.2.B.1
Flexible Lot Development                                                      P          P          P                                C-1, C-2, C-3:
                                                                                                                                     8.7.3
Group Dwelling                                                                P          P          P          P          P           
                                                                                                                                     C-1:
                                                                                                                                     4.9.7.J.3.d,
                                                                                                                                     .4, & .8 and
                                                                                                                                     4.9.13.O
Residential Care Services, Adult Care or Physical and Behavioral Health                                                              C-2:
Services: Unlimited # of Residents                                            P          P          P          P          P          4.9.7.J.3.d,
                                                                                                                                     .4, & .8
                                                                                                                                     C-3, OCR-1,
                                                                                                                                     OCR-2:
                                                                                                                                     4.9.7.J.3.d &
                                                                                                                                     .4
Residential Care Services, Adult Rehabilitation or Shelter Care:                                                                 
                                                                                                                                     C-1: 4.9.7.J.1,
                                                                                                                                     3.d, .4, .6, &
   Unlimited # Residents                                                   P          P          P                                .8 and 4.9.13.O
                                                                                                                                     C-2, C-3:
                                                                                                                                     4.9.7.J.1, 3.d,
                                                                                                                                     .4, .6, & .8
                                                                                                                                     C-1: 4.9.7.J.1,
                                                                                                                                     3.d, .4, & .8
                                                                                                                                     and 4.9.13.O
                                                                                                                                     C-2, C-3:
   Unlimited # Residents                                                   S [2]      S [2]      S [2]      P                     4.9.7.J.1, 3.d,
                                                                                                                                     .4, & .8
                                                                                                                                     OCR-1:
                                                                                                                                     4.9.7.J.1,
                                                                                                                                     .3.d, .4, .6,
                                                                                                                                     .8
                                                                                                                                     OCR-1, OCR-2
   Unlimited # Residents                                                                                    S [2]      S [2]      (S): 4.9.7.J.1,
                                                                                                                                     3.d, .4, .6, &
                                                                                                                                     .8
                                                                                                                                     C-1: 4.9.7.J.1,
                                                                                                                                     3.a, & .4 and
Residential Care Services, Rehabilitation Service - Children’s Facility                                                            4.9.13.O
(maximum 10 residents)                                                        P          P          P          P          P          C-2, C-3, OCR-
                                                                                                                                     1, OCR-2:
                                                                                                                                     4.9.7.J.1, 3.a,
                                                                                                                                     & .4
                                                                                                                                     C-1: 4.9.7.J.1,
                                                                                                                                     3.c, & .4 and
                                                                                                                                     4.9.13.O
Residential Care Services, Shelter Care for Victims of Domestic Violence      P          P          P          P          P          C-2, C-3, OCR-
                                                                                                                                     1, OCR-2:
                                                                                                                                     4.9.7.J.1, 3.c,
                                                                                                                                     & .4
Restricted Adult Activities Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:
                                                                                                                                     C-2: 4.9.8,
Adult Commercial Services, Recreation, or Retail Trade                                   P          P          P          P          4.9.13.P
                                                                                                                                     C-3, OCR-1,
                                                                                                                                     OCR-2: 4.9.8
Retail Trade Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:
Construction Material Sales                                                              P          P                                 
Food and Beverage Sales:                                                                                                              
   Farmers’ Market only                                                  P          P          P          P          P          All:
                                                                                                                                     4.9.9.A.12.a-.d
   Excluding Large Retail Establishment                                    P          P          P          P          P          C-1: 4.9.13.O
                                                                                                                                     C-1: 4.9.9.D
                                                                                                                                     and 4.9.13.O
   Large Retail Establishment                                              S [1]      S [1]      S [1]      S[1]       S[1]       C-2, C-3, OCR-
                                                                                                                                     1, OCR-2:
                                                                                                                                     4.9.9.D
                                                                                                                                     C-1: 4.9.9.B.3
                                                                                                                                     and 4.9.13.O
General Merchandise Sales, excluding Large Retail Establishment               P          P          P          P          P          C-2, C-3:
                                                                                                                                     4.9.9.B.1
                                                                                                                                     OCR-1, OCR-2:
                                                                                                                                     4.9.9.B.1
                                                                                                                                     C-1: 4.9.9.D
                                                                                                                                     and 4.9.13.O
   Large Retail Establishment                                              S [1]      S [1]      S [1]      S [1]      S [1]      C-2, C-3, OCR-
                                                                                                                                     1, OCR-2:
                                                                                                                                     4.9.9.D
   With Automotive Minor Service and Repair as an accessory use to automotiPe                                                     C-1: 4.9.4.F.7
fuel sales                                                                                                                           and 4.9.13.O
Heavy Equipment Sales                                                                    P          P                                C-2, C-3:
                                                                                                                                     4.9.9.C
Marijuana Facility:                                                                                                                   
   Designated Caregiver Cultivation Location                                          P          P                                C-2, C-3:
                                                                                                                                     4.9.9.E.2 & 3
   Dispensary                                                                         [1]        [1]                              C-2, C-3:
                                                                                                                                     4.9.9.E.1
   Dispensary Off-site Cultivation Location                                           P          P                                C-2, C-3:
                                                                                                                                     4.9.9.E.2
   Qualifying Patient Cultivation Location                                            P          P                                C-2, C-3:
                                                                                                                                     4.9.9.E.4
Smoke Shop                                                                    P          P          P          P          P          All: 4.9.9.H
                                                                                                                                     C-2, C-3, OCR-
Swap Meets and Auctions                                                                  P          P          S [3]      S [3]      1, OCR-2:
                                                                                                                                     4.9.9.F
                                                                                                                                     C-2, C-3, OCR-
Vehicle Rental and Sales                                                                 P          P          P          P          1, OCR-2:
                                                                                                                                     4.9.9.G.1& .2
Farmers’ Market as an accessory use to any permitted principal use in every P          P          P          P          P          All:
land use group                                                                                                                       4.9.9.A.12.a-.e
Additional Permitted Accessory Uses
The following are permitted as an accessory uses to any permitted Retail
Trade Uses:
•   General Manufacturing;
•   Heavy Equipment Manufacturing;                                                             P          P          P          C-2, C-3, OCR-
•   Perishable Good Manufacturing (limited to baked goods and confectionary                                                     1: 4.9.5.C.9
products);
•   Precision Manufacturing;
•   Primary Manufacturing
The following are permitted accessory uses to any permitted Retail Trade
Uses:
•   General Manufacturing;                                                                                           P          OCR-2:
•   Heavy Equipment Manufacturing; or,                                                                                          4.9.5.C.9
•   Perishable Goods Manufacturing (limited to baked goods and confectionary
products manufacturing only)
Craftwork as an accessory use to any permitted Retail Trade uses              P                                                      C-1: 4.9.5.A
Perishable Goods Manufacturing as an accessory to any permitted Retail Trade  P                                                      C-1: 4.9.5.E.4,
Uses                                                                                                                                 .5, & .8
Salvaging and Recycling as an accessory use to any permitted Retail Trade     P          P          P          P          P          All: 4.9.5.G.1
uses                                                                                                                                 & .3
Storage Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:
                                                                                                                                     C-2, C-3, OCR-
Commercial Storage                                                                       P          P          P          P          1, OCR-2:
                                                                                                                                     4.9.10.A
                                                                                                                                     C-1, C-2:
                                                                                                                                     4.9.10.B.1,
Hazardous Material Storage as an accessory use to any permitted principal use                                                        .2.a or .2.e
in every land use group                                                       P          P          P          P          P          C-3, OCR-1,
                                                                                                                                     OCR-2:
                                                                                                                                     4.9.10.B.1 &
                                                                                                                                     .2.c or .2.e
                                                                                                                                     C-1: 4.9.10.C
                                                                                                                                     and 4.9.13.O
Personal Storage                                                              P          P          P          P          P          C-2, C-3, OCR-
                                                                                                                                     1, OCR-2:
                                                                                                                                     4.9.10.C.3 & .6
Utilities Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:
                                                                                                                                     C-1:
                                                                                                                                     4.9.11.A.1, .5,
                                                                                                                                     & .9 and
Distribution System                                                           S [2]      P          P          P          P          4.9.13.O
                                                                                                                                     C-2,C-3, OCR-1,
                                                                                                                                     OCR-2:
                                                                                                                                     4.9.11.A.1, .5,
                                                                                                                                     & .9
                                                                                                                                     C-1: 4.9.11.B
                                                                                                                                     and 4.9.13.O
                                                                                                                                     C-2, C-3:
Renewable Energy Generation                                                   P          P          P          P          P          4.9.11.B.1, .2,
                                                                                                                                     .3, & .5
                                                                                                                                     OCR-1, OCR-2:
                                                                                                                                     4.9.11.B
                                                                             S [2]      S [2]      S [2]      S[2]       S[2]        
Wholesaling Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:
Business Equipment Supply and Wholesaling                                                P          P                                C-2: 4.9.13.P
Construction/Heavy Equipment Wholesaling                                                 P          P                                C-2: 4.9.13.P
Food and Beverage Wholesaling                                                            P          P                                C-2: 4.9.13.P
Additional Permitted Accessory Uses                                                                                                   
The following are permitted as accessory uses to permitted Wholesaling uses:
•   General Manufacturing;
•   Heavy Equipment Manufacturing;                                                                                              C-2, C-3, OCR-
•   Perishable Goods Manufacturing (limited to baked goods and confectionary                   P          P          P          1: 4.9.5.C.9
products);
•   Precision Manufacturing; or,
•   Primary Manufacturing.
The following are permitted accessory uses to any permitted Commercial Uses:
•   General Manufacturing;                                                                                                      OCR-2:
•   Heavy Equipment Manufacturing; or,                                                                               P          4.9.5.C.9
•   Perishable Goods Manufacturing (limited to baked goods and confectionary
products manufacturing only)
All Commercial Services in the C-1 Zone may provide one drive-through service P                                                       
lane unless otherwise provided.
 
(Am. Ord. 11070, 5/14/2013; Am. Ord. 11127, 11/6/2013; Am. Ord. 11171, 5/20/
2014; Am. Ord. 11235, 1/21/2015; Am. Ord. 11257, 4/21/2015; Am. Ord. 11328, 12/
8/2015; Am. Ord. 11557, 6/5/2018; Am. Ord. 11577, 8/8/2018; Am. Ord. 11608, 12/
18/2018; Am. Ord. 11609, 12/18/2018; Am. Ord. 11828, 4/6/2021; Am. Ord. 11890,
12/7/2021; Am. Ord. 11978, 12/20/2022; Am. Ord. 11996, 3/21/2023; Am. Ord.
12057, 11/14/2023; Am. Ord. 12060, 11/28/2023)
4.8.7.   PERMITTED USES: INDUSTRIAL ZONES
TABLE 4.8-5: PERMITTED USES - INDUSTRIAL ZONES *
P = Permitted Use S = Permitted as Special Exception Use
[1] Mayor and Council Special Exception Procedure, Section
3.4.4
[2] Zoning Examiner Special Exception Procedure, Section
3.4.3
[3] PDSD Special Exception Procedure, Section
3.4.2
*Any Land Use Class not permitted or a Special Exception Use in any other
zone , or permitted in the I-2 zone , may be permitted in the I-2 zone and
shall comply with the dimensional standards determined to be most similar
to the proposed use.
LAND USE P-I I-1 I-2 USE SPECIFIC STANDARDS
TABLE 4.8-5: PERMITTED USES - INDUSTRIAL ZONES *
P = Permitted Use S = Permitted as Special Exception Use
[1] Mayor and Council Special Exception Procedure, Section
3.4.4
[2] Zoning Examiner Special Exception Procedure, Section
3.4.3
[3] PDSD Special Exception Procedure, Section
3.4.2
*Any Land Use Class not permitted or a Special Exception Use in any other zone , or permitted in the I-2 zone , may be permitted
in the I-2 zone and shall comply with the dimensional standards determined to be most similar to the proposed use.
LAND USE                                                                         P-I        I-1        I-2        USE SPECIFIC
                                                                                                                  STANDARDS
Agricultural Land Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:                                                  *           
Community Garden                                                                 P          P          P          All: 4.9.2.B
Stockyard Operation                                                                                    S [1]      I-2: 4.9.13.Q
Urban Farm                                                                       P          P          P          All: 4.9.2.E
Civic Land Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:                                                         *           
Civic Assembly                                                                   P          P                     I-1: 4.9.13.Q
Correctional Use:                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                  I-1:
                                                                                                                  4.9.3.B.1.a,
   Custodial Facility                                                                    S [1]      S [1]      .2.b, .3.b, .6,
                                                                                                                  .7 & .8 and
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q
                                                                                                                  I-1, I-2:
                                                                                                                  4.9.3.B.1.e,
   Jail or Prison                                                                        S [1]      S [1]      .2.d, .3.c,
                                                                                                                  .4.c, .5.a, .6,
                                                                                                                  .7 & .8, and
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q
                                                                                                                  I-2: 4.9.3
   Jail or Prison                                                                                   S [1]      B.4.b, .5, .6,
                                                                                                                  .7, .8 & .10
                                                                                                                  and 4.9.13.Q
Cultural Use                                                                     P          P                      
Educational Use:                                                                                                   
   Elementary and Secondary, Limited to Grades 9 -12                          S [2]      S [2]                  
   Instructional or Postsecondary Institution                                 P          P                     P-I: 4.9.3.E
                                                                                                                  P-I: 4.9.5.G.1
   With Salvaging and Recycling as an accessory use  to an Educational Use    P          P                     & .3
                                                                                                                  I-1: 4.9.5.G.1
                                                                                                                  & .3
Membership Organization                                                          P          P                     I-1: 4.9.13.Q
Postal Service                                                                   P          P                     I-1: 4.9.13.Q
Protective Service (government owned and operated only)                          P          P          P           
Religious Use                                                                    P          P                     I-1: 4.9.13.Q
   With Salvaging and Recycling as an accessory use                                      P                     I-1: 4.9.5.G.1
                                                                                                                  & .3
Commercial Services Land Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:                                           *           
Administrative and Professional Office                                           P          P          P          P-I, I-1, I-2:
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q
Alcoholic Beverage  Service:                                                                                       
                                                                                                                  P-I: 4.9.13.P
   Excluding Large Bar                                                        P          P          P          I-1, I-2:
                                                                                                                  4.9.4.C.3 and
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q
                                                                                                                  P-I: 4.9.4.C.2
                                                                                                                  and 4.9.13.P
   Large Bar                                                                  S [1]      S [1]      S [1]      I-1, I-2:
                                                                                                                  4.9.4.C.2 and
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q
   With a Microbrewery as an accessory use  to a P or S Alcoholic Beverage                                     P-I, I-1, I-2:
Service use                                                                      P          P          P          4.9.5.E.6, .7,
                                                                                                                  & .8
                                                                                                                  P-I: 4.9.4.D.1,
                                                                                                                  .2, .3 & .4 and
Animal Service                                                                   P          P          P          4.9.13.P
                                                                                                                  I-1, I-2:
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q
                                                                                                                  P-I: 4.9.13.E
Automotive Minor or Major Service and Repair, excluding bodywork or paint-booths P          P          P          I-1, I-2:
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q
                                                                                                                  I-1, I-2:
                                                                                                                  4.9.4.G, Tucson
Billboard                                                                                   P          P          Code, Ch. 3
                                                                                                                  Standards, and
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q
Buildings and Ground Maintenance                                                            P          P          I-1, I-2:
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q
Commercial Recreation                                                            P          P          P          P-I, I-1, I-2:
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q
Communications:                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                  P-I, I-1, I-2:
   Radio or Television Station only                                           P          P          P          4.9.4.I.1 and
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q
                                                                                                                  P-I, I-1, I-2:
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q and
   Wireless Communication                                                     P          P          P          4.9.4.I.2, .3,
                                                                                                                  & .4.a or 5.a.
                                                                                                                  or 5.b.
                                                                                                                  P-I, I-1, I-2:
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q and
                                                                                                                  one of the
                                                                                                                  following
                                                                                 S [see use S [see use S [see use groups: S[3] -
   Wireless Communication                                                     specific   specific   specific   4.9.4.I.2, .3,
                                                                                 standards] standards] standards] and .6.a or
                                                                                                                  .6.b or S[2] -
                                                                                                                  4.9.4.I.2, .3,
                                                                                                                  & .7.b or S[1]
                                                                                                                  - 4.9.4.I.2,
                                                                                                                  .3, & .8
Construction Service                                                                        P          P          I-1, I-2:
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q
Day Care                                                                         P          P          P          P-I, I-1, I-2:
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q
Entertainment:                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                  P-I: 4.9.4.K.1,
                                                                                                                  .2, .3, .4,
                                                                                                                  4.9.4.C.3,
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.E, and
   Excluding Dance Halls                                                      P          P          P          4.9.13.P
                                                                                                                  I-1, I-2:
                                                                                                                  4.9.4.K.1, .2,
                                                                                                                  .3, .4,
                                                                                                                  4.9.4.C.3, and
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q
                                                                                                                  P-I: 4.9.4.C.2
                                                                                                                  and 4.9.13.P
   Dance Hall                                                                 S [1]      S [1]      S [1]      I-1, I-2:
                                                                                                                  4.9.4.C.2 & .4
                                                                                                                  and 4.9.13.Q
                                                                                                                  P-I: 4.9.4.L.3,
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q, and
                                                                                                                  drive-through
                                                                                                                  services are
Financial Service, excluding non-chartered institutions                          P          P          P          permitted as an
                                                                                                                  outdoor
                                                                                                                  activity
                                                                                                                  I-1, I-2:
                                                                                                                  4.9.4.L.3 and
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q
Food Service:                                                                                                      
   Food Court                                                                 P          P          P          4.9.4.M.1., .6,
                                                                                                                  & .7
                                                                                                                  P-I: 4.9.13.Q
                                                                                                                  and drive-
                                                                                                                  through  or
   Excluding Soup Kitchen                                                     P          P          P          drive-in
                                                                                                                  services are
                                                                                                                  permitted as an
                                                                                                                  outdoor
                                                                                                                  activity
                                                                                                                  P-I, I-1, I-2:
   With Alcoholic Beverage  Service as an accessory use                       P          P          P          4.9.4.V.1-2 and
                                                                                                                  4.9.4.C.3
                                                                                                                  P-I: 4.9.4.M.4
   Soup Kitchen                                                               S [1]      S [1]      P          I-1, I-2:
                                                                                                                  4.9.4.M.4 and
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q
Funeral Service                                                                  P          P          P          P-I: 4.9.13.P
Medical Service:                                                                                                   
   Extended Healthcare                                                        P          P          P          I-1, I-2:
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q
   Major                                                                      P          P          P          I-1, I-2:
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q
      Transportation Services, Air Carrier, Helipad as an accessory use to P          P          P          P-1, I-1, I-2:
Medical Service, Major Use                                                                                        4.9.4.Q.2
   Outpatient:                                                                                                  
      Excluding blood donor centers                                        P          P          P          P-I, I-1, I-2:
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q
                                                                                                                  P-I: 4.9.4.O.3
                                                                                                                  and 4.9.13.P
      Limited to blood donor centers                                       S [1]      S [1]      S [1]      I-1 & I-2:
                                                                                                                  4.9.4.O.3 and
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q
Parking                                                                          P          P          P          P-I, I-1, I-2:
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q
Personal Service                                                                 P          P                     P-I, I-1, I-2:
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q
                                                                                                                  P-I: 4.9.5.C.5,
                                                                                                                  .6, & .8 and
Research and Product Development                                                 P          P          P          4.9.13.Q
                                                                                                                  I-1, I-2:
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q
Technical Service                                                                P          P          P          P-I, I-1, I-2:
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q
Trade Service and Repair:                                                                                          
                                                                                                                  I-1, I-2:
   Major (includes auto body shops/paint-booths)                                         P          P          4.9.4.X.1 and
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q
                                                                                                                  P-I: 4.9.13.P
   Minor                                                                      P          P          P          I-1, I-2:
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q
Transportation Service:                                                                                            
   Air Carrier                                                                                      S [1]      I-2: 4.9.13.Q
   Land Carrier                                                                          P          P          I-1, I-2:
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q
   Airport  Authority                                                         P          P          P          P-1, I-1, I-2:
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q.5
Travelers Accommodation, Lodging                                                 P          P          P          I-1, I-2:
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q
                                                                                                                  P-I, I-1, I-2:
   With Alcoholic Beverage  Service as an accessory use                       P          P          P          4.9.4.V.1 & .2
                                                                                                                  and 4.9.4.C.3
Additional Permitted Accessory Uses
Salvaging and Recycling is a permitted accessory use  to any permitted           P          P          P          P-I, I-1, I-2:
Commercial Service Use in the specified zones                                                                    4.9.5.G.1 & .3
Industrial Land Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:                                                    *           
                                                                                                                  P-I: 4.9.5.C.2,
                                                                                                                  .4, .5, .6 & .8
                                                                                                                  and 4.9.13.Q
Craftwork                                                                        P          P          P          I-1: 4.9.5.C.2,
                                                                                                                  .6, .7, & .8
                                                                                                                  and 4.9.13.Q
                                                                                                                  I-2: 4.9.5.C
                                                                                                                  and 4.9.13.Q
Extraction                                                                                             S [1]      I-2: 4.9.5.B
                                                                                                                  and 4.9.13.Q
                                                                                                                  P-I: 4.9.5.C.2,
                                                                                                                  .4, .5, .6, &
                                                                                                                  .8 and 4.9.13.Q
General Manufacturing                                                            P          P          P          I-1: 4.9.5.C.2,
                                                                                                                  .6, .7, & .8
                                                                                                                  and 4.9.13.Q
                                                                                                                  I-2: 4.9.5.C
                                                                                                                  and 4.9.13.Q
Manufacturing:                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                  I-2: 4.9.5.C
   Hazardous Material                                                                               S [1]      .1-8 and
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q
                                                                                                                  I-2: 4.9.5.C
   Heavy Equipment                                                                                  P          .1-8 and
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q
                                                                                                                  P-I:
                                                                                                                  4.9.5.C.1,.2,
                                                                                                                  .4, .5, .6, .8,
                                                                                                                  4.9.5.D.1 and
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q
                                                                                                                  I-1:
Motion Picture Industry                                                          P          P          P          4.9.5.C.1,.2,
                                                                                                                  5-6,.8,
                                                                                                                  4.9.5.D.1 and
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q
                                                                                                                  I-2: 4.9.5.C
                                                                                                                  .1-8 and
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q
                                                                                                                  I-1 (P), P-I:
                                                                                                                  4.9.5.C.2, .4,
                                                                                                                  .5, .6, .8,
                                                                                                                  4.9.5.E.1 & .2
Perishable Goods Manufacturing                                                   P          P          P          and 4.9.13.Q
                                                                                                                  I-2 (P):
                                                                                                                  4.9.5.C.1-8,
                                                                                                                  4.9.5.E.1-2 and
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q
                                                                                                                  I-1 (S):
                                                                                                                  4.9.5.C and
                                                                                           S [2]      S [1]      4.9.13.Q
                                                                                                                  I-2 (S):
                                                                                                                  4.9.5.C and
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q
                                                                                                                  P-I: 4.9.5.C.2,
                                                                                                                  .4, .5, .6, &
                                                                                                                  .8 and 4.9.13.Q
Precision Manufacturing                                                          P          P          P          I-1: 4.9.5.C.2,
                                                                                                                  .5, .6, .7, &
                                                                                                                  .8 and 4.9.13.Q
                                                                                                                  I-2: 4.9.5.C.1-
                                                                                                                  8 and 4.9.13.Q
                                                                                                                  I-2: 4.9.5.C
Primary Manufacturing                                                                                  S [1]      .1-8 and
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q
                                                                                                                  P-I: 4.9.5.C.2,
                                                                                                                  .4, .5, .6 & .8
                                                                                                                  and 4.9.13.Q
                                                                                                                  I-1: 4.9.5.C.2,
Processing and Cleaning                                                          P          P          P          .5, .6, .7, &
                                                                                                                  .8 and 4.9.13.Q
                                                                                                                  I-2: 4.9.5.C
                                                                                                                  .1-8 and
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q
Refining                                                                                               S [1]      I-2: 4.9.5.C
                                                                                                                  and 4.9.13.Q
                                                                                                                  P-I: 4.9.5.C.2,
                                                                                                                  4.9.5.G.2, .4,
                                                                                                                  & .5 and
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q
Salvaging and Recycling                                                          P          P          P          I-1: 4.9.5.G.2
                                                                                                                  & .4 and
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q
                                                                                                                  I-2 (P):
                                                                                                                  4.9.5.G.2 & .4
                                                                                                                  and 4.9.13.Q
                                                                                                                  I-2 (S):
                                                                                                      S [1]      4.9.5.C.1 - 8
                                                                                                                  and 4.9.13.Q
                                                                                                                  I-2: 4.9.5.G.2,
   Limited to Household  Goods Donation Center                                           P          P          .6, 4.9.13.C,
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.D, and
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q
Additional Permitted Accessory Uses
The following uses are permitted as an accessory use  to any permitted use in
the Industrial Use Group:
•   Construction Material Sales;                                            P                                P-I: 4.9.5.C.8
•   Food and Beverage Sales;                                                                                 & .10
•   General Merchandise Sales; or
•   Heavy Equipment Sales
Salvaging and Recycling is a permitted accessory use to any permitted Industrial P          P          P          P-I, I-1, I-2:
Service Use                                                                                                       4.9.5.G.1 & .3
Recreation Land Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:                                                    *           
Golf Course                                                                                 P                     I-1: 4.9.13.Q
Residential Land Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:                                                   *           
Artist Studio/Residence                                                                     S[3]                  I-1: 4.9.7.A
                                                                                                                  and 4.9.13.Q
Family Dwelling or Mobile Home as an accessory use to a permitted use in any     P          P          P          P-I, I-1, I-2:
Land Use Group                                                                                                    4.9.7.C
Residential Care Services:                                                                                         
                                                                                                                  P-I: 4.9.7.J.1,
                                                                                                                  3.d, .4, .5, &
                                                                                                                  .6 and 4.9.13.Q
   Rehabilitation Service or Shelter Care (unlimited # residents)             P          P                     I-1: 4.9.7.J.1,
                                                                                                                  3.d, .4, .5,
                                                                                                                  .6, and
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q
                                                                                                                  P-I, I-2:
   Rehabilitation Service or Shelter Care (unlimited # residents)             S [2]                 S [2]      4.9.7.J.1, 3.d,
                                                                                                                  .4, & .5 and
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q
                                                                                                                  P-I: 4.9.7.J.1,
                                                                                                                  3.c, & .4 and
   Shelter Care, Victims of Domestic Violence                                 P          P                     4.9.13.Q
                                                                                                                  I-1: 4.9.7.J.1,
                                                                                                                  3.c, .4, and
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q
                                                                                                                  I-1: 4.9.7.J.1,
   Shelter Care, Children and Teenagers who need full-time supervision                   P                     3.d, .4, .5,
                                                                                                                  .10 and
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q
                                                                                                                  I-1: 4.9.7.J.1,
   Shelter Care, Children and Teenagers who need full-time supervision                   S [2]                 3.d, .4, .5,
                                                                                                                  and 4.9.13.Q
Restricted Adult Activities Land Use Class With Land Use Type:                                         *           
Adult: Commercial Services, Industrial, Recreation, or Retail Trade                         P                     I-1: 4.9.8.A
                                                                                                                  and 4.9.13.Q
Retail Trade Land Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:                                                  *           
Construction Material Sales                                                                 P          P          I-1, I-2:
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q
Food and Beverage Sales:                                                                                           
   Farmers’ Market only                                                     P          P          P          All:
                                                                                                                  4.9.9.A.12.a-.d
   Excluding Large Retail Establishments                                      P          P          P          I-1, I-2:
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q
                                                                                                                  P-I: 4.9.9.D
   Large Retail Establishment                                                 S [1]      S [1]      S [1]      I-1, I-2:
                                                                                                                  4.9.9.D and
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q
General Merchandise Sales:                                                                                         
                                                                                                                  P-I: 4.9.9.B.1
   Excluding Large Retail Establishments                                      P          P          P          I-1, I-2:
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q
                                                                                                                  P-I: 4.9.9.D
   Large Retail Establishment                                                 S [1]      S [1]      S [1]      I-1, I-2:
                                                                                                                  4.9.9.D and
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q
                                                                                                                  I-1, I-2:
Heavy Equipment Sales                                                                       P          P          4.9.9.C and
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q
Marijuana Cultivation Location:                                                                                    
                                                                                                                  I-1, I-2:
   Designated Caregiver Cultivation Location                                             P          P          4.9.9.E.2 & .3
                                                                                                                  and 4.9.13.Q
                                                                                                                  I-1, I-2:
   Dispensary Off-Site Cultivation Location                                              P          P          4.9.9.E.2 and
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q
                                                                                                                  I-1, I-2:
   Qualifying Patient Cultivation Location                                               P          P          4.9.9.E.4 and
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q
                                                                                                                  P-I, I-1, I-2:
Marijuana Dispensary Off-Site Manufacturing Location                             P          P          P          4.9.9.E.2 and
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q
                                                                                                                  P-I, I-1, I-2:
Swap Meets and Auctions                                                          S [3]      S [3]      P          4.9.9.F and
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q
                                                                                                                  I-1, I-2:
   Auctions only                                                                         P          P          4.9.9.F and
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q
                                                                                                                  P-I: 4.9.9.G.2,
                                                                                                                  & .3 and
Vehicle Rental and Sales                                                         P          P          P          4.9.13.Q
                                                                                                                  I-1, I-2:
                                                                                                                  4.9.9.G.1 and
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q
Farmers’ Market as an accessory use to any permitted principal use in every lanP          P          P          All:
use group                                                                                                         4.9.9.A.12.a-.e
Additional Permitted Accessory Uses
Salvaging and Recycling is permitted as an accessory use  to any permitted use   P          P          P          P-I, I-1, I-2:
in the Retail Trade Use Group                                                                                     4.9.5.G.1 & .3
Storage Land Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:                                                       *           
                                                                                                                  P-I: 4.9.10.A,
                                                                                                                  4.9.5.C.8, and
Commercial Storage                                                               P          P          P          4.9.13.Q
                                                                                                                  I-1, 1-2:
                                                                                                                  4.9.10.A and
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q
Hazardous Material Storage                                                                             S [1]      I-2: 4.9.13.Q
                                                                                                                  P-I: 4.9.10.B.1
Hazardous Material Storage as an accessory use to any permitted principal use in                                  & .2.a
every land use group                                                             P          P          P          I-1, I-2:
                                                                                                                  4.9.10.B.1 &
                                                                                                                  2.d
                                                                                                                  P-I: 4.9.10.C.
                                                                                                                  & 4.9.13.Q
Personal Storage                                                                 P          P          P          I-1, I-2:
                                                                                                                  4.9.10.C.3 & .6
                                                                                                                  and 4.9.13.Q
Additional Permitted Accessory Uses
The following uses are permitted as an accessory use  to any permitted use in
the Storage Use Group:
•   Construction Material Sales;                                            P                                P-I: 4.9.5.C.8
•   Food and Beverage Sales;                                                                                 & .10
•   Heavy Equipment Sales; or,
•   General Merchandise Sales
Utilities  Land Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:                                                   *           
                                                                                                                  P-I, I-1:
Distribution System                                                              P          P          P          4.9.11.A.1, .2,
                                                                                                                  & .4 and
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q
                                                                                                                  P-I, I-1, I-2:
Renewable Energy Generation                                                      P          P          P          4.9.11.B.2, .3,
                                                                                                                  & .5 and
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q
                                                                                                                  I-2: 4.9.5.C. &
Sanitation System                                                                                      S [1]      4.9.11.C and
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.Q
Wholesaling Land Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:                                                 *           
Business Supply & Equipment Wholesaling                                          P          P          P          P-I: 4.9.5.C.8
                                                                                                                  and 4.9.13.Q
Construction/Heavy Equipment Wholesaling                                         P          P          P          P-I: 4.9.5.C.8
                                                                                                                  and 4.9.13.Q
Food and Beverage Wholesaling                                                    P          P          P          P-I: 4.9.5.C.8
                                                                                                                  and 4.9.13.Q
Hazardous Material Wholesaling                                                                         S [1]      I-2: 4.9.13.Q
Additional Permitted Accessory Uses
The following uses are permitted as an accessory use  to any permitted use in
the Wholesaling Use Group:
•   Construction Material Sales;                                            P                                P-I: 4.9.5.C.8
•   Food and Beverage Sales;                                                                                 & .10
•   Heavy Equipment Sales;
•   General Merchandise Sales
 
(Am. Ord. 11070, 5/14/2013; Am. Ord. 11127, 11/6/2013; Am. Ord. 11171, 5/20/
2014; Am. Ord. 11201, 9/23/2014; Am. Ord. 11257, 4/21/2015; Am. Ord. 11328, 12/
8/2015; Am. Ord. 11446, 4/5/2017; Am. Ord. 11557, 6/5/2018; Am. Ord. 11577, 8/
8/2018; Am. Ord. 11608, 12/18/2018; Am. Ord. 11828, 4/6/2021; Am. Ord. 11996,
3/21/2023; Am. Ord. 12060, 11/28/2023)
4.8.8.   PERMITTED USES: SPECIAL USE ZONES (1) - OS, IR, P & RV
TABLE 4.8-6: PERMITTED USES - SPECIAL USE ZONES (1): OS, IR, P, & RV ZONES
P = Permitted Use S = Permitted as Special Exception Use
[1] Mayor and Council Special Exception Procedure, Section
3.4.4
[2] Zoning Examiner Special Exception Procedure, Section
3.4.3
[3] PDSD Special Exception Procedure, Section
3.4.2
LAND USE OS IR P RV USE SPECIFIC STANDARDS
Agricultural Land Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:
TABLE 4.8-6: PERMITTED USES - SPECIAL USE ZONES (1): OS, IR, P, & RV ZONES
P = Permitted Use S = Permitted as Special Exception Use
[1] Mayor and Council Special Exception Procedure, Section
3.4.4
[2] Zoning Examiner Special Exception Procedure, Section
3.4.3
[3] PDSD Special Exception Procedure, Section
3.4.2
LAND USE                                                                        OS IR         P   RV USE SPECIFIC STANDARDS
Agricultural Land Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:
Animal Production:                                                                                    
   Excluding a Stockyard                                                        P                 IR: 4.9.2.A.1.a, .2.b, .3.b, & .3.c and 4.9.13.H
   Hog Ranch                                                                    S [1]             IR: 4.9.2.A.3.d and 4.9.13.H
   Stable or Riding School                                                      P                 IR: 4.9.2.A.2.b, & .4 and 4.9.13.H
Community Garden                                                                              P   P  All: 4.9.2.B
Crop Production                                                                    P                 IR: 4.9.2.C and 4.9.13.H
                                                                                                     P, RV: 4.9.2.C
   With Food and Beverage Sales as an accessory use                             P                 IR: 4.9.9.A.2.a & 3-9 and 4.9.13.H
                                                                                                     IR: 4.9.2.A.1.a, 2.b, 3.b, & .3.c, 4.9.2.C, and
General Farming                                                                    P          P   P  4.9.13.H
                                                                                                     P, RV: 4.9.2.C
Stockyard Operation:                                                                                  
   Commercial Feedlot                                                           S [1]             IR: 4.9.2.D.1 and 4.9.13.H
   Livestock Auction Yard                                                       S [1]             IR: 4.9.2.D.2 and 4.9.13.H
Urban Farm                                                                                    P   P  P, RV: 4.9.2.E
Civic Land Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:
Cultural Use:                                                                                     
   Limited to Nature Reserve or Wildlife Refuge                                 P                  
   Other than Nature Reserve or Wildlife Refuge                                 S [1]             IR: 4.9.3.C.1 and 4.9.13.H
Educational Use, Elementary and Secondary                                          S [2]              
   With Salvaging and Recycling as an accessory use                             P                 IR: 4.9.5.G.1 & .3 and 4.9.13.H
Protective Service (government owned and operated only)                            P                 IR: 4.9.13.F & H
Religious Uses                                                                     P                  
   With Columbarium as an accessory use                                         P                  
   With Salvaging and Recycling as an accessory use                             P                 IR: 4.9.5.G.1 & .3 and 4.9.13.H
Commercial Services Land Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:
Administrative and Professional Office                                             S [2]             IR: 4.9.4.A.1 and 4.9.13.H
Animal Services, limited to Veterinary Hospital or Commercial Kennel               P                 IR: 4.9.4.D.5 and 4.9.13.H
Commercial Recreation                                                              P                  
Communications:                                                                                       
   Wireless Communication                                                       P                 IR: 4.9.13.H and 4.9.4.I.2, .3, .4.a or .5.a or
                                                                                                     .5.b
   Wireless Communication, limited to wireless communication towers  and        S [see use        IR: 4.9.13.H and one of the following groups: S[2]
antennas                                                                           specific          - 4.9.4.I.2, .3 & 7.a. or S[1] - 4.9.4.I.2, .3 & .8
                                                                                   standards]
   Radio or Television Station Only                                             S [1]             IR: 4.9.4.I.1, 4.9.13.A.2, and 4.9.13.H
Construction Service                                                               S [1]             IR: 4.9.4.J, 4.9.13.A.2, and 4.9.13.H
Entertainment, Carnival or Racetrack for the racing of animals                     S [1]             IR: 4.9.4.K.5 and 4.9.13.H
Medical Services - Outpatient, excluding blood donor centers                       P                 IR: 4.9.4.O.3, 4.9.4.P.2.b, .3, & .4, 4.9.13.A.2,
                                                                                                     and 4.9.13.H
Parking                                                                                       P      P: 4.9.4.S
Transportation Service:                                                                               
   Air Carrier, Airport  Facilities                                             S [1]             IR: 4.9.4.Y.1 & 2 and 4.9.13.H
   Air Carrier, General Aviation Strip                                          S [1]             IR: 4.9.4.Y.1 - 4 and 4.9.13.H
   Air Carrier, Ultra-light Airstrip                                            S [1]              
   Air Carrier, Ultra-light Flight Park                                         S [1]             IR: 4.9.4.Y.2 & 3 and 4.9.13.H
Travelers’ Accommodation:                                                                           
   Campsite                                                                                    P  RV: 4.9.13.L
   Campsite of over 200 spaces with the following uses as an accessory use :
•   Adult Care Services;
•   Day Care;
•   Family Dwelling;
•   Food and Beverage Sales (limited to a delicatessen, snack bar, or food
store only);                                                                                      P  RV: 4.9.7.I.3 and 4.9.13.L
•   General Merchandise Sales;
•   Mobile Home Dwelling;
•   Park and Recreation; or,
•   Personal Services (limited to a coin-operated laundry or pick-up station
for dry cleaning only)
Lodging                                                                            S [1]              
The following as accessory uses to a Travelers’ Accommodation, Lodging use:
•   Alcoholic Beverage Service;                                                                 IR: 4.9.4.AA.1-.5, .6.b, & .7 and the following:
•   Civic Assembly;                                                           S [1]             •   For Alcoholic Beverage Service, 4.9.4.C.3;
•   Commercial Recreation; or                                                                   •   For Food Service, 4.9.4.M.3.
•   Food Service
Industrial Land Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:
Extraction                                                                         S [1]             IR: 4.9.5.B.1 & .2 and 4.9.13.H
Perishable Goods Manufacturing                                                     S [1]             IR: 4.9.5.E.2 & .3 and 4.9.13.H
Recreation Land Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:
Open Space                                                                      P                    OS: 4.9.13.G
Parks and Recreation                                                                           P   
Residential Land Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:
Family Dwelling:                                                                                      
   Manufactured Housing                                                         P                  
   Single-Family , Detached                                                     P                  
   With Home Occupation as an accessory use to any Family Dwelling              P                 IR: 4.9.7.D and 4.9.13.H
Mobile Home Dwelling                                                               P                  
Retail Trade Land Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:
Food and Beverage Sales (Farmers’ Markets only)                                             P   P  All: 4.9.9.A.12.a-.d
General Merchandise Sales:                                                                            
   Artists/Artisan Workshop/Studio only                                         S [2]             IR: 4.9.9.B.2 and 4.9.13.H
   Feed Store only                                                              S [1]             IR: 4.9.13.A.2 and 4.9.13.H
Farmers’ Market as an accessory use to any permitted principal use in every                 P   P  All: 4.9.9.A.12.a-.d
land use group
Storage Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:
Hazardous Material Storage as an accessory use to any permitted principal use      P              P  IR: 4.9.10.B.1, .2.a and 4.9.13.H
in every land use group                                                                              RV: 4.9.10.B.1 & .2.a and 4.9.13.L
Utilities  Land Use Group WithLand Use Class/Type:
Distribution System:                                                                                  
   Limited to Power Substations with Input of 115 Kilovolts or more             S [2]             IR: 4.9.11.A.3, .6, .7, & .10 and 4.9.13.H
   Limited to Telephone, Telegraph, or Power Substations with Input voltage     S [2]             IR: 4.9.11.A.2 & .8 and 4.9.13.H
less than 115 Kilovolts
   Limited to Water pumping and storage facilities operated as part of a system S [2]             IR: 4.9.11.A.4 and 4.9.13.H
serving 2 or more properties as a private, public, or community utility
Renewable Energy Generation                                                        S [2]      S      IR, P : 4.9.11.B.2, .3, .4, & .5 and 4.9.13.H
                                                                                              [2]
 
(Am. Ord. 11070, 5/14/2013; Am. Ord. 11171, 5/20/2014; Am. Ord. 11257, 4/21/
2015; Am. Ord. 11328, 12/8/2015; Am. Ord. 11996, 3/21/2023)
4.8.9.   PERMITTED USES: SPECIAL USE ZONES (2) - NC, RVC, & MU
TABLE 4.8-7: PERMITTED USES - SPECIAL USE ZONES (2): NC, RVC, AND MU ZONES
P = Permitted Use S = Permitted as Special Exception Use
[1] Mayor and Council Special Exception Procedure, Section
3.4.4
[2] Zoning Examiner Special Exception Procedure, Section
3.4.3
[3] PDSD Special Exception Procedure, Section
3.4.2
LAND USE NC RVC MU USE SPECIFIC STANDARDS
Agricultural Land Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:
TABLE 4.8-7: PERMITTED USES - SPECIAL USE ZONES (2): NC, RVC, AND MU ZONES
P = Permitted Use S = Permitted as Special Exception Use
[1] Mayor and Council Special Exception Procedure, Section
3.4.4
[2] Zoning Examiner Special Exception Procedure, Section
3.4.3
[3] PDSD Special Exception Procedure, Section
3.4.2
LAND USE                                                                         NC         RVC        MU         USE SPECIFIC
                                                                                                                  STANDARDS
Agricultural Land Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:
Animal Production:                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                  MU:
   Excluding Commercial Stables                                                                     P          4.9.2.A.1.a,
                                                                                                                  1.c, 2.a, 2.b,
                                                                                                                  & 3.a
                                                                                                                  MU:
   Commercial Stables Only                                                                          S [2]      4.9.2.A.1.b,
                                                                                                                  .2.b, and
                                                                                                                  4.9.5.C.6
Community Garden                                                                 P          P          P          All: 4.9.2.B
Urban Farm                                                                       P          P          P          All: 4.9.2.E
Civic Land Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:
Cemetery                                                                                               S [2]      MU: 4.9.5.C.6
Civic Assembly                                                                                         P           
Correctional Use:                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                  MU:
                                                                                                                  4.9.3.B.1.a,
   Custodial Facility                                                                               S [1]      2.b, 3.b, 6, 7
                                                                                                                  & 8 and
                                                                                                                  4.9.5.C.6
                                                                                                                  MU:
   Supervision Facility                                                                             P          4.9.3.B.1.a,
                                                                                                                  2.b, 3.a, 6 & 8
                                                                                                                  NC, RVC:
                                                                                                                  Government
Cultural Use                                                                     P          P          P          owned and
                                                                                                                  operated only
                                                                                                                  and 4.9.13.M
Educational Use:                                                                                                   
   Elementary and Secondary                                                   P                                NC: 4.9.3.D.1 -
                                                                                                                  7 and 4.9.13.M
                                                                                S [2]                            NC: 4.9.13.M
   Postsecondary Institution                                                                        P           
   With Salvaging and Recycling as an accessory use  to both P and S EducationPl                    P          NC: 4.9.5.G.1 &
Uses                                                                                                              .3
                                                                                                                  NC, RVC:
                                                                                                                  Government
Postal Service                                                                   P          P          P          owned and
                                                                                                                  operated only
                                                                                                                  and 4.9.13.M
                                                                                                                  NC, RVC:
                                                                                                                  Government
Protective Service                                                               P          P                     owned and
                                                                                                                  operated only
                                                                                                                  and 4.9.13.M
Religious Use                                                                               P          P          RVC: 4.9.13.N
   With Columbarium as an accessory use                                                  P          P           
   With Salvaging and Recycling as an accessory use                                      P          P          RVC, MU:
                                                                                                                  4.9.5.G.1 & .3
Commercial Services Land Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:
                                                                                                                  NC: 4.9.13.M
Administrative and Professional Office                                           P          P          S [2]      RVC: 4.9.13.N
                                                                                                                  MU: 4.9.5.C.6
Alcoholic Beverage  Service, excluding Large Bars                                                      S [2]      MU: 4.9.5.C.6
   With Microbrewery as an accessory use                                                            P          MU: 4.9.5.E.6,
                                                                                                                  .7, & .8
Animal Service                                                                                         S [2]      MU: 4.9.5.C.6
                                                                                                                  NC: 4.9.4.E.1,
Artisan  Residence                                                               P                                .2, .3, .4, &
                                                                                                                  .5 and 4.9.13.M
Automotive:                                                                                                        
   Major Service and Repair (excluding bodywork and paint-booths)                                   S [2]      MU: 4.9.5.C.6
                                                                                                                  RVC: 4.9.4.F.5
   Minor Service and Repair                                                              S [1]      S [2]      and 4.9.13.N
                                                                                                                  MU: 4.9.5.C.6
Buildings and Ground Maintenance                                                                       S [2]      MU: 4.9.5.C.6
Commercial Recreation                                                                                  P           
Communications:                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                  NC: 4.9.13.M
                                                                                                                  and 4.9.4.I.2,
                                                                                                                  .3, & .4.a or
                                                                                                                  .5.a or .5.b
                                                                                                                  RVC: 4.9.13.N
   Wireless Communication                                                     P          P          P          and 4.9.4.I.2,
                                                                                                                  .3, & .4.a or
                                                                                                                  .5.a or .5.b
                                                                                                                  MU: 4.9.4.I.2,
                                                                                                                  .3, & .4.a or
                                                                                                                  .5.a or .5.b
                                                                                                                  NC: 4.9.13.M
                                                                                                                  and one of the
                                                                                                                  following
                                                                                                                  groups: S[2] -
                                                                                                                  4.9.4.I.2, .3,
                                                                                                                  & .7.a; or, S
                                                                                                                  [1] -
                                                                                                                  4.9.4.I.2, .3,
                                                                                                                  & .8
                                                                                                                  RVC: 4.9.13.N
                                                                                                                  and 4.9.4.I.2,
   Wireless Communication, limited to wireless communication towers  and      S [see use S [see use S [see use .3, & 5.a or
antennas                                                                         specific   specific   specific   5.b
                                                                                 standards] standards] standards] MU: 4.9.5.C.6
                                                                                                                  and one of the
                                                                                                                  following
                                                                                                                  groups: S[3] -
                                                                                                                  4.9.4.I.2, .3,
                                                                                                                  & .6.a; or, S
                                                                                                                  [2] -
                                                                                                                  4.9.4.I.2, .3,
                                                                                                                  & .7.b; or, S
                                                                                                                  [1] -
                                                                                                                  4.9.4.I.2, .3,
                                                                                                                  & .8
   Radio or Television Station Only                                                                 S [2]      MU: 4.9.4.I.1
                                                                                                                  and 4.9.5.C.6
Construction Service                                                                                   S [2]      MU: 4.9.5.C.6
                                                                                                                  NC: 4.9.13.M
Day Care                                                                         P          P          S [2]      RVC: 4.9.13.N
                                                                                                                  MU: 4.9.5.C.6
                                                                                                                  MU: 4.9.4.K.1,
Entertainment                                                                                          S [2]      .2, .3, & .4;
                                                                                                                  4.9.4.C.3; and
                                                                                                                  4.9.5.C.6
Financial Service:                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                  NC: 4.9.4.L.3
                                                                                                                  and 4.9.13.M
   Excluding non-chartered financial institutions                             P          P          S [2]      RVC: 4.9.4.L.3
                                                                                                                  and 4.9.13.N
                                                                                                                  MU: 4.9.5.C.6
   Non-chartered Financial Institutions only                                                                    
Food Service:                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                  NC: 4.9.4.M.1 &
                                                                                                                  5-7 and
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.M
   Food Court                                                                 P          P          S [2]      RVC: 4.9.4.M.1,
                                                                                                                  .2, .6, &.7,
                                                                                                                  and 4.9.13.N
                                                                                                                  MU: 4.9.5.C.6
                                                                                                                  RVC: 4.9.4.M.2,
   Excluding soup kitchens                                                               P          S [2]      4.9.4.V.3, and
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.N
                                                                                                                  MU: 4.9.5.C.6
   Excluding soup kitchens and Alcoholic Beverage  Sales                      P                                NC: 4.9.4.M.1 &
                                                                                                                  5 and 4.9.13.M
                                                                                                                  RVC: 4.9.4.V.2,
   With Alcoholic Beverage  Service as an accessory use                                  S [1]                 .3, & .4 and
                                                                                                                  4.9.4.C.3
Funeral Service                                                                                        S[2]       MU: 4.9.5.C.6
Medical Service:                                                                                                   
   Extended Healthcare                                                                              P           
   Major                                                                                            P           
      Transportation Services, Air Carrier, Helipad as an accessory use to a                     P          MU: 4.9.4.Q.2
Medical Service, Major Use
                                                                                                                  RVC: 4.9.4.O.2
                                                                                                                  and 4.9.13.N
   Outpatient, excluding blood donor centers                                             P          P          MU: 4.9.4.O.2,
                                                                                                                  4.9.4.P.2.b,
                                                                                                                  .3, & .4, and
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.A.2
Parking                                                                                                S [2]      MU: 4.9.5.C.6
                                                                                                                  NC: 4.9.13.M
                                                                                                                  RVC: 4.9.4.T.2
Personal Service                                                                 P          P          S [2]      & .3 and
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.N
                                                                                                                  MU: 4.9.5.C.6
Research and Product Development                                                                       S [2]      MU: 4.9.5.C.6
Technical Service                                                                                      S [2]      MU: 4.9.5.C.6
Trade Service and Repair:                                                                                          
   Major (includes automotive bodywork & paint booths)                                              S [2]      MU: 4.9.5.C.6
                                                                                                                  NC: 4.9.13.M
                                                                                                                  and excluding
   Minor                                                                      P                     S [2]      upholstery
                                                                                                                  shops
                                                                                                                  MU: 4.9.5.C.6
Transportation Service:                                                                                            
   Airport  Authority                                                                               P          MU: 4.9.13.Q.5
   Land Carrier                                                                                     S [2]      MU: 4.9.5.C.6
Travelers Accommodation, Lodging                                                                       S [2]      MU: 4.9.5.C.6
Additional Permitted Accessory Uses
                                                                                                                  NC, RVC:
Salvaging and Recycling as an accessory use  to any permitted Commercial         P          P          P          4.9.5.G.1 & .3
Services use                                                                                                      MU: 4.9.5.G.1 &
                                                                                                                  .3
Industrial Land Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:
Craftwork                                                                                              S [2]      MU: 4.9.5.C.6
General Manufacturing                                                                                  S [2]      MU: 4.9.5.C.6
Perishable Goods Manufacturing                                                                         S [2]      MU: 4.9.5.E.1
                                                                                                                  and 4.9.5.C.6
Precision Manufacturing                                                                                S [2]      MU: 4.9.5.C.6
Processing and Cleaning                                                                                S [2]      MU: 4.9.5.C.6
Additional Permitted Accessory Uses
Hazardous Material Storage is permitted as an accessory use  to any permitted                          P          MU: 4.9.10.B.1
principal land use in any Land Use Group                                                                          & .2.a
Recreation Land Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:
Parks and Recreation                                                             P                     P          NC: 4.9.13.M
Residential Land Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:
Family  Dwelling:                                                                                                  
   Duplex                                                                     P                     P           
   Manufactured Housing                                                       P                     P           
   Multifamily Development                                                    P                     P           
   Single-family , Attached or Detached                                       P                     P           
   Accessory Dwelling Unit                                                    P                     P          NC, MU: 6.6.3
   With Home Occupation  as an accessory use  to any Family  Dwelling use     P                     P          NC, MU: 4.9.7.D
Group Dwelling                                                                                         P           
Mobile Home Dwelling                                                                                   P           
Mobile Home Park                                                                                       P           
                                                                                                                  NC:
Residential Care Services, Adult Care or Physical and Behavioral Health Services P                                4.9.7.J.3.a, &
                                                                                                                  .4 and 4.9.13.M
Residential Care Services, Rehabilitation Service - Children’s Facility (maximum                                NC: 4.9.7.J.1,
10 Residents)                                                                    P                                3.a, & .4 and
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.M
Retail Trade Land Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:
Construction Material Sales                                                                            S [2]      MU: 4.9.5.C.6
Food and Beverage Sales:                                                                                           
   Farmers’ Market only                                                     P          P          P          MU:
                                                                                                                  4.9.9.A.12.a-.d
                                                                                                                  NC: 4.9.13.M
                                                                                                                  and excluding
   Excluding Large Retail Establishments                                                 S [1]      S [2]      alcoholic
                                                                                                                  beverage sales
                                                                                                                  RVC: 4.9.13.N
                                                                                                                  MU: 4.9.5.C.6
   Large Retail Establishment                                                                                  RVC: 4.9.9.D
                                                                                                                  and 4.9.13.N
General Merchandise Sales:                                                                                         
                                                                                                                  NC: 4.9.13.M
   Excluding Large Retail Establishments                                      P          P          S [2]      RVC: 4.9.13.N
                                                                                                                  MU: 4.9.5.C.6
   Large Retail Establishment                                                            S [1]                 RVC: 4.9.9.D
                                                                                                                  and 4.9.13.N
Heavy Equipment Sales                                                                                  S [2]      MU: 4.9.5.C.6
                                                                                                                  and 4.9.9.C
                                                                                                                  MU: 4.9.5.C.6
Vehicle Rental and Sales                                                                               S[2]       and 4.9.9.G.1,
                                                                                                                  .2
Farmers’ Market as an accessory use to any permitted principal use in every lanP          P          P          All:
use group                                                                                                         4.9.9.A.12.a-.e
Smoke Shop                                                                                           S [2]      MU: 4.9.9.H
Additional Permitted Accessory Uses
Salvaging and Recycling as an accessory use  to any permitted Retail Trade uses  P          P          P          All: 4.9.5.G.1
                                                                                                                  & .3
Storage Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:
Commercial Storage                                                                                     S [2]      MU: 4.9.10.A
Hazardous Material Storage as an accessory use to any permitted principal use in                       P          MU: 4.9.10.B.1
every land use group                                                                                              & .2.a
                                                                                                                  MU: 4.9.5.C.6
Personal Storage                                                                                       S [2]      and 4.9.10.C.3,
                                                                                                                  .6
Utilities Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:
                                                                                                                  NC: 4.9.11.A.1,
                                                                                                                  .5, & .9 and
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.M
                                                                                                                  RVC:
                                                                                                                  4.9.11.A.1, .5,
Distribution System                                                              S [2]      S [2]      S [2]      & .9 and
                                                                                                                  4.9.13.N
                                                                                                                  MU: 4.9.5.C.6
                                                                                                                  and 4.9.11.A.1,
                                                                                                                  .2, .5, .8, .9,
                                                                                                                  & .11
                                                                                                                  MU(P):
Renewable Energy Generation                                                                            P          4.9.11.B.1, .2,
                                                                                                                  .3, & .5
                                                                                                      S[2]       MU(S):
                                                                                                                  4.9.5.C.6
Wholesaling Use Group With Land Use Class/Type:
Business Equipment Supply and Wholesaling                                                              S [2]      MU: 4.9.5.C.6
Construction/Heavy Equipment Wholesaling                                                               S [2]      MU: 4.9.5.C.6
Food and Beverage Wholesaling                                                                          S [2]      MU: 4.9.5.C.6
 
(Am. Ord. 11070, 5/14/2013; Am. Ord. 11257, 4/21/2015; Am. Ord. 11328, 12/8/
2015; Am. Ord. 11409, 11/9/2016; Am. Ord. 11577, 8/8/2018; Am. Ord. 11608,
passed 12/18/2018; Am. Ord. 11890, 12/7/2021; Am. Ord. 11996, 3/21/2023; Am.
Ord. 12057, 11/14/2023; Am. Ord. 12060, 11/28/2023)
4.9.   USE-SPECIFIC STANDARDS
4.9.1. GENERAL
   A.   Purpose
   The use-specific standards in this section are intended to provide
additional standards for certain permitted and special exception land uses in
order to mitigate any adverse impacts on adjacent  land uses , on the immediate
neighborhood, and on the community.
   B.   Applicability
   These requirements are in addition to those required of principal buildings
in Article 6: Dimensional Standards of the UDC  and are applied only when
required in a zone for a particular land use . The use specific standards
prevail when a conflict with another standard, including a dimensional standard
from Article 6, occurs.
4.9.2. AGRICULTURAL USE GROUP
   A.   Animal Production
      1.   Provisions Relating to Animals in General
         a.   All buildings for animals shall be setback at least 50 feet from
all property lines , except corrals, which must be setback ten feet from all
property lines .
         b.   All stables, barns, and animal sheds or shelters shall be setback
at least 100 feet from any property line .
      2.   Provisions Relating to Livestock
         a.   No more than two horses or two head of cattle are permitted per
each 36,000 square feet of lot area.
         b.   A stock-tight fence and necessary cattle guards shall be erected
and maintained along the boundaries of any area where livestock is kept or
grazed. This provision does not apply to interior lot lines where the adjacent
property is zoned IR or to open range as determined under Arizona Revised
Statutes (A.R.S.).
         c.   All horses, cattle, sheep, goats, or similar animals shall be
confined within a stock-tight fence in an area of no less than 400 square feet
per animal . Such fenced-in area shall be setback ten feet from the rear
property line where it abuts an IR, RH, SR, SH, RX-1, or RX-2 zone; 40 feet
from the rear where it abuts any other zone; and 40 feet from a side property
line . A setback of ten feet is permitted on the side yard where the adjacent
property owners have a written recorded agreement to this effect, but in no
event shall a corral be closer than 50 feet to any residence or living quarters
on an abutting property.
      3.   Provisions Relating Specifically to Hogs
         a.   Hogs are prohibited.
         b.   No more than one hog weighing more than 50 pounds is permitted
per each 36,000 square feet of lot area.
         c.   Hog-raising projects that exceed the permitted number of hogs in
Section
4.9.2.A.3.b is permitted if sponsored by the 4-H Club, Future Farmers of
America, or other similar nonprofit organization, provided that a letter of
authorization from the sponsoring organization is submitted confirming that the
project is sponsored by the organization, describing the project and stating
its length of time.
         d.   Hogs shall be penned at least 500 feet from any property line .
      4.   Riding Stables or Riding Schools
         a.   All stables, barns, and animal sheds or shelters shall be setback
at least 200 feet from any interior property line with residential zoning,
except that the distance may be measured to the boundary of the site or
subdivision to be served as a common use facility.
         b.   Outside audio amplification is prohibited.
   B.   Community Garden
      1.   Permitted Activities and Uses.
      The following activities and uses are permitted on a Community Garden
use:
         a.   Growing and harvesting of agricultural products;
         b.   The keeping of food producing animals  is permitted as an
accessory use to the growing and harvesting of agricultural products in
accordance with Section
6.6.5.E, Keeping of Food Producing Animals. Permission from the property owner
is required and a sign must be posted identifying the person responsible for
caring for the animals and his or her contact information;
         c.   Mechanical greenhouses are permitted as a principal or accessory
structure in accordance with mechanical heating or cooling as defined in
Section
11.4.8, Definitions - G. Heating or cooling systems associated with greenhouses
shall be located a minimum distance of 200 feet from every property line, or as
a second option, the applicant may provide a mitigation plan that may include
screening or other treatment to comply with Section 16-31, Excessive Noise, of
the Tucson Code. Compliance with the second option may require the heating or
cooling systems and/or greenhouse to have a greater perimeter yard than that
required of a principal building by the zone. Applicants using the second
option must demonstrate compliance with this standard prior to issuance of a
building permit. Passive greenhouses , including those that are cooled solely
by an evaporative cooler, are not required to provide a wider perimeter yard
than that required by the zone;
         d.   On-site sale of agricultural products grown on-site is permitted
as an accessory use in accordance with Section
6.6.5.F.;
         e.   During an on-site sales event, a temporary booth or canopy may be
located within the front yard setback of the property provided site visibility
is maintained and is exempt from Section
6.6.1.C. In residential zones , a temporary booth or canopy is also exempt from
Section
6.6.3.B; and,
         f.   Outdoor activity, including the outdoor display of products grown
on-site, is permitted.
         g.   Any area used for keeping tools and equipment shall be screened
from the street.
   C.   Crop Production
   Greenhouses are permitted in accordance with Section
4.9.2.B.1.c.
   D.   Stockyard Operation
      1.   A commercial feedlot use shall be setback at least 500 feet from any
property line .
      2.   Livestock auction yard.
         a.   All buildings , holding pens and areas, and show areas shall be
setback at least 300 feet from any property line .
         b.   Generation of dust shall be minimized.
         c.   Outdoor audio amplification that would create a nuisance to
adjacent properties is prohibited.
   E.   Urban Farm
      1.   Permitted Activities and Uses
         The following activities and uses are permitted on an Urban Farm use:
         a.   Growing and harvesting of agricultural products;
         b.   The keeping of food producing animals as an accessory use in
accordance with Section
4.9.2.B.1.b;
         c.   Greenhouses are permitted in accordance with Section
4.9.2.B.1.c;
         d.   On-site sale of agricultural products grown on-site is permitted
as an accessory use in accordance with Section 6.6.5.F.;
         e.   During an on-site sales event, a temporary booth or canopy may be
located within the front yard setback of the property provided site visibility
is maintained and is exempt from Section 6.6.1.C; and,
         f.   Outdoor activity, including the outdoor display of products grown
on-site, is permitted.
      2.   Nuisance Mitigation
         Urban Farms are required to comply with the following standards:
         a.   Dust, Fumes, Vapors, Gases, and Other Forms of Air Pollution
         No emission shall be permitted that can cause damage to health,
animals , vegetation, or other forms of property or that can cause any
excessive soiling of the air.
         b.   Illumination
         Illumination of buildings and open areas shall be located and directed
so as to eliminate glare toward streets and adjoining properties and shall
comply with the requirements of the Tucson Code, Chapter 6, Outdoor Lighting
Code.
         c.   Liquids and Solid Waste
         No waste shall be discharged into the streets, drainage-ways, or on
property possibly creating a danger to the public health and safety, and no
waste shall be discharged in the public sewage system that might endanger the
normal operation of the public sewage system.
         d.   Noise
         The sound level of any individual operation shall not exceed the
levels permitted in Section 16-31, Excessive Noise, of the Tucson Code.
         e.   Odor
         Emission of odorous gases or other odorous matter shall not be
permitted in such quantities as to be offensive to owners or occupants of
adjoining property or in such a manner as to create a nuisance or hazard beyond
the property lines.
         f.   Vibration
         No vibration shall be permitted that is discernible beyond the
property lines to the human sense of feeling for a duration of three minutes or
more in any one hour of the day between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. or
of a duration of 30 seconds or more in any one hour between the hours of 7:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
         g.   Heavy Machinery
         The use of heavy machinery (e.g. tractors, plows, etc.) is permitted,
but is restricted to use between 7 a.m. and 7 p.m., and must be in compliance
with the other nuisance mitigation requirements as applicable.
(Am. Ord. 11328, 12/8/2015)
4.9.3. CIVIC USE GROUP
   A.   Cemetery
      1.   The use must be adjacent to, or an extension of, an existing
cemetery.
      2.   A minimum site area of one acre for a pet cemetery and five acres
for a human cemetery is required.
      3.   All buildings shall be setback at least 100 feet from any property
line .
      4.   The use is limited to the storage of cremated remains in a
columbarium.
   B.   Correctional Use
      1.   Minimum Required Lot Size /Site Area
         a.   One acre ;
         b.   Five acres ;
         c.   Ten acres ;
         d.   15 acres ; and,
         e.   30 acres .
      2.   Maximum Number of Beds
         a.   The maximum number of beds permitted is 40.
         b.   The number of beds permitted is calculated by dividing the area
of the site by 2,200 square feet, with a maximum permitted capacity of 40.
         c.   The maximum number of beds permitted is 60, with no more than 40
offenders in the Custodial Facility and no more than 20 offenders in the
Supervision Facility.
         d.   The maximum number of beds permitted is 1,250.
      3.   Separation
      A Correctional Use shall be separated from other public or private
Correctional Uses, Rehabilitation Service Uses, and Shelter Care Uses, as
determined by the zone in which the Correctional Use is located. The applicant
for a Correctional Use shall provide documentation of compliance with the
required separation distances.
         a.   1,200 feet;
         b.   1,200 feet from a Supervision Facility, Rehabilitation Service,
or Shelter Care and four miles from a Custodial Facility or a Jail or Prison;
and,
         c.   1,200 feet from a Supervision Facility, Rehabilitation Service,
or Shelter Care; four miles from a Custodial Facility; and five miles from a
Jail or Prison.
      4.   Minimum Interior Yard Setbacks
      Minimum interior yard setbacks are required for any structure, including
a fenced enclosure , and are measured to the property line .
         a.   50 feet;
         b.   100 feet; and,
         c.   500 feet.
      5.   Building Height
      The maximum building height permitted is 50 feet, except for guard
towers, which may be up to 60 feet in height.
      6.   Site Location
      The site shall be located at least 300 feet from the property line to a
zone boundary line of R-3 or more restrictive zoning , or for sites where
Section
4.9.3.B.10, Prison Clustering Provisions, is applicable, the 300-foot setback
does not apply to residentially zoned property used for a prison or jail or to
residentially zoned property used as a public right-of-way  or railroad right-
of-way .
      7.   Management Plan
      The applicant must submit to the Zoning Administrator and the Police
Department a management plan describing the management and operation of the
facility including, names and addresses of the entities that own the facility
and manage the program; name and address of local responsible party ; name and
phone number of the responsible governmental contracting agency; names and
locations of existing facilities owned or operated by the ownership or
management entities; length of the contract period; types of offenders housed;
number and qualifications of the staff of the facility; and an emergency plan
which details how the facility will deal with emergencies and how and under
what circumstances contact is made with local emergency and safety officials.
Additionally, a plan for perimeter security shall be filed with the management
plan. Any changes or amendments to the management plan and any change in
ownership or management must be filed with the Zoning Administrator and the
Police Department.
      8.   Licensure
      If licensing is required for the use, proof of such licensure shall be
provided prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the use. If
licensure is not required, the applicant shall provide documentation to that
effect.
      9.   Loudspeakers
      Outdoor speakers are prohibited.
      10.   Prison Clustering Provisions
         a.   A minimum site area of 150 acres is required.
         b.   The site shall be located within one-half mile of at least one
jail or prison facility owned and operated by the federal or state government,
and the jail or prison has a minimum design capacity of 500 beds.
         c.   The project shall not adversely affect adjacent  land uses or
surrounding neighborhoods. Adverse effects can be substantially mitigated
through the application of additional conditions.
   C.   Cultural Use
   Cultural Uses are subject to the following use specific standards and cannot
be modified with a variance. The applicant may request a modification or
exception to the use specific standard from the Mayor and Council. The Mayor
and Council can modify the standards for a specific site where there is
substantial conformance with the intent of the use specific standards:
      1.   The use shall be setback at least 100 feet from any property line .
      2.   The use shall provide a visual buffer where the site is adjacent to
a residential use or zone. This can be accomplished by providing, for example,
a landscape buffer, setbacks of buildings or uses, or masonry screen walls.
      3.   Storage of fertilizer, manure, or other odorous material located in
an enclosed  building shall be setback a minimum of 20 feet, or if located
outdoors, setback a minimum of 40 feet from any property line that is adjacent
to a residential use or zone.
      4.   Public access to the site shall be from a Major Streets and Routes
(MS&R) street or from a local street that is not an internal residential
neighborhood street .
      5.   The impacts of noise on adjacent residential uses shall be mitigated
to comply with the noise standards in Section 16-31, Excessive Noise, of the
Tucson Code.
      6.   Hours of operation for the cultural use, as well as any accessory
use , should be detailed in the application and should be limited, in order to
assure compatibility with adjacent residential uses.
      7.   Outdoor lighting shall be limited in height and shielded from
adjacent residential uses.
      8.   Trip generation and traffic impacts on the surrounding streets shall
be analyzed, and mitigation measures shall be provided.
   D.   Educational Uses
   Educational Uses are subject to the following use specific standards.
Variances are not permitted; however, if the standards cannot be met, the
applicant can request approval through a special exception procedure if
permitted within the zone.
      1.   Licensing
         a.   If licensing, certification, or similar type of approval is
required by the State of Arizona for the use, proof of such licensure,
certification, or approval shall be provided. Such information shall include
the number of students for which the school is approved.
         b.   If the number of students approved by the state exceeds the
number approved on the site in accordance with zoning requirements, the number
of students is limited to the number that meet zoning requirements.
      2.   Site Area
         a.   Except as provided below for charter schools, the minimum
required site area for educational uses in residential zones is five acres ,
unless a greater site area is required in Art. 6: Dimensional Standards and
Measurements, or the ratio of 1,452 square feet of site area  for each student
proposed for the school, whichever is greater, up to a maximum of ten acres
for elementary schools (Grades K-6), 20 acres  for middle schools (Grades 7 and
8), and 40 acres  for high schools (Grades 9-12). For the purposes of this
requirement, the number of students applied in this calculation is the number
for which the school has been approved by the authorizing agency. If a maximum
number of students is not stipulated as part of the approval from the
authorizing agency, then the number used in the calculation are the amount
proposed by the applicant.
         b.   A single-family residence on less than one acre cannot be
occupied as or converted into a charter school.
         c.   In nonresidential zones , the minimum site area shall be in
accordance with the requirements in Art. 6: Dimensional Standards and
Measurements for the use.
      3.   Hours and Days of Operation
      Educational Uses within Neighborhood Commercial (NC) or more restrictive
zoning is limited in hours of operation to 6:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday only.
      4.   Outdoor Activity
      All outdoor activity shall be held more than 50 feet away from the
property line where adjacent to R-3 or more restrictive zoning . The use of
loudspeakers, amplifiers, or similar type equipment outdoors is not permitted
on the school site within 100 feet of the property line where adjacent to R-
3 or more restrictive zoning .
      5.   Vehicular and Pedestrian Access
      Vehicular and pedestrian access to the Educational Use site shall be from
a street designated as a major street by the Major Streets and Routes (MS&R)
Plan or from a local street other than an internal residential neighborhood
street for sites zoned C-1 or more restrictive zoning .
      6.   Building Setback
      The minimum building setback from all property lines  adjacent to R-3 or
more restrictive zoning is 20 feet, unless the setback requirements of the
applicable zone is greater. Building setbacks may be reduced from the 20 feet
to the setback required under the applicable zone if there are no openings on
the side of the building adjacent to R-3 or more restrictive zoning . If the
building wall is parallel to the property line , only that side of the building
facing the property line cannot have any openings. If the building is not
parallel to the property line , there cannot be any openings within 20 feet of
the property line . For the purposes of this section, “no openings” means all
windows and doors are closed by fixed walls or nonoperable windows. Where
openings are not allowed, an emergency exit door, which can only be opened from
inside the building and has an alarm, is allowed. (
Figure 4.9-A Building Setback for Educational Uses)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2974.jpg]
Figure 4.9-A Building Setback for Educational Uses
      7.   Passenger Drop-Off Areas
      Passenger drop-off parking areas shall be provided at a ratio of one
motor vehicle parking space (parallel) for every 20 students for which the
school is authorized, up to a total of eight spaces. These spaces are in
addition to the required off-street parking spaces.
   E.   Postsecondary Institutions
   Teaching of only those operations or occupations permitted in the zoning
classification of the property as permitted uses is permitted.
   F.   Religious Use
   A minimum perimeter yard of 80 feet is required.
 4.9.4. COMMERCIAL SERVICES USE GROUP
   A.   Administrative and Professional Office
   The maximum permitted floor area is 2,000 square feet.
   B.   Adult Day Care
      1.   The use is for a maximum of ten persons , or if operated in
conjunction with an Adult Care Service, the number of clients together with the
number of residents exceed the total permitted for the Adult Care Service.
      2.   The use shall comply with one of the following.
         a.   For a maximum of 15 persons ;
         b.   For an unlimited number of persons with a minimum lot size of
20,000 square feet; or
         c.   If operated in conjunction with an Adult Care Service, the total
number of clients and residents shall not exceed the total permitted for the
Adult Care Service.
   C.   Alcoholic Beverage Service and Entertainment
      1.   The maximum permitted floor area is 2,000 square feet.
      2.   The following standards are required of large bars or dance halls:
         a.   Minimum Setbacks
         Setbacks for the following use areas are measured from the use area to
a zone boundary line of R-3 or more restrictive zoning :
            (1)   Outdoor Use Area: 500 feet.
            (2)   Parking Area : 200 feet.
            (3)   Loudspeakers: 500 feet.
            (4)   The Zoning Examiner may authorize a reduction to the required
setbacks if special physical circumstances exist that will mitigate any
negative impacts.
         b.   Security Management Plan
         The applicant must submit a security management plan describing the
method and operation of security within and outside the building , including
the parking area , to the Zoning Administrator and the Police Chief. Any
changes or amendments to the plan must be filed with, and approved by, the
Zoning Administrator and the Police Chief.
         c.   Access
         Access shall be either from a street shown on the Major Streets and
Routes (MS&R) Map with no vehicular access to the site from a local street or
from a local street within a nonresidential development .
      3.   Large bars and dance halls are prohibited.
   D.   Animal Service
      1.   Overnight confinement for clinic treatment is permitted for a
maximum of five animals .
      2.   Boarding of animals is prohibited.
      3.   The activity shall be within a completely enclosed  building .
      4.   An outpatient clinic is permitted for small animals only.
      5.   The minimum perimeter yard for buildings , shelters, animal runs,
and fenced areas from a property line  adjacent to a residential zone is 100
feet.
      6.   Buildings , shelters, animal runs, and fenced areas shall be setback
at least 100 feet from any property line .
      7.   The use shall be setback at least 200 feet from any residential
zone.
      8.   Accessory use defined as either use of 25% of gross floor area
dedicated to long-term boarding or 25% of the normal animal service use
capacity. Long-term boarding is defined as a stay of five or more consecutive
calendar days.
      9.   The minimum perimeter yard for buildings , shelters, animal runs,
and fenced areas from a property line  adjacent to a residential zone is 30
feet.
      10.   Building shall be constructed so that direct unaccompanied access
by animals to outside areas is not allowed.
      11.   A solid masonry wall or fence six feet in height shall be
constructed along the perimeter of all outdoor animal runs.
      12.   Solid waste shall be removed from outdoor exercise areas every five
hours at a minimum during time periods when these areas are in use.
      13.   Animals must be accompanied by a facility employee or pet owner at
all times when outside the building . All walks and exercise periods must take
place on facility grounds.
      14.   Outdoor operations are limited to 6:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
      15.   The average noise level, measured at the property line , shall not
exceed 55 dB (one LDN) when measured on an "A weighted" sound level meter and
according to the procedures of the Environmental Protection Agency.
   E.   Artisan Residence
      1.   Purpose
      To provide an artisan residence use in the NC, C-1, C-2, and C-
3 commercial zones designed to be used as both a dwelling and work space by an
artist, artisan , or craftsperson, including persons engaged in the
application, teaching, or performance of fine arts such as, but not limited to
drawing, vocal or instrumental music, painting, sculpture, and writing; and the
accessory sale of art objects produced on the premises. Buildings or spaces
within buildings shall be used jointly for commercial and residential purposes.
Nothing in this subsection limits principal uses as otherwise permitted by the
applicable zoning.
      2.   Combined Uses
      A building or a tenant space in a commercial zone may be used as an
artisan workshop with a residential dwelling. The workshop and workshop
activities shall be located indoors unless outdoor activity is permitted by the
applicable zoning.
      3.   On-site  Sales
      The on-site sale of the artist’s products, including occasional shows of
the artist’s works, is a permitted accessory use .
      4.   Separation and Access
      Access to the residential use shall be only through the same access that
is provided for the artisan use.
      5.   Operational Requirements
      The operation of the artisan residence shall not create noise,
vibrations, smoke, fumes, dust, odors, vapors, other noxious emissions, or any
other similar nuisances that are discernible beyond the boundaries of the
building enclosing the artisan residence.
      6.   Parking
      Each artisan residence unit shall provide two on-site  motor vehicle
parking spaces for each residential component and one on-site parking space for
each 500 square feet of gross floor area (GFA) of the work space area. The GFA
of the residential component shall not be included in the parking calculation.
   F.   Automotive - Service and Repair
      1.   Auto washing is prohibited.
      2.   The service building is limited in design to accommodate no more
than two vehicles at any time. The maximum permitted vehicle space size is ten
by 25 feet.
      3.   The use must occur within an enclosed  building with one access per
bay , not on the side toward any residential zone.
      4.   The building walls shall have no openings, other than non-opening
windows, within 30 feet of the adjacent residential zone boundary line.
      5.   Auto washing, limited to a self-service, coin-operated car wash, is
permitted on the premises. No more than six bays using hand-operated, wand-type
equipment or more than one bay using automatic equipment are permitted, and
vacuum equipment shall be located at least 100 feet from any residential zone.
Mechanical equipment that powers the conveyor must be entirely enclosed.
      6.   The maximum floor area shall be 2,000 square feet.
      7.   Limited to one automatic in-bay car wash that shall not include
conveyors or motorized air-drying. It shall be enclosed within a building
except at points of ingress and egress , have a maximum floor area of 600
square feet, and not exceed 12 feet in height.
   G.   Billboards
      1.   Pedestrian Access
      Pedestrian access shall not be located under, or within five feet of, a
vertical line intersecting the ground and any structural element extending from
a billboard, including, but not limited to, overhangs, cantilevered beams, and
elevated walkways. Refer to Section
7-01, Pedestrian Access, of the Technical Standards Manual for requirements.
      2.   Parking
      Parking area access lanes shall not be located under, or within five feet
of, a vertical line intersecting the ground and any structural element
extending from a billboard, including, but not limited to, overhangs,
cantilevered beams, and elevated walkways.
      3.   Loading
      Refer to Section
7.5, Off-Street Loading, for loading (servicing) space requirements and Section
7.5.4, Design Criteria, for location requirements for such loading spaces.
      4.   Landscaping and Screening
      Refer to
Table 7.6.4-1, Landscape Border and Screening Standards, for landscaping and
screening requirements for billboards.
      5.   Height
      The maximum permitted height shall be in accordance with Section 7A, Sign
Standards.
   H.   Child Care in Residential and Office Zones
      1.   Dispersal
      A 600-foot separation between child care centers in residential zones is
required. Child care centers that provide only before- and after-school
programs at elementary and secondary school sites are not considered for the
purposes of this separation. The separation distance is measured from property
lines , except in the case of a child care center on a mixed use  development
 site where the separation is measured from that portion of the site devoted to
the child care use.
      2.   Licensing
      If licensing is required by the State of Arizona for the use, proof of
such licensure shall be provided prior to issuance of a certificate of
occupancy.
      3.   Hours and Days of Operation
      Child care centers adjacent to R-3 or more restrictive zoning are limited
in hours of operation to 6:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. and to operation Monday through
Friday only, except as provided in Section
4.9.4.H.9, Extended Hours for any Number of Children.
      4.   Building Setbacks
      The minimum building setback from all property lines  adjacent to R-3 or
more restrictive zoning is 20 feet, unless the setback requirements of the
applicable zone is greater. Building setbacks may be reduced from the 20 feet
to the setback required under the applicable zone if there are no openings on
the side of the building  adjacent to R-3 or more restrictive zoning . If the
building wall is parallel to the property line , only that side of the building
facing the property line cannot have any openings. If the building is not
parallel to the property line , there cannot be any openings within 20 feet of
the property line . For the purposes of this section, “no openings” means all
windows and doors are closed by fixed walls or nonoperable windows. Where
openings are not allowed, an emergency exit door, which can only be opened from
inside the building and has an alarm, is allowed. (
Figure 4.9-B, Building Setback for Child Care in Residential and Office Zones )
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2976.jpg]
Figure 4.9-B Building Setback for Child Care in Residential and Office Zones
      5.   Recreation Areas
      Minimum distance of outdoor recreation areas, including, but not limited
to, swimming and wading pools, ball fields, and playground equipment, to any
adjacent property in R-3 or more restrictive zoning shall be 25 feet. Where
abutting a street or alley , the setback shall be measured to the centerline of
a right-of-way . A wall shall be required between a recreation area provided on
site and adjacent to R-3 or more restrictive zoning .
      6.   Number of Children
      The maximum number of children cared for shall be as follows.
         a.   30 children;
         b.   100 children; and,
         c.   Unlimited number of children.
      7.   Site Area
      The minimum required site size are as follows. In no case will a site
larger than ten acres be required.
         a.   Six and six-tenths acres in RH and SR;
         b.    72,000 square feet in SH and RX-1;
         c.   32,000 square feet in RX-2;
         d.   14,000 square feet in R-1, R-2, and certain specified uses in O-
2;
         e.   10,000 square feet in R-3 and certain specified uses in O-3;
         f.   The minimum required site size shall be equal to the minimum site
size required for the zone in Section
4.9.4.H.7.a, .b, .c, or .d for the zoning district , divided by 30 and
multiplied by the maximum enrollment for which the center is licensed; and,
         g.   The minimum required site size shall be equal to 200 square feet
per child, multiplied by the maximum enrollment for which the center is
licensed, plus 4,000 square feet.
      8.   Street  Frontage
      The center shall front on a Major Streets and Routes (MS&R) street with
no vehicular access to the site from a local street or on a local street within
a nonresidential development . The street  frontage requirements shall be apply
to a child care center located on an elementary school site if the child care
center is in conformance with the dispersal, licensing, recreational area and
building setbacks , hours and days of operation limitations, and site coverage
standards.
      9.   Extended Hours for Any Number of Children
      In addition to the requirements of Section
4.9.4.H.1, .2, .3, and 8, a child care use that operates before 6:00 a.m. or
after 7:00 p.m. or on Saturday or Sunday where the site is adjacent to R-3 or
more restrictive zoning shall comply with the following.
         a.   Site Area
         The minimum site size for a child care center with extended hours of
operation or weekend operation shall be two and one half acres , except in RH
and SR where the minimum site shall be ten acres .
         b.   Building Setback
         The minimum building setback shall be 75 feet from a property line
 adjacent to R-3 or more restrictive zoning .
         c.   Recreational Areas
         Outdoor recreational areas, including, but not limited to, swimming
and wading pools, ball fields, and playground equipment, shall be screened and
setback from any property line  adjacent to R-3 or more restrictive zoning as
follows:
            (1)   A wall, as defined in screening materials, shall be required
between a recreational area and the adjacent  property line .
            (2)   The minimum setback from the adjacent property in R-3 or more
restrictive zoning shall be 100 feet. Where abutting a street , alley ,
drainage-way, or other right-of-way , the setback shall be measured to the
centerline of a right-of-way .
            (3)   A reduction to the required recreational area setback may be
requested in accordance with Section
3.10.1 and
3.10.3, Board of Adjustment Variance Procedure, if the reduction meets the
requirements set forth for special exception land uses .
         d.   Vehicular Use Areas
         Vehicular use areas shall be designed so that no more than 50% of the
parking spaces provided are within 50 feet of an interior property line
 adjacent to R-3 or more restrictive zoning .
   I.   Communications
      1.   Limited to a radio or television station, provided the buildings do
not occupy more than 30% of the site and are set back at least 50 feet from any
adjoining C-1 or more restrictive zoned property.
      2.   Provider ’s Communication Plan. Each wireless communication provider
shall provide a plan of its facilities to the City prior to any application for
the installation of a tower or antennas . The plan shall cover the entire City
and within three miles of the City limits. The plan shall include the
following.
         a.   All of the provider ’s existing towers and antennas , by size and
type, and their coverage areas.
         b.   All presently anticipated future service areas and the types of
antennas and heights desired for each of the service areas .
         c.   The various types of antennas and towers used by the provider to
furnish service and when they are used. This includes drawings providing the
sizes and shapes of the antennas and equipment and written materials describing
their application.
         d.   The provider ’s policy direction for the mitigation and/or
reduction of existing and proposed towers and antennas to avoid the negative
proliferation of such facilities.
         e.   The provider ’s policy direction on the mitigation and/or the
reduction of the negative visual impact created by existing or proposed towers
and antennas , including any proposals to conceal or disguise such facilities
designed to be architecturally and/or environmentally compatible with their
surroundings.
         f.   The provider ’s policy direction on collocation of antennas on
their own facilities or on ones from other providers or on other structures
that provide the verticality required for the antennas . The policy shall also
provide that the provider shall not enforce any requirement by an owner of
property that would prohibit collocation .
         g.   Designation of an agent of the provider who is authorized to
receive communications and notices pursuant to this section.
      3.   General. The following shall be applicable to all wireless
communication requests.
         a.   Noninterference with Public Safety. No wireless communication
transmitter, receptor, or other facility shall interfere with police, fire, and
emergency public safety communications. The Director of Operations for the City
is authorized to determine whether any transmitter, receptor, or other facility
has interfered with public safety communications or is reasonably believed to
be an imminent threat to public safety communications. Upon making that
determination, the Director of Operations shall notify the Zoning Administrator
and the provider responsible for that facility. The Zoning Administrator may
obtain a temporary restraining order from the City Court with or without notice
to enforce this section, provided a hearing is scheduled within five days of
the Court’s order.
         b.   All applications for towers / antennas will be reviewed by the
Communications Division of the City of Tucson Operations Department and any
other appropriate public safety department to ensure that the proposed
installation of the towers / antennas will not interfere with any public safety
communications or operations of the City . All applications shall include a
certification by a registered or electrical engineer that each proposed antenna
or tower will be in compliance with all standards established by the Federal
Environmental Protection Agency and Federal Communications Commission (FCC)
regarding potential health and safety hazards. Submittal of information and
review of the application by the Department of Operations shall be in
accordance with all applicable standards.
         c.   Any antenna or tower for which the use is discontinued for six
months or more shall be removed, and the property shall be restored to its
condition prior to the location of the antenna or tower , all at the expense of
the provider . The City may require financial assurances to ensure compliance
with this provision.
         d.   No new towers shall be permitted within 400 feet of a designated
Scenic Route or Gateway Route ; within a designated Historic Preservation Zone
(HPZ) or Environmental Resource Zone (ERZ); or on a protected peak or ridge as
identified in a Hillside Development Zone (HDZ) except as follows:
            (1)   Communication towers and antennas shall be permitted on a
protected peak or ridge that was used for such facilities prior to March 3,
1997, provided any new antennas and towers do not increase the area already
disturbed and the placement of any new towers in such areas is approved as a
special exception in accordance with Section
3.5.3, Zoning Examiner Legislative Procedure.
            (2)   New antennas may be permitted under Section
4.9.4.I.4 and.5 if they also comply with the purposes and review procedures of
the overlay zone.
            (3)   New communication towers may be permitted on Gateway Routes
in exceptional circumstances, provided there is no alternative and the
placement is approved in accordance with Section
3.5.3, Zoning Examiner Legislative Procedure.
         e.   The dimensional provisions of Article 6 as applicable to towers
and antennas shall be superseded by the provisions of Section
4.9.4.I.5 and by the height and setback provisions of Section
4.9.4.I.5, .6, and .7.
         f.   All proposed wireless communication towers and antennas shall be
in compliance with all Federal Communications Commission (FCC) regulations,
including those protecting the public health and those protecting historic
districts.
         g.   Submittal Requirements. The following information is to be
submitted with each application for the installation of a tower or antenna .
            (1)   An updated provider ’s Communication Plan, including any
proposed changes in the service areas , antennas , towers , or policy
direction;
            (2)   The proposed antennas /tower location, the type of antennas /
tower , and the proposed service area ;
            (3)   A statement of compliance with FCC requirements and
specifically the areas listed in Section
3.5.4.20.C.6.;
            (4)   If the proposed installation involves a new tower , then the
following information is required.
               (a)   The searched area for the proposed location;
               (b)   All existing structures , buildings , towers , etc., of
greater than 20 feet in height located within the searched area; and,
               (c)   A report on why collocation within the search area is not
a viable alternative.
            (5)   Any technological or engineering requirements which effect or
limit the location, height, or construction of the proposed tower / antennas
should be included in reports.
      4.   The following are permitted provided they meet the required Use
Specific Standards. The PDSD Director may forward the request to the Design
Review Board (DRB) for design review and recommendation.
         a.   Wireless communication antennas , provided:
            (1)   The antennas are collocated on an existing wireless
communication tower ;
            (2)   The antennas and tower are architecturally and/or
environmentally compatible with the surrounding structure(s) and general area;
            (3)   The existing tower is set back at least the height of the
tower structure from the boundary of any other property zoned residential or
office;
            (4)   The existing tower may be replaced and/or extended up to six
feet in height to allow for the placement and architectural treatment of the
new antennas ; and,
            (5)   The maximum extension of the new antennas and associated
attachments shall not exceed 36 inches as measured perpendicular to the tower
at the point of attachment.
      5.   The following requires approval in accordance with Section
3.3.3, PDSD Director Approval Procedure. The PDSD Director  may forward the
request to the Design Review Board (DRB) for design review and recommendation.
         a.   Wireless communication antennas , provided:
            (1)   The antennas are mounted on the wall or roof of a building ,
or concealed within an architectural or structural element of the building ,
not exceeding the permitted height of the building ;
            (2)   The antennas and tower , or architectural or structural
element, are architecturally and/or environmentally compatible with the
building and general area; and,
            (3)   Wall or roof mounted antennas are limited to six feet above
the building , or to 15 feet if the antennas are mounted on top of the roof,
the building is 40 feet high or taller, and no more than six feet of the
antennas can be seen from any point on the street which is a distance from the
building equal to the height of the building .
         b.   Wireless communication antennas , provided:
            (1)   The antennas are mounted on an existing structure within
public right-of-way or public property;
            (2)   The antennas are architecturally and/or environmentally
compatible with the structure and general area;
            (3)   The existing structure may be extended up to ten feet in
height to allow for the placement and architectural treatment of the new
antennas ; and,
            (4)   The new antennas do not substantially increase the visual
mass of the existing facility.
      6.   The following requires approval in accordance with Section
3.3.4, 100' Notice Procedure. The PDSD Director  shall forward the request to
the Design Review Board (DRB) for design review and recommendation.
         a.   Wireless communication antennas , provided:
            (1)   The antennas are mounted on or within a new tower or
structure in a manner that conceals or disguises the antennas or new tower .
For purposes of this subsection, painting may be a method of concealing or
disguising a tower ;
            (2)   The tower , antennas , and structure are architecturally and/
or environmentally compatible with the surrounding structure(s) and general
area;
            (3)   A new tower is set back at least two times the height of the
tower  structure from the boundary of any other property zoned residential or
office; and,
            (4)   The tower and antennas are 50 feet or less in height.
         b.   Wireless communication antennas , provided:
            (1)   The antennas are mounted on a new tower or an existing
structure in a manner that is designed or painted so as to minimize their
visual impact;
            (2)   The tower and antenna are architecturally and/or
environmentally compatible with the existing structures and general area;
            (3)   The tower is set back a minimum of 500 feet from
nonindustrially zoned property except where the nonindustrially zoned property
is used as an interstate highway or railroad; and,
            (4)   The tower and antennas are 80 feet or less in height.
      7.   The following requires approval as a special exception in accordance
with Section
3.4.3, Zoning Examiner Special Exception Procedure. The Zoning Examiner may
forward the request to the Design Review Board (DRB) for design review and
recommendation.
         a.   Wireless communication antennas , provided:
            (1)   The antennas are mounted on a new tower and the tower and
antennas are concealed or disguised, or the antennas are collocated on an
existing structure;
            (2)   The tower and antennas are architecturally and/or
environmentally compatible with the surrounding structure(s) and general area;
            (3)   A new tower is set back at least two times the height of the
structure from the boundary of any property zoned residential or office; and,
            (4)   The tower and antennas are 50 feet or less in height.
         b.   Wireless communication antennas , provided:
            (1)   The antennas are mounted on a new tower and the tower and
antennas are concealed or disguised, or the antennas are collocated on an
existing structure;
            (2)   The tower and antennas are architecturally and/or
environmentally compatible with the surrounding structure(s) and general area;
            (3)   A new tower is set back at least two times the height of the
structure from the boundary of any property zoned residential or office; and,
            (4)   The tower and antennas are 80 feet or less in height.
      8.   The following requires approval as a special exception in accordance
with Section
3.4.4, Mayor and Council Special Exception Procedure. The Mayor and Council may
forward the request to the Design Review Board (DRB) for design review and
recommendation.
         a.   Wireless communication antennas , provided:
            (1)   The tower or antennas are not permitted by other provisions
of this section;
            (2)   New towers require a minimum separation of one mile from any
existing tower , regardless of ownership, unless documentation establishes that
no practical alternative exists;
            (3)   All appropriate measures shall be taken to conceal or
disguise the tower and antenna from external view;
            (4)   All appropriate measures shall be taken to reduce the
negative proliferation of visible towers and antennas by the collocation of new
antennas on existing towers or with the facilities of other providers that are
located or planned for development within the proposed service area ; and,
            (5)   Notice shall be provided to all agents designated, in
accordance with Section
4.9.4.I.2.g, at least 15 days prior to the date of the public hearing before
the Zoning Examiner.
   J.   Construction Service
      1.   The use shall be setback at least 100 feet from any property line .
      2.   The yard shall be completely enclosed by screening a minimum of six
feet in height.
   K.   Entertainment
      1.   A circus, carnival, or tent show shall be permitted for no longer
than 15 days .
      2.   Circuses, carnivals, and tent shows are reviewed for compliance in
accordance with Section
3.3.3, PDSD Director Approval Procedure.
      3.   A circus, carnival, or tent show shall be setback 100 feet from the
activity to the lot line of any residential use or zone.
      4.   Motor vehicle parking areas and bicycle facilities for a circus,
carnival, or tent show shall be dust-proofed, and access to the vehicular use
areas shall be identified and controlled to minimize vehicular and pedestrian
conflicts.
      5.   The use shall be setback at least 200 feet from any property line .
      6.   Concerts, dances, and other similar high-noise activities shall be
conducted entirely within an enclosed  building or setback a minimum of 600
feet from adjacent residentially zoned property. When the activity occurs
outdoors, the high-noise activity shall be directed away from residential
areas. Modification of this criterion may be permitted by the Mayor and Council
through the special exception process provided:
         a.   All speakers and similar sound projecting devices are oriented
away from adjacent residentially zoned properties;
         b.   The applicant will develop a noise mitigation plan for the use
based on the specific activities proposed and the proximity of such activities
to the residential property line ;
         c.   Noise levels are continuously monitored during the performance,
and noise emission standards are enforced by a cultural use employee (or
designee); and,
         d.   The performance ends no later than 10:00 p.m.
   L.   Financial Service
      1.   Limited to a maximum of three drive-through service lanes, with one
restricted to drive-through automated teller machine (ATM) service only.
      2.   The use shall be setback at least 100 feet from any property line .
      3.   No non-chartered financial institution facilities, such as payday
loan facilities, except where permitted as a special exception under Section
4.9.4.L.4.
      4.   Non-chartered financial institutions are reviewed and considered for
approval in accordance with Section
3.4.3, Zoning Examiner Special Exception Procedure, and must comply with the
following.
         a.   A non-chartered financial institution  site shall be separated
from other non-chartered financial institution  sites by a distance of 1,320
feet.
         b.   A non-chartered financial institution  site shall be located at
least 500 feet, measured in a straight line, from the property line to a zone
boundary line of R-3 or more restrictive zoning .
   M.   Food Service
      1.   Activities may be conducted outdoors. Loudspeakers or music, live or
recorded, shall not be permitted within 600 feet of a residentially zoned
property.
      2.   Dancing shall not be permitted. Drive-in or drive-through
restaurants shall not be permitted.
      3.   Soup kitchens are not permitted.
      4.   Soup kitchens shall comply with the following standards.
         a.   The use shall be conducted within a completely enclosed  building
.
         b.   Seating shall be provided at 100% of the meal service capacity.
         c.   A waiting area shall be provided within the building for a
minimum of one-half of the total number of persons to be served.
         d.   Public rest rooms shall be provided.
         e.   No other soup kitchen use shall be located within one mile.
      5.   To differentiate between a restaurant that serves alcoholic
beverages and a bar that serves food, a restaurant meets the following
standards.
         a.   The full kitchen remains open and meals are available to patrons
during all hours of operation, except as follows. Restaurants open later than
10:00 p.m. must keep the full kitchen open until at least 10:00 p.m. to
maintain their classification as a Restaurant.
         b.   Management cannot ask for age verification (carding) for
admittance to the establishment.
         c.   Management cannot restrict patronage by age or sex (i.e., Ladies
Night, Over 21, etc.) except for limited special services or events within
certain limited areas of the establishment.
         d.   A cover charge cannot be required for general admittance, except
for special services or events offered within certain areas of the
establishment.
         e.   Management shall maintain a minimum amount of table seating at
all times and not have tables removed to create a dance floor or set aside
major sections of the establishment for special events.
         f.   The gross revenue sale of food complies with A.R.S. § 4-205.02(G)
(2).
         6.   All Food Court sites must be reviewed, permitted, and developed
in accordance with the UDC and the adopted Building Code, including those for
signage and waste collection, and shall comply with the following standards:
            a.   A business license is required to be held for the entire
facility and on-site management is required to be present during all hours of
operation to ensure compliance with the required standards.
            b.   Retail sales vendors are permitted as an accessory use to the
Food Court but shall not exceed 50% of the designated vendor stalls.
            c.   Canopies, awnings, or shade structures designed to shield
operators or patrons must meet the UDC and adopted Building Code requirements
and must be permanently affixed to the ground.
            d.   Compliance with the adopted Outdoor Lighting Code and outdoor
lighting standards is required.
         7.   If all, or part, of the Food Court operates outdoors, those
outdoor portions shall also comply with the following standards, including
outdoor lighting requirements:
            a.   All vendors shall be located within a developed stall. The
number of vendors will be limited by the number of stalls.
            b.   Permanent power pedestals for each vendor stall are required.
A central grease interceptor to serve all vendors is also required.
            c.   Temporary or permanent accessible restrooms and a parking area
with delineated parking spaces with a dust-proof surface may be permitted as
exceptions to the standard requirements.
            d.   If located within an existing developed site, such as a
shopping center parking area , excess available parking may be allocated to the
requirements for the Food Court. Parking spaces utilized for vendor parking and
patron access may continue to be counted towards the parking provided on-site.
On-site circulation standards and fire routes must be maintained. Additional
landscaping (UDC Article
7.6) and stormwater retention and detention standards (TSM Sect 4-03.0.0) are
not required.
            e.   If located within an undeveloped site and permanent paving is
not provided, landscaping (UDC Article
7.6) and stormwater retention and detention standards (TSM Sect
4-03.0.0 ) do not apply.
            f.   The outdoor hours of operation are limited to 7 a.m. to 10
p.m.
            g.   The use of outdoor internal combustion generators is
prohibited.
   N.   Funeral Service
      1.   A crematorium shall be setback a minimum of 200 feet from any
property line .
      2.   A crematorium shall be setback a minimum of 500 feet from any
boundary of the site that adjoins property in a residential zone.
   O.   Medical Service
      1.   The use shall provide a minimum of one off-street loading space or
the number of spaces required in accordance with Section
7.4, Off-Street Loading, whichever is greater.
      2.   Blood donor centers are not permitted.
      3.   Blood donor centers shall comply with the following standards.
         a.   The site is not located in the same block as a residential zone
or any elementary or secondary school or Day Care use.
         b.   The site is located at least 300 feet, measured in a straight
line, from the property line to a residential zone boundary line or the
property line of an elementary or secondary school.
         c.   A waiting area equal to 10% of the gross floor area is provided.
         d.   No other blood donor center is located within 1,200 feet.
   P.   Medical Service in Residential and Office Zones Standards
      1.   The facility must front on a street on the Major Streets and Routes
(MS&R) Plan or on a residential street , provided:
         a.   The residential street intersects a street on the MS&R Plan ;
and,
         b.   The property is within 150 feet of a street on the MS&R Plan ,
measured along the residential street .
      2.   Minimum Setbacks .
         a.   A minimum perimeter yard of 20 feet from any interior lot line
 adjacent to a residential zone is required.
         b.   A minimum perimeter yard of 100 feet from any property line is
required.
      3.   Requests to vary the provisions of this section, including setbacks
for existing or new buildings , are processed in accordance with Section
3.10.1 and
3.10.3, Board of Adjustment Variance Procedure.
      4.   If licensing is required by the State of Arizona for the use, proof
of such licensure shall be provided.
   Q.   Major Medical Service and Outpatient Medical Service, Accessory Uses
      1.   Food Service; General Merchandise Sales; Personal Service or other
permitted accessory use to a Medical Service, Major use, except as noted in
4.9.4.Q.2
         a.    The use shall be located within a principal building .
         b.    Access to the use shall be from within the principal building or
from the interior of the development .
         c.    Outside display or storage of merchandise or supplies is
prohibited.
         d.    A sign(s) associated with the accessory use shall not be visible
from any public street .
         e.    Sale of items shall be restricted to those associated with
medical services.
      2.   Transportation Services, Air Carrier, Helipad, as an accessory use
to a Medical Service, Major use.
         a.    The primary use shall be a medical facility licensed by the
State of Arizona as a general or special hospital with a minimum of 50 beds.
         b.   The helipad shall be in compliance with all applicable
regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration, including Circular No. 150/
5390-2C "Helistop and Heliport Design," or subsequent revisions to this
advisory circular at the time of construction.
   R.   Office Zone  Compatibility Standards
      1.   Chain link fencing shall not be used to meet screening requirements.
      2.   Refuse areas shall be setback at least 20 feet from street  property
lines and interior property lines  abutting a residential use or zone, except
when alley pickup is approved by the Environmental Services Department.
      3.   Refuse areas shall be screened from the street with materials
similar to those of the principal building .
      4.   Noise-generating equipment shall be located in an area away from
adjacent residential uses or vacant residentially zoned property.
      5.   Vehicular access shall be from other than internal residential
neighborhood streets .
      6.   Consolidation of parking areas and access points shall be required
for sites with multiple buildings . Consolidation of parking areas and access
points is encouraged for adjoining  sites.
      7.   New construction shall be reviewed by the Design Review Board (DRB)
for architectural and site design compatibility with the surrounding
residential area. The DRB review shall include architectural style, building
elevations, materials on exterior facades, color schemes, new mechanical
equipment locations, lighting of outdoor areas, window locations and types,
screening, landscaping , vehicular use areas , and other contributing design
features. The DRB recommendation shall be made to the PDSD for determination of
compatibility . The DRB shall find that:
         a.   The building materials on the exterior facade are compatible with
those used within the neighborhood block ;
         b.   Color schemes of the new building are compatible with those of
the developments on the block face;
         c.   The exterior facade of new construction is of a residential type
architecturally if adjacent to a residential use or vacant residentially zoned
property;
         d.   The building scale of new construction complements, rather than
is dominant in scale to, adjacent  projects ; and,
         e.   Any new mechanical equipment located on the roof are screened and
that the screen is integrally designed as part of the architectural style of
the building . If this cannot be done, the equipment shall be located at ground
level and screened from the street .
   S.   “P” Parking Zone Standards
   Parking is restricted to at or below grade . Structures to cover-grade
parking is permitted.
   T.   Personal Service
      1.   Laundry facilities shall not exceed 3,000 square feet of floor area
.
      2.   An attendant shall be on the premises during all open hours.
      3.   No more than 24 dry cleaning units are permitted.
      4.   The maximum floor area is 2,000 square feet.
   U.   Research and Product Development
      1.   All land use operations, including storage, shall be housed within a
completely enclosed  building . Vehicular use areas do not have to be located
within enclosed  buildings .
      2.   The minimum lot size requirement is 10,000 square feet.
      3.   Every building shall be setback from property lines  adjacent to
residential uses or zones a distance equal to three times the height of the
building .
   V.   Sale of Spirituous Liquor in Conjunction with Food Service Use
      1.   The Food Service establishment shall provide regular meal service at
regularly available tables during all hours of operation or until 10:00 p.m. to
guests for compensation. The establishment shall have kitchen facilities for
keeping, cooking, and preparing foods for meals .
      2.   The Food Service establishment shall have 75 seats or more for the
serving of meals at regularly available tables for all hours of operation.
Seating at counters, in private banquet rooms, and outdoor seating shall not
count toward the minimum 75-seat requirement.
      3.   The Food Service establishment may serve alcoholic beverages with
meals ; however, an area separate from the Food Service use shall not be
provided with tables, counter areas, and/or booths for persons to sit at
primarily for service of alcoholic beverages operating as an Alcoholic Beverage
Service establishment, unless:
         a.   The Food Service establishment has 75 seats or more for the
serving of meals at tables (seating at counters, in banquet rooms, and outdoor
seating shall not count toward the 75-seat requirement) that are available at
all hours of operation;
         b.   The Alcoholic Beverage Service area does not exceed, in size, 25%
of the Food Service floor area , including any Food Service outdoor area; and,
         c.   The Alcoholic Beverage Service area does not have an outside
public entrance separate from the main entrance to the Food Service use.
      4.   The Food Service establishment may serve other alcoholic beverages
in addition to beer and wine.
      5.   A Food Service use with more than 75 seats for the serving of meals
at tables that are available at all hours of operation may have a dance floor,
provided such dance floor shall not be larger than 200 square feet. Seating at
counters, in banquet rooms, and outdoor seating shall not count toward the 75-
seat requirement.
      6.   Signs are not permitted in or on a window or on the exterior of any
building or structure within the project that is visible from a public street
or adjacent residentially zoned property identifying or advertising the
Alcoholic Beverage Service use or the sale of spirituous liquors.
      7.   Alcoholic beverages shall not be provided with drive-in or drive-
through services.
      8.   Alcoholic Beverage Service may be provided outdoors if the outdoor
area is a minimum of 100 feet from residentially zoned property excluding
public right-of-way , or is separated by a building from adjacent residentially
zoned property. If the use is within 600 feet of a residential zone, no
loudspeakers or music, live or recorded, are permitted.
      9.   A Food Service establishment that is located within 300 feet of a
residential zone, excluding public right-of-way , measured in a straight line
from the licensed premises to the zone boundary line of R-3 or more restrictive
zoning may serve alcoholic beverages upon conformance with the following
conditions:
         a.   The applicant is required to submit a mitigation plan to the PDSD
Director that will be reviewed in accordance with Section
3.3.5, 400' Notice Procedure. The mitigation  plan shall specifically address
noise from the use, including parking lot  noise, screening of lighting from
vehicle headlights and light standards on site , parking, and access to
adjacent  neighborhoods, but shall not address issues that are the purview of
the Arizona Department of Liquor Licenses and Control, such as the number of
liquor licenses in the area or the hours of liquor sales.
         b.   If the use is operated in a manner that violates the mitigation
plan or conditions for permitting the use or causes adverse land use impacts,
the use may be suspended or terminated in accordance with Section
10.4, Penalties and Remedies.
   W.   Technical Service
      1.   The maximum permitted gross floor area is 1,500 square feet.
      2.   The maximum permitted gross floor area is 3,500 square feet.
   X.   Trade Service and Repair
      1.   Major
   If located within 30 feet of a residential use or zone, the building walls
shall have no openings, other than non-opening windows, within 30 feet of the
adjacent residential use or zone boundary line.
      2.   Minor
   Use shall exclude the repair and replacement of upholstery and the repair of
burglar alarms and motor vehicle stereos.
   Y.   Transportation Service, Air Carrier
      1.   The minimum site area shall be as required by the Federal Aviation
Agency (FAA) for the airport facility. The site area shall not be less than
permitted by the underlying zoning.
      2.   The Mayor and Council may restrict the number of flights and hours
of operation due to the proximity and intensity of noise-sensitive land uses .
      3.   The runway length required for safe operation shall be as shown in
the flight manual of the largest aircraft to use the site and an additional 240
feet at each end of the runway.
      4.   The runway width shall be 240 feet centered on the runway.
   Z.   Travelers’ Accommodation, Campsite
      1.   The use shall be in conjunction with, and within, a mobile home
park.
      2.   The overall number of mobile home spaces and campsites shall not
exceed the overall density permitted for the mobile home park.
      3.   The campsite area shall not be located adjacent to a non-mobile home
residential zone.
      4.   Access to the area shall be through the mobile home park.
      5.   The area shall comply with the mobile home park development
standards.
      6.   No more than 25% of the total spaces in the mobile home park can be
used for the campsite use.
   AA.   Travelers’ Accommodation, Lodging - Accessory Uses
      1.   The minimum required distance to any public street is 100 feet.
      2.   Outside entrances shall not face any public street .
      3.   The use shall be operated for the convenience of the guests.
      4.   When the Alcoholic Beverage Service use is provided in an area set
aside from the Food Service area, such as a bar or cocktail lounge, that area
of the Alcoholic Beverage Service use shall not have an outside public entrance
separate from the entrance to the principal use .
      5.   The total area of retail and service establishments shall not exceed
5% of the total floor area .
      6.   Animal -Related Uses
         a.   No more than one animal for each 10,000 square feet of site area
.
         b.   No stable or corral shall be located within 100 feet of any
property line or within 300 feet of any existing buildings on an adjacent
property at the time of the improvement.
         c.   No stable or corral shall be located or maintained closer than 50
feet to any property line or closer than 100 feet to any school, park, public
street (excepting an alley ), or dwelling on adjoining properties.
      7.   Travelers’ Accommodation, Lodging, shall have at least 50 rooms for
transient lodging.
      8.   Alcoholic Beverage Service may be provided outdoors if the outdoor
area is a minimum of 100 feet from residentially zoned property or is separated
by a building from adjacent residentially zoned property. If the use is within
600 feet of a residential zone, no loudspeakers or music, live or recorded, are
prohibited.
      9.   Alcoholic beverages shall not be provided with drive-in or drive-
through services.
      10.   No alcoholic beverages , except beer and wine, shall be served.
      11.   Signs are not permitted in or on a window or on the exterior of any
building or structure visible from a public street or from adjacent
residentially zoned property identifying or advertising the Alcoholic Beverage
Service use or the sale of spirituous liquors.
      12.   Large Bars are prohibited.
      13.   Soup Kitchens are prohibited.
(Am. Ord. 11070, 5/14/2013; Am. Ord. 11410, 11/22/2016; Am. Ord. 11508, 12/5/
2017; Am. Ord. 11608, passed 12/18/2018; Am. Ord. 11609, passed 12/18/2018; Am.
Ord. 11732, 2/19/2020; Am. Ord. 11996, 3/21/2023; Am. Ord. 12060, 11/28/2023)
4.9.5. INDUSTRIAL USE GROUP
   A.   Craftwork Manufacturing
      1.   The area devoted to the use shall not exceed 25% of the gross floor
area or 1,000 square feet, whichever is less.
      2.   The products manufactured on site shall be sold at retail on the
premises.
      3.   The products manufactured on site shall be limited to leather-craft,
jewelry, and clothing.
   B.   Extraction
      1.   The use shall be setback at least 300 feet from any property line ,
except that the use may be closer than 300 feet to an abutting I-2 zoned parcel
with the written consent of the owner of the abutting property.
      2.   The generation of dust shall be minimized.
   C.   Manufacturing and Industrial (Includes General, Heavy Equipment,
Precision, and Primary Manufacturing Land Uses )
      1.   The manufacturing activity shall be located on the same lot or site
with the permitted use.
      2.   Access shall be from a street . Access from an alley shall also be
permitted, provided the alley is at least 20 feet wide; it is paved for its
entire block length; and zoning on both sides of the alley for its entire
length within the block is not residential or office.
      3.   Reserved.
      4.   Manufacturing uses shall be conducted wholly within completely
enclosed  buildings .
      5.   All work and activity in connection with, and accessory to, a
manufacturing use, such as loading and unloading areas, docks, and platforms,
shall be located entirely within a building or an area on the lot that shall be
enclosed on all sides by a solid wall or fence six feet in height . Such
loading and unloading areas, docks, and platforms shall be located as far from
any surrounding residential uses or zones as is reasonably possible.
      6.   The manufacturing and allied uses and activities shall be conducted
in conformance with the following use specific standards:
         a.   Noise
         The sound level of any individual operation shall not exceed the
levels permitted in Section 16-31, Excessive Noise, of the Tucson Code.
         b.   Smoke
         Smoke emission from any source shall not exceed a density greater than
that described as No. 1 on the Ringleman Chart. However, smoke may be emitted
that is equal to, but not darker than, No. 2 on the Ringleman Chart for not
more than four minutes in any 30-minute period. For the purpose of grading the
density of smoke, the Ringleman Chart, as published by the U.S. Bureau of
Mines, shall be the standard.
         c.   Glare or Heat
         Any activity producing intense glare or heat shall not be performed in
such a manner as to create a nuisance or hazard beyond the property lines .
         d.   Odors
         Emission of odorous gases or other odorous matter shall not be
permitted in such quantities as to be offensive to owners or occupants of
adjoining property or in such a manner as to create a nuisance or hazard beyond
the property lines .
         e.   Vibration
         No vibration shall be permitted that is discernible beyond the
property lines to the human sense of feeling for a duration of three minutes or
more in any one hour of the day between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. or
of a duration of 30 seconds or more in any one hour between the hours of 7:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
         f.   Fly Ash, Dust, Fumes, Vapors, Gases, and Other Forms of Air
Pollution
         No emission shall be permitted that can cause damage to health,
animals , vegetation, or other forms of property or that can cause any
excessive soiling of the air.
         g.   Liquids and Solid Waste
         No waste shall be discharged into the streets , drainage-ways, or on
property possibly creating a danger to the public health and safety, and no
waste shall be discharged in the public sewage system that might endanger the
normal operation of the public sewage system.
         h.   Illumination
         Illumination of buildings and open areas shall be located and directed
so as to eliminate glare toward streets and adjoining properties and shall
comply with the requirements of the Tucson Code, Chapter 6, (Outdoor Lighting
Code).
      7.   Soap manufacturing is limited to cold process only.
      8.   Outdoor storage, when permitted, shall not be located in a street
 perimeter yard . Outdoor storage areas shall be screened in accordance with
Section
7.6, Landscaping and Screening. No materials or products shall be stacked or
stored to exceed the height  of the screen  within 50 feet of an adjoining
residential zone or street . Outdoor display of finished products is permitted
within a street  perimeter yard  in an area limited to 10% of the site area  or
10,000 square feet, whichever is less. Such display area shall not encroach
into required landscape buffer areas. Outdoor storage in the P-I zone is
limited to 25% of the site area .
      9.   Accessory Manufacturing uses to Commercial Services, Retail Trade,
or Wholesaling Use Groups, are permitted:
         a.   In the C-2 zone, limited to 25% of the gross floor area except as
follows. Accessory manufacturing uses may occupy more than 25% of the gross
floor area if the use complies with Section
4.9.5, Industrial Use Group.
         b.   In the C-3 zone, limited to 33% of the gross floor area except as
follows. Accessory manufacturing uses may occupy more than 33% of the gross
floor area if the use complies with Section
4.9.5, Industrial Use Group.
         c.   In the OCR-1 and OCR-2 zones , limited to 50% of the gross floor
area . Exception: The accessory may exceed 50% of the gross floor area if it
complies with the applicable use-specific standards in Section
4.9.5, Industrial Use Group.
      10.   The accessory use is limited to:
         a.   Those products that are wholesaled, manufactured, or stored on
the premises; and,
         b.   No more than 25% of the total area, but not to exceed 2,500
square feet.
   D.   Motion Picture Industry
      1.   Buildings and structures shall be setback at least 100 feet from the
boundary of the site .
   E.   Perishable Goods Manufacturing
      1.   The manufacturing of fish or meat products, sauerkraut, sugar beets,
vinegar, and yeast and the rendering or refining of fats and oils shall not be
permitted.
      2.   Slaughterhouses, meat packing plants, fertilizer yards, and plants
for the reduction of animal matter is not permitted.
      3.   The building setback shall be at least 300 feet from any property
line .
      4.   The area devoted to the accessory land use is limited to a maximum
of 33% of the gross floor area .
      5.   The accessory land use is limited to baked goods and confectionery
products.
      6.   The accessory land use is limited to the manufacturing of beer,
“microbrewery.”
      7.   The area devoted to the accessory land use shall not exceed 25% of
the gross floor area or 1,000 square feet, whichever is less.
      8.   The products manufactured on site must be sold at retail on the
premises.
      9.   Accessory Manufacturing uses to Commercial Services, Retail Trade,
or Wholesaling Use Groups, are permitted in the:
         a.   In the C-2 Zone , limited to 25% of the gross floor area except
as follows. Accessory manufacturing uses may occupy more than 25% of the gross
floor area if the use complies with Section
4.9.5.
         b.   In the C-3 Zone , limited to 33% of the gross floor area except
as follows. Accessory manufacturing uses may occupy more than 33% of the gross
floor area if the use complies with Section
4.9.5.
   F.   Radioactive Materials Restrictions
      1.   Manufacturing activities involving the use, storage, or disposal of
radioactive material shall be prohibited, except as permitted below.
      2.   Radioactive material that does not become an integral part of the
manufactured product or is exempt from the licensing requirements of, or is
permitted under, a general license issued by the Arizona Atomic Energy
Commission or its legally established successor, may be used, stored, or
disposed of as part of a manufacturing activity.
      3.   Radioactive material may be used in medical diagnosis and therapy or
in medical, educational, or industrial research and development .
   G.   Salvaging and Recycling
      1.   Salvaging and Recycling is limited to recycling collection bins
only.
      2.   All Salvaging and Recycling activities and storage shall occur
within an enclosed  building .
      3.   Salvaging and Recycling is limited to empty household product
containers, such as, but not limited to, aluminum cans, glass and plastic
bottles, and newspaper.
      4.   Junkyards, salvaging of motorized vehicles, such as cars, trucks,
airplanes, and similar vehicles; salvaging of hazardous materials; and
landfills are not permitted.
      5.   Salvaging and Recycling is restricted to collection of recycling
materials.
      6.   In addition to the requirements of Section
7.6, Landscaping and Screening, there shall be a screen  wall at least six feet
in height  between this use and any residential zone .
      7.   The household goods donation center shall be located in a permanent
building staffed by an attendant who remains on the premises during the
center’s hours of operation.
      8.   Security procedures or physical barriers shall be provided to
prevent after-hours drop-off of donated items and to prohibit nighttime access
to these items.
      9.   The applicant shall submit a security management plan that describes
the operation of the center, to the Zoning Administrator for review and
approval. The plan shall include: the days and hours of operation for the
center; descriptions of the planned security procedures and/or physical
barriers planned to prohibit both vehicular access when the center is closed
and outside storage when the center is closed; the outdoor lighting schematic;
and the operational procedures planned to implement the security management
plan. Any changes or amendments to the security management plan shall be filed
with and approved by the Zoning Administrator. If the use is operated in a
manner that violates the security plan or conditions for permitting the use,
the use may be suspended in accordance with Section
10.4, Penalties and Remedies.
      10.   Signs shall be posted on the site providing the days and hours of
operation and stating that donations are not to be left after the center has
closed.
      11.   One drive-through service lane may be provided for customer drop-
off of donated items.
      12.   The household goods donation center shall be located on, and have
access from, either a street designated as an arterial street in the Major
Streets and Routes Plan (MS&R) or a local street in a commercial or industrial
park that has direct access to an arterial street .
4.9.6. RECREATION USE GROUP
   A.   Golf Course
      1.   Standards for Permitted and Special Exception Land Uses
         a.   At least nine holes are required.
         b.   There must be at least 75 feet between a tee and its hole.
         c.   A tee and cup must be at least 100 feet from any property line .
         d.   A driving range shall be placed so that flying balls are directed
toward the interior of the site .
         e.   Subject to lighting requirements, Section
4.9.13.C, Lighting.
         f.   Activities may occur outdoors.
      2.   Standards for Accessory Uses to Golf Courses
         a.   Alcoholic Beverage Service
            (1)   Permitted only as part of, and in conjunction with, a Food
Service use. All requirements for dispensing alcoholic beverages listed for
Food Service, Section
4.9.6.A.2.b, apply.
            (2)   The Alcoholic Beverage Service area may not have a separate
outside entrance. Access shall be through the Food Service use area.
            (3)   Large bars are not permitted.
         b.   Food Service
            (1)   The Food Service establishment shall have kitchen facilities
for keeping, cooking, and preparing foods for meals .
            (2)   Food Service establishments with at least 75 seats for dining
at regularly available tables may operate a cocktail lounge or bar to sell all
spirituous liquors for on-premises consumption.
            (3)   Soup kitchens are not permitted.
         c.   Personal Service and General Merchandise Sales
            (1)   Personal Service and General Merchandise Sales shall be
integrated into the main building associated with the principal use , such as a
clubhouse or registration office. Access shall be from within such main
building .
            (2)   No sign associated with the Personal Service or General
Merchandise Sales shall be visible from the exterior of the building .
            (3)   General Merchandise Sales shall be limited to the sale of
items related to the principal use only.
         d.   In addition to Section
4.9.6.A.2.a, .b, and .c, the following requirements apply.
            (1)   The minimum distance to any public street shall be 100 feet.
            (2)   Outside entrances shall not face any public street .
            (3)   The use is operated for the convenience of the users of the
Golf Course.
4.9.7. RESIDENTIAL USE GROUP
   A.   Artist Studio/Residence in I-1
      1.   The use is limited to buildings in existence on February 25, 1991,
within the designated Artist Studio/Residence Area as defined in Section
11.4.2, Definitions-A.
      2.   The use shall not displace existing industrial uses.
      3.   The appearance and structural integrity of the building shall be
preserved or enhanced.
      4.   Residential use of the property shall be incidental and accessory to
the artist studio use, with no greater than 50% of the floor area devoted to
the accessory residential use.
      5.   The accessory residential use shall be occupied by an artist who is
also the occupant of the principal artist studio use.
      6.   Adequate measures shall be provided to assure the health, safety,
and welfare of the occupants in relation to any industrial process, use, or
storage carried out in the artist studio/residence or on adjacent properties.
      7.   The use shall not impair or interfere with the continued industrial
use of adjacent properties or with the purposes of the industrial zone.
   B.   Family Dwelling
      1.   Both dwellings shall be under the same ownership and on the same
parcel .
      2.   Both dwellings shall comply with the dimensional standards in
accordance with Article 6.
      3.   One dwelling must be at least 25% smaller than the other dwelling.
      4.   The dwellings may be attached or detached.
      5.   A manufactured housing unit is not considered a dwelling for the
purposes of this section, unless it is located in a subdivision recorded after
January 1, 1982, and not located in a re-subdivision of any subdivision
recorded prior to January 1, 1982.
      6.   A manufactured housing unit is not considered a dwelling for the
purposes of this section, unless the following standards are met or a
subdivision  plat that has been clearly identified for manufactured housing has
been approved and permits for manufactured homes have been issued for 25% or
more of the lots prior to December 27, 2000:
         a.   It is placed on an excavated and backfilled foundation (ground
set). If the home is located in a floodplain, the bottom of the lowest floor
joist shall be a minimum of one foot above the 100-year/base flood elevation,
and the foundation of the home shall be placed on the fill ;
         b.   No more than eight inches of perimeter skirting wall shall be
visible from the street  frontage of the property. The perimeter skirting wall
shall match the exterior color of the home;
         c.   The exterior siding materials shall be either hardboard, vinyl,
or stucco;
         d.   Concrete or masonry steps shall be provided for the entry on the
street side of the dwelling;
         e.   All entry doors on the street side of the dwelling shall be
inward-swinging doors; and,
         f.   The roofing style and materials shall be either flat roof
(Pueblo), steel rib roof, or shingle or tile roof with a 3:12 roof pitch or
greater. All pitched roofs, except those that are disguised by a parapet, shall
have a minimum six inch eave on all sides of the dwelling.
      7.   For any new single-family dwelling in the R-1 zone with five
bedrooms , three parking spaces are required. For every bedroom over five, one
additional space is required for each bedroom . For all single-family dwellings
in the R-1 zone with five or more bedrooms , and for all lots containing two or
more single-family dwellings, with the second dwelling having more than one
bedroom , all parking spaces must be located on-site , either in a side or rear
perimeter yard . Parking spaces may not be located in a vehicular use area in
any front street  perimeter yard . A parking area is not required to be
developed to a commercial standard. A dustproof parking surface is required to
at least a minimum of two inches of compacted pea gravel. An existing covered
residential parking area may be used.
      8.   If there is one or more dwelling(s) on a lot , all dwellings on a
lot are considered to be one dwelling for the purpose of determining whether
there is a group dwelling. If there are five or more unrelated persons residing
on the lot , it is a group dwelling that is not permitted.
      9.   Subject to the requirements of this Section
4.9.7.B.9, any group dwelling use existing prior to February 15, 2012 shall be
treated as a lawful nonconforming use and structure in accordance with Article
9, Nonconforming Uses , Buildings , and Structures, except as otherwise
expressly provided in this Section and in Tucson Code Section 16-37. A
protected development right  plan approved by the Mayor and Council prior to
the enactment of this ordinance shall be treated as a nonconforming use  for a
maximum number of unrelated persons  equivalent to the number of bedrooms  on
the approved plan.
         a.   The right to treatment as a nonconforming use or structure under
this section is established by the following:
            (1)   Evidence that the property was registered as a rental
property as required by A.R.S. §33-1902 on or before February 15, 2012, or is
otherwise timely registered as required by that statute; and
            (2)   Evidence acceptable to the Zoning Administrator that
establishes the maximum number of unrelated persons to whom the dwelling was
leased pursuant to subsection (a) above. Such evidence may include executed
leases, tax records, an approved protected development right plan as described
in this section, or other documentation. An executed lease that was executed
during the calendar year 2009, 2010, or 2011 shall be sufficient under this
subsection to establish the number of persons to whom the dwelling was leased.
         b.   If a group dwelling is established for treatment as a lawful
nonconforming use as provided in subsection (1) above, the maximum number of
unrelated persons to whom the dwelling may be leased shall be that number
established by the evidence provided under subsection (1)(b) above.
         c.   Notwithstanding the provisions of Section
9.2.1.B, an established nonconforming use under this Section
4.9.7.B.9 shall not be deemed abandoned or lost based upon the leasing of the
dwelling after February 15, 2012 to less than five unrelated persons , to
related persons , or to a single family ; or upon the failure to lease the
dwelling, provided that it is continually registered as a rental property as
described under A.R.S. §33-1902.
         d.   The nonconforming use under this Section
4.9.7.B.9 may be suspended or lost as provided in Section
9.2.1.B if it is declared a public nuisance by court order pursuant to Tucson
Code Section
         e.   To the extent any of the provisions of Tucson Code Section 16-37
or this Section
4.9.7.B.9 conflict with Article 9: Nonconforming Uses , Buildings , and
Structures relating to the discontinuance or abandonment of a nonconforming use
, the provisions of this Section and Tucson Code Section 16-37 shall control.
      10.   Occupancy of a dwelling by five or more unrelated persons is a
group dwelling and is not permitted.
      11.   The following standards apply to family dwellings in the Rio Nuevo
District:
         a.   The maximum density is 17 units per acre ;
         b.   A minimum lot size of 2,500 square feet is required;
         c.   The maximum permitted lot coverage is 90%;
         d.   A minimum perimeter yard equal to one and one-half times the
height of the proposed exterior building wall is required from a property line
 adjacent to a residential zone; and,
         e.   A perimeter yard is not required from a property line  adjacent
to a nonresidential zone.
   C.   Family Dwelling or Mobile Home Dwelling as Accessory Use in Industrial
Zones
      1.   The dwelling is permitted as an accessory use to an Industrial,
Wholesaling, or Storage Use in the P-I, I-1, and I-2 zones .
      2.   The use is restricted to one single-family or mobile home dwelling
for a caretaker of the principal use .
      3.   The dwelling shall conform to the development standards for the
principal use .
   D.   Home Occupations are permitted as Accessory Land Uses to Mobile Home
Dwelling or Family Dwelling as follows:
      1.   Home occupations other than those specified below are required to
comply with Section
4.9.7.E, Home Occupation : General Standards; or,
      2.   The following uses within the specified zones are required to comply
as follows:
         a.   Home Occupation : Day Care is permitted in SR, SH, RX-1, RX-2, R-
1, R-2, R-3, MH-1, MH-2, O-1, O-2, O-3, NC, and C-1 subject to: 4.9.7.E.1, .2,
.3, .5, .6, .7, .9, .10, .11, & .13 and F.
         b.   Home Occupation : Group Dwelling is permitted in IR, RH, SR, SH,
RX-1, RX-2, R-1, R-2, R-3, MH-1, and MH-2 subject to: 4.9.7.G.
         c.   Home Occupation : Travelers’ Accommodation, Lodging is permitted
in SR, SH, RX-1, RX-2, R-1, MH-1, O-1, O-2, and NC subject to: 4.9.7.H.1 & .5 -
.11.
         d.   Home Occupation : Travelers’ Accommodation, Lodging is permitted
in R-2 and MH-2 subject to: 4.9.7.H.2 & .5 - .11.
         e.   Home Occupation : Travelers’ Accommodation, Lodging is permitted
in R-3 and O-3 subject to: 4.9.7.H.4 - .11.
         f.   Home Occupation : Where Animal Production, Crop Production,
General Farming, and/or Stockyard Operation is permitted as a principal use,
the same standards and procedure required to establish the applicable principal
use is required when establishing the home occupation.
         g.   Home Occupation : Urban Farm is permitted in O-1, O-2, O-3, NC,
C-1, C-2, C-3, MU, OCR-1, OCR-2 subject to: 4.9.2.E and 4.9.7.E.5.
   E.   Home Occupation : General Standards
      1.   Home occupations require review and consideration for approval in
accordance with Section
3.3.3, PDSD Director Approval Procedure.
      2.   The home occupation shall be clearly secondary to the residential
use of the dwelling.
      3.   The home occupation shall be conducted in such a manner that it is
compatible with the residential character of the neighborhood in which it is
located.
      4.   Except for multifamily development , no more than 25% of all
buildings on the lot may be devoted to the home occupation . For multifamily
development , no more than 25% of the dwelling unit may be devoted to the home
occupation . A detached accessory building of not more than 200 square feet in
area may be used for such home occupation . This provision applies to a Home
Occupation : Crop Production greenhouses. Outdoor gardens are exempt.
      5.   Persons other than those residing in the dwelling shall not be
employed in the home occupation , except that one nonresident of the premises
may be employed in the IR, RH, SR, SH, O-2, O-3, NC, C-1, C-2, C-3, OCR-1, and
OCR-2 zones .
      6.   Goods related to the home occupation shall not be visible from the
street . This provision applies to a Home Occupation : Crop Production
greenhouses. Outdoor gardens are exempt.
      7.   Goods shall not be sold on the premises.
      8.   Outdoor storage of materials or equipment related to the home
occupation activity is not permitted on the premises.
      9.   Except for permitted signage and gardens not in an enclosed
structure or building , the home occupation use shall not substantially alter
the exterior appearance or character of the residence in which it is conducted,
either by exterior construction, lighting, graphics, or other means.
      10.   No more than one sign shall be visible from the exterior of the
property used as a home occupation . The sign shall not exceed one square foot
in size. Signs shall also conform to Chapter 3 of the Tucson Code.
      11.   A home occupation shall not create any nuisance , hazard, or other
offensive condition, such as that resulting from noise, smoke, fumes, dust,
odors, or other noxious emissions. Electrical or mechanical equipment that
causes fluctuations in line voltage, creates any interference in either audio
or video reception, or causes any perceivable vibration on adjacent properties
is not permitted.
      12.   No more than ten clients per day, and only one client at a time,
shall be permitted on site .
      13.   Except as otherwise required, additional motor vehicle and bicycle
parking is not required for a home occupation . The home occupation may involve
the use of no more than one commercial vehicle for the transportation of goods
or materials to and from the premises. The commercial vehicle is limited to a
passenger car, van, or pickup truck. This vehicle cannot be more than 20 feet
in overall length and not more than seven feet in overall height and shall be
parked on private property in a carport or garage or shielded from view from
adjoining properties by landscaping , fencing, or screening material. Motor
vehicle and bicycle parking necessitated by the conduct of such home occupation
shall be provided on site .
      14.   Automotive - Service and Repair, and Medical Service uses are
prohibited as home occupations .
      15.   For Home Occupation : Crop Production and General Farming uses, the
on-site accessory sale of agricultural products grown on-site is permitted in
accordance with Section 6.6.5.F.
   F.   Home Occupation , Day Care: Permitted in Office, Residential, NC and C-
1 zones :
      1.   No more than one full-time equivalent person not residing on the
premises shall be employed in the day care use.
      2.   During the hours of activity of the day care use, there is no limit
on the amount of floor area devoted to this use.
      3.   Outdoor activities and equipment associated with the use is
permitted and shall be screened by a five-foot fence, wall, or hedge where
adjoining R-3 or more restrictive zoning .
      4.   Hours of operation shall be noted on the application, and those
hours of operation shall not create an adverse impact on adjoining residences.
      5.   Any vehicle used in conjunction with the day care use is limited to
a passenger car, van, or pickup truck.
      6.   The day care use shall be approved and licensed by the Arizona
Department of Health Services (ADHS), if required by ADHS, prior to final
approval.
   G.   Home Occupation , Group Dwellings
      1.   Room and board shall be provided to not more than two persons in the
Family Dwelling who are not members of the family or household in the IR, RH,
SR, SH, RX-1, RX-2, MH-1 Zones . Room and board shall be provided to not more
than four persons in the Family Dwelling who are not members of the family or
household in the R-2 or MH-2 zones .
      2.   Meals shall be served only to roomers or boarders residing in the
Family Dwelling. Separate cooking facilities in guest rooms are prohibited.
      3.   Parking is required for Group Dwellings in accordance with Section
7.4, Motor Vehicle and Bicycle Parking.
   H.   Home Occupation , Travelers’ Accommodation, Lodging
      1.   Accommodations are permitted for up to four guests for a maximum
stay of 14 days . No more than two sleeping rooms shall be used to accommodate
guests.
      2.   Accommodations are permitted for up to eight guests for a maximum of
14 days . No more than four sleeping rooms can be used to accommodate guests.
      3.   Accommodations are permitted for up to 12 guests for a maximum stay
of 14 days . No more than six sleeping rooms can be used to accommodate guests.
      4.   Accommodations are permitted for up to 20 guests for a maximum stay
of 14 days . No more than ten sleeping rooms can be used to accommodate guests.
      5.   Meals can be served only to guests staying in the facility. Separate
cooking facilities in guest rooms are prohibited.
      6.   The PDSD Director shall determine whether the building and site
 improvements are compatible with the surrounding residential area. The Design
Review Board (DRB) reviews all applications, except those involving properties
within the Historic Preservation Zone (HPZ), for compatibility and make
recommendations to the PDSD Director . The DRB reviews architectural style,
building elevations, materials on exterior facades, color schemes, new
mechanical equipment locations, lighting of outdoor areas, window locations and
types, screening, landscaping , vehicular use areas , and other contributing
design features. Applications in an HPZ are reviewed for compatibility in
accordance with Section
5.8.8, Design Review Required.
      7.   No more than one full-time equivalent person not residing on the
premises may be employed in the home occupation use.
      8.   Outdoor activities and equipment associated with the use are
permitted and shall be screened by a five foot fence, wall, or hedge when
abutting R-3 or more restrictive zoning .
      9.   Motor vehicle and bicycle parking shall be provided in accordance
with Sections
7.4.4 and
7.4.8 for the Travelers’ Accommodation, Lodging use and shall be in addition to
that required for the residential use. Variances shall not be granted from the
number of required parking spaces.
      10.   If Home Occupation , Group Dwelling and Home Occupation , and/or
Travelers’ Accommodation, Lodging, occur on the same site , the total number of
guests, roomers, and boarders shall not exceed the number of guests permitted
for that zone.
      11.   The minimum required lot size is 10,000 square feet.
   I.   Accessory Uses in Mobile Home Parks
      1.   Day Care, Child uses are subject to Sections
4.9.4.H.1, .2, .3, .4, and .5;
      2.   Travelers’ Accommodation, Campsite uses are subject to Section
4.9.4.Z;
      3.   The listed secondary uses, except for mobile home unit sales and
Travelers' Accommodation, Campsite, are permitted only if all of the following
apply:
         a.   The use is located in the social or recreation center of the
park;
         b.   The social or recreation center is located 50 feet or more from
any interior lot line of the mobile home park and 100 feet or more from any
street lot line bounding the mobile home park;
         c.   The accessory use does not occupy more than 25% of the floor area
of the social or recreation center;
         d.   No merchandise or supplies shall be stored or displayed outside
the building ;
         e.   Exterior signs or public advertising are prohibited; and,
         f.   Food and Beverage Sales is limited to a delicatessen, snack bar,
or food store only. Personal Services is limited to a coin-operated laundry or
pick-up station for dry cleaning only.
      4.   Vehicle rental and sales of model units in the mobile home park are
permitted as accessory uses in accordance with the following:
         a.   Section
4.9.7.I.2;
         b.   Each model home shall have the same setback and spacing
requirements as other units;
         c.   The number of spaces allotted for model homes shall be no more
than 5% of the total spaces in the mobile home park; and,
         d.   Exterior display or advertising is limited to one sign. The sign
may not exceed six square feet at each model, be over six feet in height nor be
illuminated.
      5.   Recreational vehicles may occupy no more than 25% of the existing
spaces designed for mobile homes provided:
         a.   The mobile home park is in an MH-2 zone, or the mobile home park
was built prior to July 1, 1995.
         b.   The rental lease is for no less than one-month.
   J.   Residential Care Services
      1.   A Rehabilitation Service or Shelter Care use shall not be less than
1,200 feet, in any direction, from another Rehabilitation Service or Shelter
Care use. The applicant shall provide documentation demonstrating compliance
with this standard prior to the establishment of the use.
      2.   Other Services:
         a.   Accessory treatment, including counseling or other types of
meetings, is not permitted for nonresidents of the facility.
         b.   Accessory treatment, including counseling or other types of
meetings, is permitted for nonresidents of the facility, if limited to 25% of
the gross floor area of the facility.
      3.   Maximum Number of Residents Permitted.
         a.   Care is permitted for a maximum of ten residents.
         b.   Care is permitted for a maximum of 15 residents.
         c.   Care is permitted for a maximum of 20 residents.
         d.   Care is permitted for an unlimited number of residents.
      4.   If licensing is required by the State of Arizona for the use, proof
of such licensure is required.
      5.   Prior to the establishment of a Rehabilitation Service or Shelter
Care in an industrial zone, applicants for the use shall provide to the PDSD a
report and site environs analysis for the facility indicating that adequate
measures are provided to assure the health, safety, and welfare of the
residents of the facility in respect to any industrial process, use, or storage
carried out on the site or on adjacent properties.
      6.   The site shall be located at least 500 feet, measured in a straight
line, from the property line to a zone boundary line of R-3 or more restrictive
zoning .
      7.   The maximum permitted lot coverage is 50%. Minimum setback from all
interior lot lines  adjoining residential zoning shall be 25 feet. The minimum
required lot size is three acres , except as follows:
         a.   In the RH zone, there is no minimum lot size ; or,
         b.   In the SR zone, the minimum required lot size is 144,000 square
feet.
      8.   The maximum permitted lot coverage is 60%. The minimum required
setback from all interior lot lines  adjoining residential zoning is 20 feet.
The minimum required lot size is one and one-half acres , with the following
exception. Exception: There is no minimum lot size requirement for Residential
Care Services uses in the R-3, C-1, C-2, C-3, OCR-1, and OCR-2 zones .
      9.   The minimum required lot size is 20,000 square feet.
      10.   The site shall be located at least 200 feet, measured in a straight
line, from the property line to a zone boundary line of R-3 or more restrictive
zoning .
(Am. Ord. 11127, 11/6/2013; Am. Ord. 11171, 5/20/2014; Am. Ord. 11201, 9/23/
2014; Am. Ord. 11328, 12/8/2015; Am. Ord. 11557, 6/5/2018; Am. Ord. 11860, 8/
10/21; Am. Ord. 11996, 3/21/2023)
 4.9.8. RESTRICTED ADULT ACTIVITIES USE GROUP
   A.   Restricted Adult Activities
      1.   The adult establishment shall not be less than 1,000 feet from any
church, school, public playground, park, or neighborhood recreation property
line .
      2.   The adult establishment shall not be less than 1,000 feet from any
residential use property line or residential zone boundary line.
      3.   The adult establishment shall not be less than 1,000 feet from the
premises of any other adult entertainment enterprise.
      4.   The adult establishment requires approval in accordance with Section
3.3.3, PDSD Director Approval Procedure.
      5.   The land use activity shall occur within an enclosed  building .
      6.   In the I-1 zone, all activity, including the display of any retail
items, shall occur within a completely enclosed  building and shall not be
visible from the exterior.
4.9.9. RETAIL TRADE USE GROUP
   A.   Food and Beverage Sales
      1.   One building is permitted.
      2.   The maximum permitted area of the stand is as follows:
         a.   3,000 square feet.
         b.   750 square feet.
         c.   200 square feet.
      3.   Only the sale of farm products grown or produced on the premises is
permitted.
      4.   The building must be at least 20 feet from any property line .
      5.   The minimum setback from any street intersection is 150 feet.
      6.   The parking area shall be setback a minimum of 45 feet from the
property line .
      7.   The minimum required parking area is 800 square feet.
      8.   The maximum width of the entry to the parking area is 30 feet.
      9.   If the stand is open more than six months per calendar year, the
vehicular use area must be surfaced in accordance with Section
7.4.6.I, Surfacing Requirements. If open a shorter time, these areas shall be
maintained to minimize dust.
      10.   The maximum permitted floor area is 4,000 square feet.
      11.   The following standards apply to retail establishments:
         a.   The maximum permitted floor area is 100,000 square feet of floor
area . The 100,000 square feet of floor area includes gross floor area ,
outdoor storage areas, and any outside area that provides associated services
to the public, such as, but not limited to, outdoor merchandise display, snack
bars, etc. The floor area does not include motor vehicle parking or loading
areas . For the purposes of determining the applicability of the 100,000 square
foot  floor area maximum, the aggregate square footage of all adjacent stores,
which share cashiers, management, a controlling ownership interest, and storage
areas, shall be considered one establishment, e.g., a plant nursery associated
with a general merchandise store, such as a home improvement store.
         b.   Establishments greater than 100,000 square feet of floor area
(Large Retail Establishments) are considered for approval in accordance with
the special exception land use procedure in accordance with the applicable
zone.
      12.   Farmers’ Market
         a.   The predominant sales area must be for agriculture-related
products.
         b.   Outdoor activity, including the outdoor display of products for
sale, is permitted.
         c.   Compliance with the Tucson Code, Section 16-31, Excessive Noise
(Neighborhood Preservation Ordinance) is required. Additionally, loudspeakers
and amplified music are prohibited outdoors when within 300 feet of a
residential use or zone . Any high noise activity, such as amplified
entertainment, shall occur within an enclosed building when within 300 feet of
a residential use or zone.
         d.   The retail area shall be dust proofed.
         e.   All litter, tents, stalls, food, merchandise, signs (on-site and
off-site), and other evidence of the Farmers’ Market shall be removed from the
premises at the end of the permitted operation time.
         f.   A Farmers’ Market shall not be operated more than two days each
week.
         g.   A Farmers’ Market shall not be operated more than six hours per
day between sunrise and sunset.
   B.   General Merchandise Sales
      1.   Outdoor display or storage of fertilizer, manure, or other odorous
material shall be located at least 30 feet from any interior lot line .
      2.   The maximum floor area is 2,000 square feet.
      3.   The site is limited to a maximum of 12 fuel dispensing locations.
      4.   The following standards shall apply to the retail establishment
(store):
         a.   The retail establishment (store) is limited to a maximum of
100,000 square feet of floor area . The 100,000 square feet of floor area
includes gross floor area , outdoor storage areas, and any outside area that
provides associated services to the public, such as, but not limited to,
outdoor merchandise display, snack bars, etc. Motor vehicle parking or loading
areas are not included in the floor area calculation.
         b.   For the purposes of determining the applicability of the 100,000
square foot  floor area maximum, the aggregate square footage of all adjacent
stores that share checkstands, management, a controlling ownership interest,
and storage areas shall be considered one establishment, e.g., a plant nursery
associated with a general merchandise store, such as a home improvement store.
         c.   Establishments greater than 100,000 square feet of floor area
(Large Retail Establishments) shall be considered through a special exception
land use process as provided in the applicable zone.
   C.   Heavy Equipment Sales
      1.   Any area used for the display or storage of heavy equipment shall be
surfaced with a hard, durable, dustproof material.
      2.   Any lights used to illuminate outdoor activity shall be arranged so
as to reflect the light away from adjacent residential uses or zones .
   D.   Large Retail Establishment Design Standards
   Large Retail Establishments shall be subject to the following use specific
standards. Variances from the standards shall not be permitted; however, if one
or more of the standards cannot be met, the applicant may request approval
through the special exception land use process where there is substantial
compliance with this section.
      1.   Site Design and Relationship to Surrounding Community
         a.   Vehicular Access
         The project shall provide safety and protection to adjacent
residential uses by having motor vehicle access from a major street as
designated by the adopted Major Streets and Routes (MS&R) Plan . Access can
also be provided from a street that is not designated by the MS&R Plan ,
provided it can be shown that any negative impacts on residential uses or
residentially zoned properties can be mitigated.
         b.   Buffers
         The project shall provide visual and noise buffers where the site is
adjacent to a residential use or residentially zoned property. This can be
accomplished by providing a minimum building setback of at least 200 feet from
a residential use or residentially zoned property that is adjacent to the site
. An eight foot high, or higher, masonry screen wall and at least a 20-foot
wide landscape buffer shall be provided adjacent to the site  property line
where it adjoins a residential use or residentially zoned property. The
landscape buffer shall be placed on the inside of the screen wall and shall
include, in addition to shrubs and groundcover, canopy trees at 20- to 30-foot
intervals depending on the separation needed for the tree canopies to touch at
maturity to form a noise, light, and visual screen above the screen wall. No
other uses, such as, but not limited to, parking or storage, shall be permitted
within the landscape buffer area.
         c.   Outdoor Storage Areas
         The project shall mitigate visual and noise impacts on residential
uses, residentially zoned properties, and streets that may be adjacent to the
site from outdoor storage areas (when permitted by the zone district
requirements). The mitigation can be accomplished by locating these areas on-
site and at least 200 feet from any residential use or residentially zoned
property that is adjacent to the site . The areas should be screened or
enclosed so that they are not visible from public streets , public sidewalks ,
internal pedestrian walkways, or adjacent residential properties. The screen
shall be at least eight feet high and of masonry construction to assure the
highest level of noise abatement and to confine any loose papers, cartons, and
other trash. Storage materials shall not be visible above the screen wall. It
is preferred that these outdoor storage areas be placed between buildings in a
manner that would allow the buildings to act as screens .
         d.   Trash Collection Areas
         The project shall mitigate visual and noise impacts on adjoining
residential neighborhoods and streets from trash collection areas by locating
these areas on-site and at least 200 feet from any residential use,
residentially zoned property, and street that is adjacent to the site . The
areas shall be screened or enclosed so that they are not visible from public
streets , public sidewalks , internal pedestrian walkways, or adjacent
residential properties. Screening and landscaping of these areas shall conform
to the predominant materials used on the site . The screen shall be at least
eight feet high and of masonry construction to assure the highest level of
noise abatement and to confine any loose papers, cartons, and other trash. It
is preferred that these trash collection areas be placed between buildings to
allow the buildings to act as screens . No trash shall be removed between 4:00
p.m. and 9:00 a.m. as part of scheduled trash collection.
         e.   Pedestrian Flow
         The project shall provide pedestrian accessibility, safety, and
convenience to reduce traffic impacts and enable the development to project a
friendly, inviting image. Sidewalks shall be at least eight feet wide and
unobstructed and shall connect the public street  sidewalks , the main
entrances to the stores, transit stops on- or off-site , and other buildings on
the site , in addition to providing convenient access to adjacent residential
neighborhoods. Sidewalks shall be provided along the full length of any
building where it adjoins a parking lot . Sidewalks shall have an associated
three foot wide landscape strip for their entire length, except at
intersections with parking area access lanes (PAALs ). The landscaping shall
include canopy trees or other shading devices to shade at least 65 to 75% of
the sidewalks during the major part of the day (shadow pattern needs to be
taken into consideration).
         f.   Central Features and Community Spaces
         The project shall provide attractive and inviting pedestrian scale
features, spaces, and amenities. Entrances and parking lot locations shall be
functional and inviting with walkways conveniently tied to logical
destinations. Bus stops should be considered integral parts of the
configuration whether they are located on-site or along the street . Customer
drop-off/pick-up points that may be provided should also be integrated into the
design (shall not conflict with traffic lanes or pedestrian paths). Pedestrian
ways shall be anchored by special design features, such as towers, arcades,
porticos, light fixtures, planter walls, seating areas, and other architectural
features that define circulation paths and outdoor spaces. Examples are outdoor
plazas, patios, courtyards, and window shopping areas. Each development shall
have at least two of these features.
         g.   Delivery and Loading Spaces
            (1)   Delivery and loading operations shall be designed and located
to mitigate visual and noise impacts to adjoining residential neighborhoods. If
there is a residential use or residentially zoned property adjacent to the site
, such operations shall not be permitted between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
Delivery and loading spaces shall be setback at least 200 feet from a
residential use or residentially zoned property that is adjacent to the site ,
unless such operations are located entirely within an enclosed  building ,
provided it is no closer than the allowable building setback .
            (2)   Delivery trucks shall not be parked in close proximity to or
within a designated delivery or loading area during non-delivery hours with
motors and/or refrigeration/generators running, unless the area where the
trucks are parked is setback at least 300 feet from residential property to
mitigate the truck noise. The setback shall not apply if the main building is
located between the truck parking and the residential use or residentially
zoned property to act as the screen .
            (3)   The delivery and loading areas shall be screened or enclosed
so that they are not visible from public streets , public sidewalks , internal
pedestrian walkways, or adjacent properties. The screen shall be of masonry
construction and at least ten feet high, measured from the loading dock floor
elevation, to screen the noise and activity at the loading dock. The masonry
screen assures the highest level of noise abatement. It is preferred that the
delivery and loading spaces be enclosed within a building or placed between
buildings in a manner that would allow the buildings to act as screens .
         h.   Traffic Impacts
         The applicant shall have a professional entity perform a Traffic
Impact Analysis (TIA) report for the development using the Institute of
Transportation Engineers’ Trip Generation publication as the standard for trip
generation calculation, as well as a parking generation report proposing the
number of motor vehicle parking spaces required for the project , if different
from shopping center calculations. The scope and standards for the TIA report
shall be approved by the Department of Transportation, prior to submittal of
the TIA report. The parking generation report shall be accepted by the
Department of Transportation and PDSD, prior to the first public hearing. The
TIA report shall identify traffic flow impacts on the public streets ,
recommend mitigation measures to address those conditions that fall below the
standards established by the adopted regional Mobility Management Plan, and
show how the applicant will provide the recommended improvements . The Mayor
and Council may approve a parking requirement that supersedes the number
required by Section
7.4, Motor Vehicle and Bicycle Parking, as part of their review process. The
TIA and parking generation reports are applicable to a specific application.
Any change to the specific proposed use of the site  and buildings  requires
resubmittal, review, and approval of a revised TIA report and revised parking
generation report.
         i.   Outdoor Lighting
         A photometric plan and outdoor lighting report shall be required that
provides information on how outdoor lighting is addressed to mitigate negative
impacts on adjacent residential uses or residentially zoned properties. The
report shall also address the negative impacts of outdoor lighting between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on adjacent residential properties or zones
and how they will be mitigated. Outdoor lighting between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. shall be limited to low-pressure sodium lighting.
         j.   Outdoor Sales Display/Ancillary Uses
         Measures to mitigate any negative impacts to a residential use or
residentially zoned property that is adjacent to the site from the location of
any outdoor activity associated with services to the public, such as, but not
limited to, outdoor merchandise display and sales, outdoor storage, and outdoor
snack bar and eating areas shall be required. The outside activity shall be
setback at least 250 feet and oriented to face away from any residential use or
residentially zoned property that is adjacent to the site , unless a building
is located between the activity and the residential property.
         k.   Hazardous Materials
         The project shall provide a Hazardous Materials Management Plan and
Hazardous Materials Inventory Statement as provided in the Fire Code to assure
that the building site and design will protect public health and safety from
accidental exposure to hazardous materials as provided in the Tucson Fire Code.
         l.   Noise Abatement
         The project shall provide a noise mitigation plan indicating how the
noise initiated by the land use will be mitigated to comply with noise
standards in Section 16-31, Excessive Noise, of the Tucson Code. Trucks shall
not be left idling between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
         m.   Combination of Retail with Food and Beverage Sales
         General Merchandise Sales and retail sales shall not be combined with
Food and Beverage Sales except where one of the Land Use Classes consists of
less than 10% of the gross floor area .
      2.   Aesthetic Character of Buildings
         a.   Facades and Exterior Walls Including Sides and Back
         The building shall be designed in a way that will reduce the massive
scale and uniform and impersonal appearance and will provide visual interest
consistent with the community’s identity, character, and scale. Long building
walls shall be broken up with projections or recessions with depths of at least
3% of the facade length along all sides of the building . Along any public
street  frontage , the building design should include windows, arcades, or
awnings along at least 60% of the building length. Architectural treatment,
similar to that provided to the front facade, shall be provided to the sides
and rear of the building to mitigate any negative view from adjacent properties
and/or streets .
         b.   Detail Features
         The project shall provide architectural features that contribute to
visual interest at the pedestrian scale and reduce the massive aesthetic effect
by breaking up the building wall, front, side, or rear, with color, texture
change, wall offsets, reveals, or projecting ribs.
         c.   Roofs
         The roof design shall provide variations in roof lines to add interest
to, and reduce the massive scale of, large buildings . Roof features shall
complement the architectural and visual character of adjoining neighborhoods.
Roofs shall include two or more roof planes. Parapet walls shall be
architecturally treated to avoid a plain, monotonous look, unless it is in
keeping with the architectural style of the building , e.g., Santa Fe style
with smooth walls.
         d.   Materials and Color
         The buildings shall have exterior building materials and colors that
are aesthetically pleasing and compatible with materials and colors that are
used in adjoining neighborhoods. This includes the use of high-quality
materials and colors that are low reflective, subtle, neutral, or earth tone.
Certain types of colors shall be avoided, e.g., fluorescent or metallic.
Construction materials, such as tilt-up concrete, smooth-faced concrete block ,
prefabricated steel panels, and other similar material shall be avoided, unless
the exterior surface is covered with an acceptable architectural treatment.
         e.   Entryways
         The building design shall provide design elements that give customers
orientation on accessibility and that add aesthetically pleasing character to
buildings by providing clearly-defined, highly-visible customer entrances.
         f.   Screening of Mechanical Equipment
            (1)   Roof- or ground-mounted mechanical equipment shall be
screened to mitigate noise and views in all directions. If roof mounted, the
screen shall be designed to conform architecturally with the design of the
building , whether it is with varying roof planes or with parapet walls. A wood
fence or similar treatment is not acceptable.
            (2)   Ground-mounted mechanical equipment shall be screened. The
screen shall be of masonry construction and be of sufficient height to block
the view and noise of the equipment.
      3.   Design Review Board (DRB)
      All proposed Large Retail Establishments shall be reviewed by the Design
Review Board (DRB) for recommendation to the PDSD Director , who will make a
recommendation on whether the project complies with the use specific standards.
The DRB will base its recommendation on whether or not the project complies
with the use specific standards related to compatibility , architecture, and
site design, as provided in Section
4.9.9.D, Large Retail Establishment Design Standards, where specific
requirements are not provided. The applicant shall be responsible for providing
all documentation and information necessary to show compliance, such as, but
not limited to, site plans , building  elevations, landscaping  plans, floor
plans, and outdoor lighting photometry plan.
   E.   Marijuana Facility
      1.   Marijuana Dispensary .
         a.   The total maximum floor area of a marijuana dispensary shall not
exceed 10,000 square feet.
         b.   A medical marijuana dispensary shall be located in a permanent
building and shall not be located in a trailer, cargo container, mobile or
modular unit, mobile home, recreational vehicle , or other motor vehicle.
“Building ” shall have the same meaning provided in Section
11.4.3, Definitions-B.
         c.   The permitted hours of operation of a marijuana dispensary are
from 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
         d.   A marijuana dispensary shall have an interior customer waiting
area equal to a minimum of 25% of the sales floor area . For purposes of this
section, sales floor area is defined as any area open to customers for the sale
of products. This does not include waiting areas, areas for production and
storing of products, or offices.
         e.   A marijuana dispensary shall not have outdoor seating areas.
         f.   A marijuana dispensary may deliver marijuana, once rules
permitting and regulating delivery are approved by the AZDHS and become
effective, and shall comply with state law and all lawful, applicable health
regulations, including those promulgated by the Arizona Department of Health
Services and any other authorized regulatory agency.
         g.    A marijuana dispensary shall be setback a minimum of 2,000 feet
from any other marijuana dispensaries, measured in a straight and direct
horizontal line between the two closest exterior or applicable interior suite
walls of marijuana dispensaries.
         h.   A marijuana dispensary shall be setback a minimum of 500 feet
from a K-12 public, private, or charter school or a licensed childcare center,
measured in a straight and direct horizontal line from the closest exterior or
applicable interior suite wall of the marijuana dispensary to the closest
property line of a school or childcare center. Exception: For the purposes of
this section, the following uses are not considered schools and, therefore, are
exempt from the setback requirement: 1) school administrative offices not
located on or contiguous with a school site; and, 2) athletic fields or
playgrounds used for school functions that are not contiguous with a school
site, except as provided in Section
4.9.9.E.1.k.
         i.   A marijuana dispensary  shall be setback  a minimum of 500 feet
from a public park listed in Section 6: Marijuana Dispensary and Dispensary
Off-Site Cultivation Uses - Required Setback from Certain Parks, of the
Technical Standards Manual, or library and a minimum of 500 feet from a
licensed residential substance abuse diagnostic and treatment facility or other
licensed residential drug or alcohol rehabilitation facility, measured in a
straight and direct horizontal line from the closest exterior or applicable
interior suite wall of the marijuana dispensary  to the closest property line
of a library, public park, licensed residential substance abuse diagnostic and
treatment facility, or other licensed drug or alcohol rehabilitation facility.
         j.   The expansion of an existing marijuana dispensary shall be
setback a minimum of 500 feet from a K-12 public, private, or charter school,
measured in a straight and direct horizontal line from the closest exterior or
applicable interior suite wall of the marijuana dispensary to the closest
property line of a school.
         k.   A marijuana dispensary and associated uses such as infusion
kitchens, shall comply with all lawful, applicable health regulations,
including those promulgated by the Arizona Department of Health Services and
any other authorized regulatory agency.
         l.   Odor Mitigation  
            (1)   Odor mitigation devices and techniques shall be incorporated
in all marijuana facilities to ensure that odors are mitigated. As such, this
may be done through an exhaust air filtration system with odor control that
prevents internal odors from being emitted externally or through any other best
practices deemed adequate for odor mitigation as determined by the Zoning
Administrator.
            (2)    An odor mitigation plan shall be submitted demonstrating
compliance with odor control requirements. When a modification is made to a
marijuana facility, or the facility operation, that has the potential to impact
the nature or degree of odor, or affects the control of odor, and UDC
requirements for bringing the entire site up to code per Sections
7.4.3.E,
7.5.3.E,
7.6.2.B &
9.2.2, the marijuana facility owner must update its odor mitigation plan within
30 days of facility modification. Failure to submit an updated odor mitigation
plan within 30 days of facility modification is a violation of this section and
shall be a civil infraction.
            (3)   Upon receipt of a formal complaint through code enforcement
related to a marijuana facility's odor, an inspection for compliance with the
odor mitigation plan shall be conducted. If an inspection reveals that the
existing odor mitigation plan does not comply with the odor mitigation plan for
the marijuana facility or marijuana facility's cultivation site , code
enforcement shall provide the owner or person in charge with a notice of
deficiencies and the owner or person in charge will be required to bring
facility into compliance with the approved odor mitigation plan.
      2.   Marijuana Dispensary Off-Site Cultivation Location/Manufacturing
Location
         a.   In the C-2 and C-3 zones, the total maximum floor area of a
medical marijuana dispensary off-site cultivation location shall not exceed
10,000 square feet.
         b.   In the P-I, I-1 and I-2 zones, there is no size limit.
         c.   In the C-2 and C-3 zones, a medical marijuana dispensary off-site
cultivation location shall be located in a permanent building and shall not be
located in a trailer, cargo container, mobile or modular unit, mobile home,
recreational vehicle , or other motor vehicle. “Building ” shall have the
meaning provided in Section
11.4.
         d.   In the I-1 and I-2 zones, a marijuana dispensary off-site
cultivation location , or a marijuana dispensary off-site manufacturing
location in the P-1, I-1, and I-2 zones, shall be located in a permanent,
enclosed, locked facility in accordance with state statutes and Arizona
Department of Health Services rules and shall not be located in a trailer,
cargo container, mobile or modular unit, mobile home, recreational vehicle, or
other motor vehicle.
         e.   In the C-2 and C-3 zones, a marijuana dispensary off-site
cultivation location shall be setback a minimum of 2,000 feet from any other
marijuana dispensaries or marijuana dispensary off-site cultivation locations
measured in a straight and direct horizontal line between the two closest
exterior or applicable interior suite walls of marijuana dispensaries'
cultivation locations.
         f.   In the C-2 and C-3 zones, a marijuana dispensary off-site
cultivation location shall be setback a minimum of 1,000 feet from a K-12
public, private or charter school or a licensed childcare center measured in a
straight and direct horizontal line from the closest exterior or applicable
interior suite wall of the marijuana off-site cultivation location to the
nearest property line of a school or childcare center. Exception: For the
purposes of this section, the following uses are not considered schools, and
therefore, exempt from the setback requirement: 1) school administrative
offices not located on or contiguous with a school site ; and, 2) except as
provided in Section
4.9.9.E.k, athletic fields or playgrounds used for school functions that are
not contiguous with a school site .
         g.    In the C-2 and C-3 zones, a marijuana dispensary off-site
cultivation location  shall be setback  a minimum of 1,000 feet from a public
park listed in Section 6: Marijuana Dispensary and Dispensary Off-Site
Cultivation Uses - Required Setback from Certain Parks, of the Technical
Standards Manual or library and a minimum of 1,000 feet from a licensed
residential substance abuse diagnostic and treatment facility or other licensed
residential drug or alcohol rehabilitation facility measured in a straight and
direct horizontal line from the closest exterior or applicable interior suite
wall of the marijuana dispensary off-site cultivation location  to the closest
property line of a library, public park, licensed residential substance abuse
diagnostic and treatment facility, or other licensed drug or alcohol
rehabilitation facility.
         h.   In the I-1 and I-2 zones, a marijuana dispensary off-site
cultivation location , or a marijuana dispensary off-site manufacturing
location in the P-1, I-1, and I-2 zones, shall be setback a minimum of 500 feet
from a K-12 public, private, or charter school, measured in a straight and
direct horizontal line from the closest exterior or applicable interior suite
wall of the marijuana off-site cultivation location to the closest property
line of a school.
         i.   A marijuana off-site cultivation location or a marijuana
dispensary off-site manufacturing location and associated uses such as infusion
kitchens, shall comply with all lawful, applicable health regulations,
including those promulgated by the Arizona Department of Health Services and
any other authorized regulatory agency.
         j.   A marijuana dispensary off-site cultivation location or marijuana
dispensary off-site manufacturing location shall provide only wholesale
products to other marijuana dispensaries, marijuana dispensary off-site
manufacturing locations, or marijuana dispensary off-site cultivation
locations.
         k.   Odor Mitigation   
            (1)   Odor mitigation devices and techniques shall be incorporated
in all marijuana facilities to ensure that odors are mitigated. As such, this
may be done through an exhaust air filtration system with odor control that
prevents internal odors from being emitted externally or through any other best
practices deemed adequate for odor mitigation as determined by the Zoning
Administrator.
            (2)   An odor mitigation plan shall be submitted demonstrating
compliance with odor control requirements. When a modification is made to a
marijuana facility, or the facility operation, that has the potential to impact
the nature or degree of odor, or affects the control of odor, and UDC
requirements for bringing the entire site up to code per Sections
7.4.3.E,
7.5.3.E,
7.6.2.B &
9.2.2, the marijuana facility owner must update its odor mitigation plan within
30 days of facility modification. Failure to submit an updated odor mitigation
plan within 30 days of facility modification is a violation of this section and
shall be a civil infraction.
            (3)   Upon receipt of a formal complaint through code enforcement
related to a marijuana facility's odor, an inspection for compliance with the
odor mitigation plan shall be conducted. If an inspection reveals that the
existing odor mitigation plan does not comply with the odor mitigation plan for
the marijuana facility or marijuana facility's cultivation site , code
enforcement shall provide the owner or person in charge with a notice of
deficiencies and the owner or person in charge will be required to bring
facility into compliance with the approved odor mitigation plan.
      3.   Medical Marijuana Designated Caregiver Cultivation Location
         a.   All conditions and restrictions for medical marijuana dispensary
off-site cultivation locations apply except that the designated caregiver
cultivation location cultivation area is limited to a total 250 square feet
maximum, including any storage areas.
         b.   A designated caregiver may cultivate at their residence for a
single qualifying patient subject to compliance with A.R.S. § 36-2806.01.
         c.   More than one designated caregiver may co-locate cultivation
locations as long as the total cultivation area does not exceed 250 square feet
maximum, including storage areas.
         d.   A designated caregiver shall comply with all lawful, applicable
health regulations, including those promulgated by the Arizona Department of
Health Services and any other authorized regulatory agency.
      4.   Medical Marijuana Qualifying Patient Cultivation Location
         a.   A qualifying patient may cultivate at their place of residence
subject to compliance with A.R.S. § 36-2806.01.
         b.   A qualifying patient, cultivating marijuana, shall comply with
all lawful, applicable health regulations, including those promulgated by the
Arizona Department of Health Services and any other authorized regulatory
agency.
   F.   Swap Meets and Auctions
      1.   Large animals shall not be sold.
      2.   Area lighting shall be low-pressure sodium and shielded on top.
      3.   The retail area shall be dust-proofed.
      4.   The following additional requirements apply if the use is located
within 400 feet of a residential use or zone.
         a.   The use shall not operate later than 11:00 p.m.
         b.   Any high-noise activity, such as amplified auctioneering,
entertainment, or woodworking, shall occur within an enclosed  building .
   G.   Vehicle Rental and Sales
      1.   Outdoor lights shall not operate later than 10:00 p.m., except for
security lighting provided it does not exceed 10% of all outdoor lighting.
      2.   Any lights used to illuminate outdoor activity shall be arranged so
as to reflect the light away from adjacent property and comply with Chapter 6,
Outdoor Lighting Code, of the Tucson Code.
      3.   Limited to rental only; no retail sales.
      H.   Smoke Shop
         1.   A smoke shop shall be setback a minimum of 2,640 feet from
another smoke shop, measured in a straight and direct horizontal line between
the two closest exterior or applicable interior suite walls of smoke shops.
         2.   A smoke shop shall be setback a minimum of 1,000 feet from a K-12
public, private, or charter school, measured in a straight and direct
horizontal line from the closest exterior or applicable interior suite wall of
the smoke shop, to the closest property line of a school or childcare center.
Exception: For the purposes of this section, school administrative offices not
located on or contiguous with a school site are not considered schools, and
therefore, are exempt from the setback requirement.
         3.   A smoke shop shall be setback a minimum of 1,000 feet from a
public park.
         4.   The permitted hours of operation of a smoke shop are from 7:00
a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
(Am. Ord. 11199, 9/9/2014; Am. Ord. 11328, 12/8/2015; Am. Ord. 11346, 2/23/
2016; Am. Ord. 11612, 1/8/2019; Am. Ord. 11828, 4/6/2021; Am. Ord. 11978, 12/
20/2022; Am. Ord. 12057, 11/14/2023)
4.9.10. STORAGE USE GROUP
   A.   Commercial Storage
      1.   Adjacent to a residential use or zone, outdoor storage shall comply
with the following.
         a.   Storage material shall not be visible from outside the screen .
         b.   Outdoor lighting shall be directed away from adjacent residential
uses and zones .
      2.   Outdoor storage, when permitted, shall not be located in the street
 perimeter yard .
   B.   Hazardous Material Storage
      1.   Aboveground storage tanks for the storage of hazardous materials,
such as, but not limited to, hydrogen, gasoline, diesel fuel, automotive
fluids, oil, or waste-oil, are permitted as accessory uses in conjunction with
and for the purpose of a principal permitted land use .
         a.   Exceptions.
            (1)   A tank used for storing propane, water, or heating oil for
consumptive use on the premises are not regulated by this section.
            (2)   Within the Scenic Corridor Zone (SCZ), aboveground storage
tanks must be located within an enclosed  building .
         b.   The following are required of an accessory aboveground storage
tank:
            (1)   The tank shall be used only for the purpose of servicing the
vehicles used or serviced in connection with a permitted principal use . The
tanks shall not be open for use by the public.
            (2)   Except as specified in this section, the setback standards of
the zoning district apply to all accessory storage tanks.
               (a)   If the Fire Chief approves the location of a tank within
an enclosed  building , the minimum setbacks shall be determined by the Fire
Chief, provided that the setbacks shall not be less than those required by the
zoning.
               (b)   A tank that is not located within an enclosed  building
shall be approved by the Fire Department and setback as follows.
                  (i)   A minimum of 50 feet from any property line  adjacent
to any area where, in the opinion of the Fire Chief, the tank could present a
hazard or danger to person or property.
                  (ii)   A minimum of 200 feet from any property line  adjacent
to R-3 or more restrictive zoning , or the tank location shall be processing in
accordance with Section
3.4.3, Zoning Examiner Special Exception Procedure.
                  (iii)   For Major Medical Service use only, with unrestricted
aboveground storage tank capacity, a minimum of 200 feet from any property line
 adjacent to R-3 or more restrictive zoning , or the tank location shall be
processed in accordance with Section
3.10.3, General Board of Adjustment Variance Procedure.
            (3)   The tank shall be screened by a wall equal to the height of
the tank. Exception: An unrestricted aboveground storage tank capacity, for
Major Medical Service use only, may be screened by a 6 foot structure .
            (4)   The maximum permitted diameter of a tank is 95 inches.
Exception: A 10,000 gallon storage tank may have a maximum diameter up to ten
feet. An unrestricted aboveground storage tank capacity, for Major Medical
Service use only, may have an unrestricted diameter.
            (5)   The maximum permitted height of a tank, excepting venting,
manways, and filler caps, is ten feet above grade . Exception: A 10,000 gallon
storage tank may be a maximum of 12 feet in height above grade . An
unrestricted aboveground storage tank capacity, for Major Medical Service use
only, may have an unrestricted height .
            (6)   An aboveground storage tank shall have a secondary
containment tank.
            (7)   A concrete pad shall be provided under all tanks.
            (8)   The construction, installation, and location of the
aboveground storage tanks and the types of materials to be stored in the tanks
shall be approved by the Fire Chief.
            (9)   Aboveground storage tanks, for Major Medical Service use
only, shall be painted a color complimentary to the color of the nearest
adjacent  structure and approved by zoning review.
         c.   These standards shall not supersede or replace any other
applicable City , county , state , or federal standards and requirements for
aboveground storage tanks.
      2.   The maximum permitted capacity of each aboveground storage tank is
as follows.
         a.   A maximum capacity of 1,000 gallons is permitted.
         b.   A maximum capacity of 2,000 gallons is permitted.
         c.   A maximum capacity of 4,000 gallons is permitted.
         d.   A maximum capacity of 10,000 gallons is permitted.
         e.   Aboveground storage tank capacity is unrestricted for Major
Medical Service use only.
   C.   Personal Storage
      1.   All storage shall be within enclosed  buildings .
      2.   Access shall be from a collector or arterial street .
      3.   All walls or doors visible from adjacent  streets and residential
properties shall be surfaced with a non-reflective material.
      4.   The maximum permitted individual unit size is 200 square feet of
floor area .
      5.   Razor or barbed wire shall not be used.
      6.   The facility’s exterior facade visible from adjoining residential
properties or street  frontage shall be earth tone in color and of masonry,
stucco, or similar materials.
      7.   The maximum permitted site area is three acres .
(Am. Ord. 11235, 1/21/2015)
4.9.11. UTILITIES USE GROUP
   A.   Distribution System
      1.   The setback of the facility, including walls or equipment, shall be
20 feet from any adjacent residential zone.
      2.   Where a facility is not enclosed within a building , the surrounding
screen shall be used as the building wall for the purposes of setbacks .
      3.   The setback of the facility, including walls or equipment, shall be
200 feet from any existing adjacent residential zone. This setback may be
varied in accordance with Sections
3.10.1 and
3.10.3, Board of Adjustment Variance Procedure.
      4.   Where a water tower more than 20 feet in height is used in
conjunction with such facilities, its center shall be located a distance from
any lot line equal to not less than one-half its height.
      5.   The use shall not have any service or storage yards.
      6.   Noise emission at the property line shall be equivalent to the
residential requirements of the noise ordinance.
      7.   No TVI (television interference) or RIV (radio interference) on a
continuous basis shall be permitted.
      8.   Any building housing such facility shall be in keeping with the
character of the zone in which it is located. The Design Review Board (DRB)
shall review all applications and make recommendations to the Zoning Examiner.
The DRB shall review architectural style, building elevations, materials on
exterior facades, color schemes, new mechanical equipment locations, lighting
of outdoor areas, window locations and types, screening, landscaping ,
vehicular use areas , and other contributing design features.
      9.   The use shall be located wholly within an enclosed  building or
within an area enclosed on all sides with a masonry wall or compact evergreen
hedge, not less than six feet, nor more than ten feet, in height .
      10.   The use shall include a ten-foot high wall in an earth tone and
vegetative landscaping where contiguous to a residential zone.
      11.   The use shall be limited to water pumping and storage facilities,
telephone exchanges, and power substations with an input voltage of no greater
than 138 kilovolts.
      12.   The following requires approval in accordance with Section
3.3.4, 100' Notice Procedure. The PDSD Director may forward the request to the
Design Review Board (DRB) for design review and recommendation.
         a.   Water pumping and storage facility upgrades or expansions,
provided:
            (1)   Existing setbacks are not altered.
            (2)   Use Specific Standards
4.9.11.A.5, .9, .11, are met.
      13.   Transmission lines may be relieved of their requirement to be
underground per UDC section
5.3, Scenic Corridor Zone (SCZ) or section
5.5, Gateway Corridor Zone (GCZ) in accordance with UDC section
3.4.3 Zoning Examiner Special Exception Procedure.
         In considering any request for a special exception, the Zoning
Examiner shall take into consideration the impact of providing such an
exception in historic areas (as defined by or listed in the National Register
of Historic Places, properties or districts, City of Tucson Historic
Preservation Zones, City of Tucson Historic Landmarks, or Neighborhood
Preservation Zones), located within the specific Gateway Corridor Zone or
Scenic Corridor Zone in which the special exception is being requested.
         A special exception request to relieve the requirement to underground
transmission lines must meet the required findings of UDC section
3.4.5. Additionally, the effects that can be expected from permitting relief
from the undergrounding requirements based on any of the criteria listed herein
or any combination of those criteria when added together must remain consistent
with the overall purpose and integrity of the Gateway/Scenic route, unless it
is technologically impossible and/or clearly financially cost prohibitive. If
relief is approved under this section, any new above-ground transmission line
that is permitted must be designed, constructed, and maintained to be as
unobtrusive as possible.
         A special exception request to relieve the requirement to underground
transmission lines that meets the findings established by UDC section
3.4.5, Findings and which also meets criteria a, d, or f of this subsection may
only require one criterion for approval when no other criteria apply to the
project. Otherwise, in addition to the required findings of UDC section
3.4.5, the special exception request must meet more than one criterion listed
in subsections (a) through (h) below.
         a.   The proposed overhead transmission lines are contextually
sensitive to adjacent and surrounding zoning and land uses. Examples of this
may include a proposed location that is industrially zoned or a proposal that
results in a less adverse aesthetic impact or less adverse impact on viewsheds
for surrounding properties.
         b.   Requiring underground construction would cause a significant
increase in ground disturbance when compared to overhead construction in
sensitive areas such as Environmental Resource Zone (ERZ) or Watercourse
Amenities, Safety and Habitat (WASH) wash crossings or environmentally and
archeologically sensitive areas.
         c.   The proposed overhead transmission line will have minimal impact
on residential areas.
         d.   The proposed overhead transmission lines are located on non-
Gateway or non-Scenic corridor routes, and the relief is requested for a
segment that perpendicularly crosses a Gateway Corridor Zone or Scenic Corridor
Zone, and the placement of poles is set back at least 150 feet from the
curbline of the designated Gateway or Scenic Corridor.
         e.   The proposed overhead transmission lines are for a repair or
upgrade of existing facilities and the proposed facilities are similar in size
and scale to the existing facilities being repaired or replaced. Replacement
facilities may not be any larger than 10% the height or width of existing
facilities being replaced.
         f.   The transmission lines are proposed in an area where there is an
existing presence of railroad, highway and/or bridge crossings, or in an area
where underground installation would interfere with other existing
undergrounded utilities, and curing that interference is technologically
impossible or financially cost prohibitive.
         g.   The proposed transmission lines will provide electrical service
to critical customers where overhead lines are strongly recommended for
specialized operations; examples include but are not limited to: provision of
electricity to Davis Monthan AFB or other installations necessary to the
national defense.
         h.   The proposed project is in an area where costs to install
underground would have a disparate impact on low-income residents.
         The ZE findings shall identify each specific criterion that relates to
the application/ project, and which are met. Approval of a Zoning Examiner
special exception shall not preclude any other necessary regulatory relief
process such as a variance.
   B.   Renewable Energy Generation
      1.   Requires approval in accordance with Section
3.3.4, 100' Notice Procedure.
      2.   The setback of the facility, including walls or equipment, shall be
20 feet from any adjacent residential zone.
      3.   All activities shall be conducted in conformance with the following
use specific standards.
         a.   Noise
         The sound level of any individual operation shall not exceed the
levels permitted in Section 16-31, Excessive Noise, of the Tucson Code.
         b.   Smoke
         Smoke emission from any source is not permitted to exceed a density
greater than that described as No. 1 on the Ringleman Chart. However, smoke may
be emitted which is equal to, but not darker than, No. 2 on the Ringleman Chart
for not more than four minutes in any 30-minute period. For the purpose of
grading the density of smoke, the Ringleman Chart, as published by the U.S.
Bureau of Mines, is the standard.
         c.   Glare or Heat
         Any activity producing intense glare or heat shall not be performed in
such a manner as to create a nuisance or hazard beyond the property lines of
the project site .
         d.   Odors
         Emission of odorous gases or other odorous matter is not permitted in
such quantities as to be offensive to owners or occupants of adjoining property
or in such a manner as to create a nuisance or hazard beyond the property lines
of the project site .
         e.   Vibration
         Vibration discernible beyond the property lines of the project site is
prohibited.
         f.   Fly Ash, Dust, Fumes, Vapors, Gases, and Other Forms of Air
Pollution
         Emissions that can cause damage to health, animals , vegetation or
other forms of property or that can cause any excessive soiling of the air per
state or county guidelines is prohibited.
         g.   Liquids and Solid Waste
         Waste shall not be discharged into the streets , drainage ways, or on
property possibly creating a danger to the public health and safety, and no
waste shall be discharged in the public sewage system that might endanger the
normal operation of the public sewage system.
         h.   Illumination
         Illumination of buildings and open areas shall be located and directed
so as to eliminate glare toward streets and adjoining properties and shall
comply with the requirements of the Outdoor Lighting Code in Chapter 6 of the
Tucson Code.
         i.   Interference
         TVI (television interference) or RIV (radio interference) that
emanates from the project site is prohibited.
      4.   A service or storage yard is prohibited.
      5.   In addition to the requirements of Section
7.6, Landscaping and Screening, there shall be a decorative masonry wall at
least six feet in height  between the project site  and any residential zone .
   C.   Sanitation System
   Uses shall be at least 300 feet from any nonindustrial zone, except where
the use of the non-industrially zoned property is railroad or freeway right-of-
way .
(Am. Ord. 11732, 2/19/2020; Am. Ord. 11942, 7/12/2022; Am. Ord. 11996, 3/21/
2023)
4.9.12.    WHOLESALING USE GROUP
   Reserved.
4.9.13.    GENERAL STANDARDS, RESTRICTIONS, AND EXCEPTIONS
   The following apply to those zones and specific uses, including accessory
uses , as indicated in the use-specific standard column of the permitted use
tables,
Tables 4.8-1 through
7.
   A.   Access
      1.   The use shall have primary vehicular access from an arterial street
.
      2.   The use shall have access from a paved public street on the Major
Streets and Routes (MS&R) Plan .
   B.   Hours
   The principal use is restricted to hours of operation of 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
p.m.
   C.   Lighting
   In addition to the requirements of Section 6-101, Outdoor Lighting Code, of
the Tucson Code, any outdoor lighting utilized in conjunction with the use
shall be located and directed so as to eliminate glare toward streets  and
adjoining  R-3 or more restrictive zoning .
   D.   Noise
   In addition to the requirements of Section 16-31, Excessive Noise, of the
Tucson Code, the use shall be located within an enclosed  building . There
shall be no openings on the side of the building  adjacent  to R-3 or more
restrictive zoning .
   E.   Outdoor Activity
   Activity may occur outdoors.
   F.   Screening
   In addition to the requirements of Section
7.6.5, Screening Standards, there shall be a screen  wall at least five feet in
height  between this use and any residential zone .
   G.   Open Space   Zone (OS)- General Restrictions and Requirements
      1.   Applicability
      The OS zone may be applied to both public and private lands that warrant
protection as open space . The OS zone may be applied to land only with the
express written consent of the property owner(s).
         a.   Dedications and Donations
         The OS zone may be applied by the City to land that is preserved by
acquisition, an easement, or dedication, and/or donation to the City or other
entity, for the purpose of keeping the land as permanent natural open space .
         b.   Fee Waiver
         Fees for a rezoning application to the OS zone are waived.
      2.   General Restrictions
      The following restrictions apply to all land uses and development in this
zone.
         a.   Unpaved or paved trails or paths shall be permitted for use only
by pedestrians, non-motorized bicycles, and horses. Limited access is permitted
for maintenance vehicles only. Use by all-terrain vehicles is prohibited.
         b.   Picnic areas, sitting areas, equestrian trail nodes, scenic
lookouts, shade structures , and rest rooms shall be permitted, subject to
minimal disturbance of the natural open space . Grills in the picnic areas and
overnight camping are not permitted, unless located in an area that fire
vehicles can access without impact on the natural open space .
         c.   Access driveways and parking areas shall be permitted in
conjunction with the Open Space Requirements in Section
4.9.13.G.3.a & .b, subject to minimal disturbance of the natural open space .
         d.   Drainage-way facilities and utility easements shall be re-
vegetated to be consistent with the surrounding natural vegetation.
         e.   All new utilities shall be underground.
      3.   Open Space Requirements
         a.   The disturbed area shall be clearly identified and the balance of
the property protected during construction. All impervious surfaces, buildings
, utility or drainage corridors, and structures shall be contained within the
disturbed area identified on the approved site plan .
         b.   Whenever a portion of the property is disturbed by the
construction of a permitted use or has been cleared of vegetation, the
disturbed area shall be re-vegetated in conformance with an approved re-
vegetation plan using plants native to the site and the immediately surrounding
area. Re-vegetation shall be at a similar density to the natural surroundings.
         c.   The minimum width of property zoned OS shall be 40 feet, and the
minimum contiguous area for OS is 4,000 square feet, unless the OS property
connects to another perpetual, dedicated  open space or trails resource.
   H.   Institutional Reserve Zone (IR)- Exception
   Parcels of less than 36 acres , recorded prior to December 1, 1985,
conforming to the minimum lot size requirements in effect on the date of
recording, are deemed non-conforming.
   I.   Rural Homestead Zone (RH) - Exception
   Parcels of less than 180,000 square feet, recorded prior to December 1,
1985, conforming to the minimum parcel size requirements at the date of
recording, are deemed non-conforming.
   J.   O-1 and O-2 Office Zones - General Restrictions
   The following restrictions apply to all uses and development in these zones
:
      1.   Drive-through services are prohibited;
      2.   All land use activities shall be conducted entirely within an
enclosed  building with the following exceptions:
         a.   Vehicular use areas ;
         b.   When required by state law;
         c.   When specifically permitted by a use specific standard; or,
         d.   When associated with one of the following uses: Community Garden;
Day Care; Educational Use; Food and Beverage Sales (Farmers’ Markets only);
Medical Service; Extended Healthcare; Parks and Recreation; Urban Farm; or,
urban agriculture -related uses; and,
      3.   All nonresidential land use activities shall:
         a.   Restrict hours of operation from 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., unless
otherwise required by use-specific standard.
         b.   Comply with the requirements of Section 6-101, Outdoor Lighting
Code, of the Tucson Code. Outdoor lighting utilized in conjunction with the use
shall be located and directed so as to eliminate glare toward streets  and
adjoining  R-3 or more restrictive zoning .
         c.   Comply with the requirements of Section 16-31, Excessive Noise,
of the Tucson Code and be located within an enclosed  building . There shall be
no openings on the side of the building  adjacent  to R-3 or more restrictive
zoning .
   K.   O-3 Office Zone - General Restrictions
   The following restrictions apply to all uses and development in this zone:
      1.   Drive-through services are prohibited; and,
      2.   All land use activities shall be conducted entirely within an
enclosed  building with the following exceptions:
         a.   Vehicular use areas ;
         b.   When required by state law;
         c.   When specifically permitted by a use specific standard; or,
         d.   When associated with one of the following uses: Community Garden;
Day Care; Educational Use; Food and Beverage Sales (Farmers’ Markets only);
Medical Service, Extended Healthcare; Parks and Recreation; Urban Farm; or,
urban agriculture -related uses.
   L.   Recreational Vehicle  Zone (RV) - General Restrictions
   Storage buildings are not permitted in this zone as accessory to each
individual unit space; however, they are permitted as part of the common use
facility. The Community Garden, Farmers’ Market, Urban Farms, or urban
agriculture -related uses are exempt from this restriction.
   M.   Neighborhood Commercial Zone (NC) - General Restrictions and Exception
   The following standards apply to all uses and development in this zone:
      1.   Drive-through or drive-in services are prohibited;
      2.   All land use activities shall be conducted entirely within an
enclosed  building with the following exceptions:
         a.   Vehicular use areas ;
         b.   When required by state law;
         c.   When specifically permitted by a use specific standards; or,
         d.   When associated with one of the following uses: Community Garden;
Day Care; Educational Use, Elementary and Secondary; Food and Beverage Sales
(Farmers’ Markets only); Parks and Recreation; all uses in the Residential Use
Group; Urban Farm; or, any urban agriculture -related uses.
      3.   All land use activities, except the Residential Use Group or those
uses required differently by a use-specific standard, are restricted to hours
of operation of 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.;
      4.   All nonresidential development and nonresidential exterior
remodeling that require a building permit are reviewed and approved by the
Design Review Board (DRB) for architectural and site design compatibility with
the surrounding residential area; and,
      5.   All land uses are limited to 2,000 square feet of GFA, except Family
Dwelling, Educational Uses, and the following exception. Mixed use or multi-
tenant developments are limited to 10,000 square feet of GFA. A tenant within a
mixed use  development is limited to 2,000 square feet of GFA. Outdoor activity
areas permitted in this zone shall be included in the GFA limitations.
Exception: On authorization of rezoning of property to the NC zone, Mayor and
Council may approve land uses that will be located in existing buildings or
portions thereof that exceed the limitation of 2,000 square feet of gross floor
area per use or the limitations restricting mixed use or multi-tenant
development to 10,000 square feet of gross floor area . The gross floor area
for any such exception shall neither be increased nor enlarged following
initial authorization, and the right to exceed the gross floor area
restrictions shall be terminated if discontinued or abandoned. Community
Garden, Food and Beverage Sales (Farmers’ Markets only), or any urban
agriculture -related uses are exempt from this restriction.
   N.   Rural Village Center Zone (RVC) - General Restrictions
   The following restrictions apply to all uses and development in this zone:
      1.   Drive-through or drive-in services are prohibited unless
specifically provided for the land use.
      2.   All land use activities shall be conducted entirely within an
enclosed  building with the following exceptions:
         a.   Vehicular use areas ;
         b.   When required by state law;
         c.   When specifically permitted by a use specific standard; or,
         d.   When associated with one of the following uses: Community Garden;
Day Care; Food and Beverage Sales (Farmers’ Market only); or, any urban
agriculture -related use.
      3.   The maximum permitted area of each RVC zone is 20 acres .
   O.   C-1 Commercial Zone - General Restrictions
   The following restrictions apply to all uses and development in this zone:
      1.   Drive-through services are prohibited except as follows.
         a.   Commercial Services and Retail Trade Uses may provide one drive-
through lane.
         b.   Financial Services Use may provide two drive-through lanes and
one Automated Teller Machine (ATM) service lane.
      2.   All land use activities shall be conducted entirely within an
enclosed  building unless specifically provided otherwise, except as follows:
         a.   Agricultural Use Group: Community Garden, Urban Farm, or any
urban agriculture -related use;
         b.   Civic Use Group: Cemetery, Education Elementary & Secondary
Schools;
         c.   Commercial Use Group: Commercial Recreation (except shooting
ranges which must be located in an enclosed building ), Medical Services,
Extended Health Care;
         d.   Recreation Use Group: Golf Course, Parks and Recreation;
         e.   Retail Trade Use Group: Food and Beverage Sales (Farmers’ Market
only); and,
         f.   Vehicular use areas .
   P.   C-2 Commercial Zone - General Restrictions
      1.   Outdoor display of finished products for rent or sale at retail or
wholesale is permitted, unless prohibited by a use-specific standard.
      2.   The land uses in the Commercial Services (except Automotive Service
and Repair, Day Care Use; Medical Service, Extended Health Care; Transportation
Services, Land Carrier; and Travelers’ Accommodation, Lodging) Industrial,
Restricted Adult Activities, and Wholesaling Use Groups shall be conducted
entirely within an enclosed  building unless modified by Use Specific
Standards.
   Q.   Park Industrial (P-I), Light Industrial (I-1), and Heavy Industrial (I-
2) Zones - General Restrictions
      1.   The use, storage, or disposal of radioactive materials must be done
in accordance with Section
4.9.5.F, Radioactive Material Restrictions.
      2.   On land uses in the Industrial Use Group, traffic circulation must
be designed so that access to the site is from a major street or from a local
street which is not an internal residential neighborhood street and which does
not provide access to residentially zoned areas unless no alternative exists.
      3.   The following special exception uses in the I-2 zone must be at
least 300 feet from any non-industrial zone. Exception: the 300-foot setback is
not required when the use of the non-industrially zoned property is a railroad
or freeway right-of-way :
         a.   Extraction;
         b.   Hazardous Material Manufacturing;
         c.   Perishable Goods Manufacturing;
         d.   Primary Manufacturing;
         e.   Refining; or,
         f.   Salvaging and Recycling.
      4.   Use must comply with the applicable standards of Section
4.9.5, Industrial Use Group.
      5.   The airport authority land use class may contain residential,
commercial, and industrial land uses compatible with the airport environs
overlay. These uses include but are not limited to typical airport uses such as
terminals, runways, control towers, radio and telecommunication towers, fueling
and maintenance stations, helipads, hangars, parking facilities, various
military and governmental uses and passenger-oriented food and personal
services, retail sales, and vehicle rentals. Additionally, the land use class
allows the following uses:
         a.   Aeronautical uses associated with an airport including
manufacturing, assembly, storage, training and flight schools and similar uses;
         b.   Permitted or special exception uses in the underlying zone;
         c.   Industrial parks containing corporate business centers,
wholesaling, manufacturing, agriculture, civic, commercial, industrial, retail,
storage, and utility uses provided they comply with the design and development
standards applicable to the permitted or special exception uses in the
underlying zone.
   (Am. Ord. 11070, 5/14/2013; Am. Ord. 11127, 11/6/2013; Am. Ord. 11328, 12/8/
2015; Am. Ord. 11409, 11/9/2016; Am. Ord. 11577, 8/8/2018)
4.10.   ACCESSORY USES , BUILDINGS , AND STRUCTURES
   The accessory use , building , and structure standards are located in
Section
6.6, Accessory Uses, Buildings and Structures.
4.11.   TEMPORARY USE OR BUILDING
   Certain land uses or buildings not permitted within specific zones may be
permitted on a temporary basis if authorized in accordance with Section
3.3.3, PDSD Director Approval Procedure, provided such request for a temporary
use complies with the following.
4.11.1.   QUALIFICATION FOR PERMIT
   For certain land uses or buildings to be permitted on a temporary basis, the
land use or building shall comply with one or more of the following special
circumstances.
   A.   The circumstances constitute a substantial hardship, such as, but not
limited to, a natural disaster, e.g., fire or flood, or a government action
that has resulted in damage to an existing building on the subject property.
   B.   A temporary building , such as a mobile or modular unit, utilized for
the management or oversight of construction (e.g., contractor’s office) or
occupied as a caretaker’s facility or a home for the eventual resident may be
permitted during the construction of a permanent building . The temporary
building shall be on the same site as the construction.
   C.   The temporary location of off-street parking facilities during the
structural expansion or remodeling of an existing building may be permitted.
Such temporary facilities do not have to comply with requirements of a
permanent parking facility but shall, at a minimum, provide the following:
      1.   Screening from adjacent residential development . Since this is a
temporary facility, screening cannot be achieved by the use of landscaping
unless mature vegetation that can act as the screen exists on the site ; and,
      2.   Dust-proofing.
   D.   A temporary real estate office may be permitted during construction of
a project , provided:
      1.   The temporary use shall be terminated one year from the date the
approval was granted. Additional 12-month extensions may be granted, provided
sales activity for the project continues and 10% or more of the lots or units
remain unsold;
      2.   The temporary office building is located on a lot and complies with
all zoning standards applicable to that lot ;
      3.   The temporary office building is located in the same subdivision
within which sales occur; and,
      4.   The temporary use or building complies with any additional
conditions required by the approval authority.
   E.   A temporary construction equipment yard for public improvement projects
involving street  improvements or the placement of utilities within public
rights-of-way , provided solutions are implemented to mitigate potential
negative impacts to adjacent residential development . Such solutions include,
but are not limited to, screening of equipment, setbacks , hours of operation,
and limited or restricted use of residential streets .
   F.   The temporary placement of a mobile telecommunications tower facility
on nonresidential property may be permitted upon the demonstration by a
telecommunications provider that the facility is necessary for its operations;
the facility is setback from any residentially zoned property by a distance
equal to the height of the proposed tower and base; and the tower and base do
not exceed 65 feet from the existing grade . The temporary use authorized by
this subsection shall be approved for a period not to exceed 60 days and may be
approved for one extension of time not to exceed 60 days .
4.11.2.   BOND REQUIRED
   A cash or assurance bond in the amount of $1,000 for a residential use and
$5,000 for a nonresidential use is required, unless stipulated otherwise in the
qualification standards in Section
4.11.1, Qualification for Permit, to guarantee termination of the temporary
use. The cash or assurance  bond shall be provided to the City  before any
permit for the use is issued.
4.11.3.   REFUND
   The bond, as required in Section
4.11.2, Bond Required, shall be refunded when the temporary use or building  is
removed by the applicant in accordance with Section
4.11.4, Removal.
4.11.4.   REMOVAL
   The temporary use or building shall be removed on or before the date of
expiration of the approval period. Should the zoning compliance certificate be
revoked, a temporary use shall be removed within 15 days .
   A.   Removal is to include all improvements installed to accommodate the
temporary use or building .
   B.   If, after the removal, the property is left graded and vacant, the
property shall be reseeded in accordance with the requirements of the grading
ordinance for graded but undeveloped properties.
4.11.5.   FORFEITURE
   If the temporary use or building is not removed or the site does not achieve
compliance, the bond required by Section
4.11.2, Bond Required, shall be forfeited.
4.11.6.   TIME LIMIT
   Approval for a temporary use or building may be granted for one year, with
an additional one year period granted for good cause, unless otherwise
stipulated in the temporary use or building qualification standards in Section
4.11.1, Qualification for Permit.
ARTICLE 5: OVERLAY ZONES
Section
5.1.   PURPOSE OF OVERLAY ZONES
5.2.   HILLSIDE DEVELOPMENT ZONE (HDZ)
   
5.2.1.   Introduction
   
5.2.2.   Purpose
   
5.2.3.   Applicability
   
5.2.4.   Permitted Uses
   
5.2.5.   Development Standards
   
5.2.6.   Natural Areas
   
5.2.7.   Hillside Site Improvement Standard
   
5.2.8.   Maintenance and Protection
   
5.2.9.   Enforcement
   
5.2.10.   Variances
5.3.   SCENIC CORRIDOR ZONE (SCZ)
   
5.3.1.   Introduction
   
5.3.2.   Purpose
   
5.3.3.   Applicability
   
5.3.4.   Scenic Route Buffer Area
   
5.3.5.   Structure Height
   
5.3.6.   Siting and View Corridors
   
5.3.7.   Parking Areas
   
5.3.8.   Screening
   
5.3.9.   Utilities
   
5.3.10.   Additional Design Considerations
   
5.3.11.   Review and Approval Procedure
   
5.3.12.   Submittals
   
5.3.13.   Grading
   
5.3.14.   Variances
   
5.3.15.   Designation, amendment, or change of boundaries for a Scenic Corridor
Zone
5.4.   MAJOR STREET AND ROUTES  SETBACK  ZONE (MS&R)
   
5.4.1.   Purpose
   
5.4.2.   Applicability
   
5.4.3.   MS&R Adoption and Amendment
   
5.4.4.   Establishment of MS&R Right-of-Way Lines and Gateway Routes
   
5.4.5.   Permitted Use of MS&R Right-of-Way Area
   
5.4.6.   MS&R Street  Perimeter Yard and Parking Adjustment
   
5.4.7.   MS&R Right-of-Way Use Modification Request
5.5.   GATEWAY CORRIDOR ZONE (GCZ)
   
5.5.1.   Purpose
   
5.5.2.   Applicability
   
5.5.3.   Review and Approval Procedure
   
5.5.4.   Development Standards
   
5.5.5.   Designation, amendment, or change of boundaries
   
5.5.6.   Variances
5.6.   AIRPORT ENVIRONS ZONE (AEZ)
   
5.6.1.   Purpose
   
5.6.2.   Establishment, Designation, and Amendment of AEZ Maps
   
5.6.3.   Applicability in the TIA Environs
   
5.6.4.   TIA Environs
   
5.6.5.   Compatible Use Zones for the TIA Environs
   
5.6.6.   Noise Control Districts
   
5.6.7.   Applicability in the DMAFB Environs
   
5.6.8.   Approach Departure Corridors (ADC) for DMAFB
   
5.6.9.   Noise Control District for DMAFB Environs
   
5.6.10.   Special Exception Land Uses
   
5.6.11.   Airport Hazard Districts for TIA and DMAFB Environs
5.7.   ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCE ZONE (ERZ)
   
5.7.1.   Purpose
   
5.7.2.   Applicability
   
5.7.3.   Development Options
   
5.7.4.   Development Standards
   
5.7.5.   Standards for Encroachment
   
5.7.6.   Standards for Fences, Walls, and Exterior Lighting
   
5.7.7.   Variances and Amendments
5.8.   “H” HISTORIC PRESERVATION ZONE (HPZ) AND “HL” HISTORIC LANDMARK (HL)
   
5.8.1.   Purpose
   
5.8.2.   Applicability
   
5.8.3.   Standards for Establishing and Amending HPZs
   
5.8.4.   Steps to Establish or Amend a HPZ
   
5.8.5.   Standards for Establishing and Amending HLs
   
5.8.6.   Steps to Establish or Amend a HL
   
5.8.7.   Permitted Uses
   
5.8.8.   Design Review Required
   
5.8.9.   Design Standards
   
5.8.10.   Demolition Review Required
   
5.8.11.   Maintenance
   
5.8.12.   Pending Historic Preservation Zones
5.9.   DRACHMAN SCHOOL OVERLAY ZONE (DSO)
   
5.9.1.   Introduction
   
5.9.2.   Purpose
   
5.9.3.   Establishment
   
5.9.4.   Applicability
   
5.9.5.   Permitted Land Uses
   
5.9.6.   Accessory Land Uses
   
5.9.7.   Height and Setback Standards
   
5.9.8.   Parking
   
5.9.9.   Lighting
   
5.9.10.   Landscaping
   
5.9.11.   All Other Development Standards
   
5.9.12.   Design Standards and Review
5.10.   NEIGHBORHOOD PRESERVATION ZONE (NPZ)
   
5.10.1.   Purpose
   
5.10.2.   Establishing an NPZ
   
5.10.3.   Neighborhood Preservation Zone (NPZ) Design Review Procedure
5.11.   COMMUNITY CORRIDORS TOOL (CCT)
   
5.11.1.   Purpose
   
5.11.2.   Applicability and Zoning Clarifications
   
5.11.3.   Review and Approval Procedure
   
5.11.4.   Permitted Uses
   
5.11.5.   Dimensional Standards
   
5.11.6.   Development Standards
   
5.11.7.   Incentives
   
5.11.8.   Large Scale Development Requirements
   
5.11.9.   Modifications and Interpretations
   
5.11.10.   Variances
   
5.11.11.   Enforcement
   
5.11.12.   Definitions
5.12.   DOWNTOWN AREA INFILL INCENTIVE DISTRICT (IID)
   
5.12.1.   Purpose
   
5.12.2.   Establishment
   
5.12.3.   Definitions
   
5.12.4.   Applicability
   
5.12.5.   IID Plan Submittal Requirements
   
5.12.6.   IID Plan Review and Approval Procedures Under the IID Zoning Option
   
5.12.7.   Rio Nuevo Area (RNA) Zoning Design Standards
   
5.12.8.   General IID Zoning Option Design Standards
   
5.12.9.   Greater Infill Incentive Subdistrict (GIIS)
   
5.12.10.   Downtown Core Subdistrict (DCS)
   
5.12.11.   Downtown Links Subdistrict (DLS)
   
5.12.12.   Toole Avenue Area (TAA)
   
5.12.13.   Warehouse Triangle Area (WTA)
   
5.12.14.   Fourth Avenue Area (FAA)
   
5.12.15.   Iron Horse Area (IHA)
   
5.12.16.   Stone/Sixth Area (SSA)
   
5.12.17.   [Reserved]
   
5.12.18.   Illustrative Map
 
5.13.   URBAN OVERLAY DISTRICT (UOD)
   
5.13.1.   Purpose
   
5.13.2.   Initiation
   
5.13.3.   Establishment
   
5.13.4.   Development Standards
   
5.13.5.   Application
   
5.13.6.   Development Review
   
5.13.7.   Enforcement
   
5.13.8.   Interpretation
   
5.13.9.   Amendment Procedures
   
5.13.10.   Waiver
5.1.   PURPOSE OF OVERLAY ZONES
   This article provides for overlays that impose standards and procedures that
are in addition to those required under base zoning standards. Where there is a
conflict between the standards of a base district and an overlay district , the
standards of the overlay district shall apply, except for the Urban Overlay
District (UOD) and Downtown Area Infill Incentive District (IID) that provide
flexible development options to landowners rather than mandatory requirements.
5.2.   HILLSIDE DEVELOPMENT ZONE (HDZ)
5.2.1.   INTRODUCTION
   Tucson is surrounded by mountains. These mountainous areas exhibit steep
slopes that may contain unstable rock and soils. Development on potentially
unstable soils or rock can be hazardous to life and property. Development in
these areas should utilize construction methods that ensure slope stabilization
and minimize soil erosion . Tucson’s mountains and foothills are valuable
scenic resources that should be preserved. Dominant peaks and ridges should be
protected in order to preserve the City ’s unique visual setting, promote its
economic well-being, and encourage tourism. Regulating the intensity of
development according to the natural characteristics of hillside terrain, such
as degree of slope , significant vegetation and landforms, and soil stability
and existing drainage patterns, will allow for development in hillside areas
while minimizing the physical impacts of such development .
5.2.2.   PURPOSE
   This zone provides for the reasonable use of hillside areas and related
lands while protecting the public health, safety, and general welfare by:
   A.   Determining whether certain types of soil conditions exist, such as
loose or easily eroded soils or rocky soils that may require blasting, and
utilizing appropriate engineering technology to result in stable slopes during
and subsequent to development ;
   B.   Reducing water runoff, soil erosion , and rock slides by minimizing
grading and by requiring revegetation and grading restoration;
   C.   Permitting intensity of development  compatible with the natural
characteristics of hillside terrain, such as degree of slope , significant
landforms, soil suitability, and existing drainage patterns;
   D.   Preserving the scenic quality of the desert and mountain environment
through the retention of dominant peaks and ridges in their natural states;
   E.   Reducing the physical impact of hillside development by encouraging
innovative site and architectural design, minimizing grading , and requiring
restoration of graded areas;
   F.   Providing safe and convenient vehicular access by encouraging
development on the less steeply sloped terrain; and,
   G.   Promoting cost-efficient public services by encouraging development on
the less steeply sloped terrain, thereby minimizing service extensions and
utility costs and maximizing access for all necessary life safety services.
5.2.3.   APPLICABILITY
   The provisions of the Hillside Development Zone (HDZ) apply to newly
proposed subdivisions or individual lot  developments in the areas listed
below. (See
Figure 5.2-A.)
   A.   Protected Peak and Ridge Areas
   Any lot or parcel containing protected peak and ridge areas designated for
protection by the Mayor and Council, as shown on the City Zoning Maps . The
whole parcel is included if any portion of the parcel is within the Protected
Peak and Ridge Area.
   B.   Slope Areas of 15% or Greater
   Any lot or parcel containing slopes of 15% or greater, as shown on the HDZ
Maps. The whole parcel is included if any portion of the parcel is over 15%.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2980.jpg]
Figure 5.2-A: Applicability of Hillside Development Zone
   C.   Approved Subdivisions
   Any recorded subdivision  plat approved in compliance with the Pima County
HDZ or the City of Tucson HDZ may be developed in compliance with the
conditions and stipulations as approved. If the plat is resubdivided, it shall
comply with all provisions of the HDZ currently in effect.
   D.   New Development
   New development that occurs on parcels or proposed subdivisions that include
property designated as HDZ shall be reviewed for compliance with these
standards in accordance with Section
3.3.3, PDSD Director Approval Procedure.
   E.   Exceptions
      1.   The HDZ standards do not apply to those lots or parcels located
within the City limits south of the Rillito River/Tanque Verde, east of the
Silverbell Road-Congress Street -Grande Avenue-Mission Road alignment, west of
Harrison Road, and north of the Los Reales-Interstate 10 alignment unless
otherwise identified on the HDZ maps.
      2.   The HDZ standards shall not apply to vacant residentially-zoned lots
or parcels , legally created as of September 15, 1980, and containing an area
of 16,000 square feet or less, unless, after July 19, 1989, the lot or parcel
is divided into two or more parcels or used for other than one single-family
dwelling.
      3.   The HDZ standards shall not apply to lots or parcels annexed from
Pima County that were exempt from the Pima County HDZ at the time of
annexation, unless the lot or parcel is divided into two or more parcels or
used for other than one single-family dwelling.
      4.   The density restrictions of Section
5.2.5 shall not apply to any lot or parcel that was zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, or O-
3 and located within the City limits prior to December 10, 1979, unless the lot
or parcel is divided into two or more parcels or used for other than one
single-family dwelling.
      5.   The HDZ standards shall not apply in the following situations if the
structure or vehicular circulation area existed prior to September 15, 1980.
         a.   Any addition to a structure that does not exceed one 1,000 square
feet or 25% of the enclosed area of the structure, whichever is greater.
Additions shall be cumulative after September 15, 1980.
         b.   Any alteration of, or addition to, a vehicular circulation area
that does not exceed 1,000 square feet or 25% of the existing vehicular
circulation area, whichever is greater. Additions shall be cumulative after
September 15, 1980.
         c.   Any paving of an existing vehicular circulation area.
   F.   Designation, Amendment, or Change of Boundaries for a Hillside
Development Zone , a Protected Peak , or Ridge
      1.   Designation
      The Mayor and Council may designate new property as subject to this
Hillside Development Zone or a new peak or ridge for protection by the
establishment of a 300-foot setback . Consideration shall be in accordance with
Section
3.5.3, Zoning Examiner Legislative Procedure. The change to an existing
designation, amendment to or change of the boundaries of an existing HDZ area
shall be through the same process.
      2.   Standard for Designation
      Peaks or ridges or new HDZ areas designated for protection shall:
         a.   Have been designated by Pima County as a Hillside Development
Zone or as a protected peak or ridge prior to annexation by the City ;
         b.   Contain significant slopes which should be protected;
         c.   Be significant in relationship to the surrounding property;
         d.   Be highly visible from lower elevations; or,
         e.   Form a silhouette against the sky when viewed from a Scenic Route
.
5.2.4.   PERMITTED USES
   Any use permitted by the underlying zone shall be allowed.
5.2.5.   DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
   The following development standards shall apply to lots and parcels that are
affected by this zone . Any lot or parcel created shall meet the slope /size
standards of
Table 5.2-1 except as provided below. All development must be setback at least
300 feet from each protected peak or ridge as delineated on the City Zoning
Maps .
   A.   Single-Family Residential Development
      1.   Existing Lot or Parcel Where No Land Division is Proposed
      The average natural cross-slope (ACS ) shall be calculated for the entire
lot or parcel . If the ACS is 15% or greater, Columns A, B, and D of
Table 5.2-1 shall apply. If the minimum land area required for the lot or
parcel , based on the ACS , is greater than the area of the lot or parcel ,
natural areas may be designated on the lot or parcel , in accordance with
Section
5.2.6, to reduce the ACS percentage. Such designated natural areas shall be
excluded from the ACS calculation but shall be included in the land area for
the lot or parcel . (See
Figure 5.2-B)
      2.   Existing Lot or Parcel Where Land Division is Proposed
      The average natural cross-slope shall be calculated for the entire lot or
parcel . If the ACS is 15% or greater, Columns A and C of
Table 5.2-1 apply. Natural areas may be designated on the lot or parcel in
accordance with Section
5.2.6 to reduce the ACS percentage. Such natural areas shall be excluded from
the ACS calculation but shall be included in the land area for the lot or
parcel . (See
Figure 5.2-B)
         a.   If the land division requires a subdivision  plat , all areas of
15% or greater slope within the lot or parcel , except within natural areas,
shall be delineated. These sloped areas shall then determine the design of the
development according to the following standards.
            (1)   For any proposed lot within the parcel where the areas of 15%
or greater slope shall be located outside the buildable area , the minimum lot
size standards of the underlying zone apply. The buildable area may be
redefined to exclude areas of steeper slope in order to comply with this
standard. Grading shall occur only within the buildable area and access to the
buildable area . Grading for access may cross a delineated sloped area.
            (2)   For any proposed lot within the parcel where the buildable
area contains areas of 15% or greater slope , the minimum size required for
that lot shall be one acre unless a greater size is required by the underlying
zone . The amount of grading permitted is indicated in Column D of
Table 5.2-1, based on the area of the lot , Column B.
            (3)   Yard setbacks for the applicable zone shall be applied to the
entire parcel or to each lot within the parcel if the parcel is divided into
lots .
         b.   If a subdivision  plat is not submitted, the land area of each
lot created shall comply with Columns A, B, and D of
Table 5.2-1.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2978.jpg]
Figure 5.2-B: Natural Areas in HDZ
   B.   Multifamily Residential Development
      1.   The ACS is calculated for the entire lot or parcel . If the ACS is
15% or greater, Columns A, B, C, and D of
Table 5.2-1 applies.
      2.   Natural areas may be designated on the lot or parcel , in accordance
with Section
5.2.6, to reduce the ACS percentage. Such natural areas shall be excluded from
the ACS calculation but shall be included for the density and lot size
calculations. (See
Figure 5.2-B.)
         a.   If the ACS of the remaining portion of the lot or parcel is less
than 15% and contains no areas of 15% or greater slope , 100% of that portion
may be graded, subject to Section
5.2.7.B.1.
         b.   If the ACS of the remaining portion of the lot or parcel is less
than 15% but contains areas of 15% or greater slope , 80% of that portion may
be graded.
         c.   If the ACS of the remaining portion of the lot or parcel is 15%
or greater, Columns B, C, and D of
Table 5.2-1 apply, based on the entire area of the lot or parcel .
TABLE 5.2-1: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS BASED ON AVERAGE CROSS SLOPE
A                     B                    C       D
Average Natural Cross Minimum Area (Acre ) Density Maximum Grading (Percent)
Slope (Percent)
TABLE 5.2-1: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS BASED ON AVERAGE CROSS SLOPE
A                     B                    C       D
Average Natural Cross Minimum Area (Acre ) Density Maximum Grading (Percent)
Slope (Percent)
Less Than 15          As Permitted by Underlying Zoning
15.0-15.9             1.00                 1.00    40.0
16.0-16.9             1.12                 0.90    36.2
17.0-17.9             1.25                 0.80    32.0
18.0-18.9             1.37                 0.73    29.2
19.0-19.9             1.50                 0.67    21.3
20.0-20.9             2.00                 0.50    20.0
21.0-21.9             2.25                 0.44    17.7
22.0-22.9             2.50                 0.40    16.0
23.0-23.9             3.50                 0.29    13.3
24.0-24.9             4.50                 0.22    11.9
25.0-25.9             6.00                 0.17    9.3
26.0-26.9             7.00                 0.14    9.3
27.0-27.9             8.60                 0.12    9.3
28.0-28.9             10.40                0.09    9.3
29.0-29.9             12.80                0.08    9.3
30.0-30.9             16.00                0.06    8.8
31.0-31.9             23.50                0.04    6.7
32.0-32.9             31.00                0.03    6.7
33.0 and Greater      36.00                0.027   4.0
1 As determined in accordance with Section
9-01.3.0 of the Technical Standards Manual
2 Or as permitted by underlying zoning, whichever is more restrictive.
3 The following are not included when calculating the maximum permitted
grading percentage:
1. The area for septic tanks, including the primary and secondary leachate
fields.
2. The area for the minimum area needed for a driveway with a maximum slope
of 15%, including the minimum amount of area for a necessary turn around
area.
 
   C.   Flexible Lot Development (FLD)
   The purpose of the FLD in the HDZ is to preserve the sloped areas while
encouraging development on the flatter portions of a lot or parcel . An FLD
shall meet the standards of Section
8.7.3, as well as the following standards: (See
Figure 5.2-C.)
      1.   All structures shall be located outside the 300-foot protected peak
or ridge setback area and the protected area shall be preserved as a natural
area as provided in Section
5.2.6, Natural Areas;
      2.   The FLD application may be used for either single-family or
multifamily development . In order to apply the FLD, the ACS of the area to be
developed shall be less than 15%. This may require excluding steeper slopes as
natural areas in order to reduce the ACS of the remaining portion. Such natural
areas shall be excluded from the ACS calculation but shall be included for
density and lot size calculations. Density shall be regulated by the underlying
zone , based on the entire area; and,
      3.   For property within the HDZ, sloped areas in excess of 15% with an
area greater than or equal to 7,000 square feet shall be delineated and set
aside as Natural Undisturbed Open Space and designated as common area.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2982.jpg]
Figure 5.2-C: Flexible Lot Development in HDZ
   D.   Nonresidential Development
      1.   The ACS shall be calculated for the entire lot or parcel . If the
ACS is 15% or greater, Columns A, B, and D of
Table 5.2-1 apply. Column C does not apply.
      2.   Natural areas may be designated on the lot or parcel , in accordance
with Section
5.2.6, to reduce the ACS percentage.
         a.   If the ACS of the remaining portion of the lot or parcel is less
than 15% and contains no areas of 15% or greater slope , 100% of that portion
may be graded, subject to Section
5.2.7.B.1.
         b.   If the ACS of the remaining portion of the lot or parcel is less
than 15% but contains areas of 15% or greater slope , 80% of that portion may
be graded.
         c.   If the ACS of the remaining portion of the lot or parcel is 15%
or greater, Columns B and D of
Table 5.2-1 shall apply, based on the entire area of the lot or parcel .
   E.   Mixed Development
   When a mix of development is proposed, each type of development shall meet
all standards for that development , as required by this section.
5.2.6.   NATURAL AREAS
   Natural areas may be designated on any lot or parcel , subject to the
following standards.
   A.   Development other than hiking trails shall not be permitted within the
legally described boundaries of a natural area. (See
Figure 5.2-D.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2984.jpg]
Figure 5.2-D: Hiking Trails in Designated Natural Areas in HDZ
   B.   The natural area shall be delineated in a surveyable manner on the
tentative and final plats or on the site plan , whichever is applicable, and
designated by legal description on a document recorded with the Pima County
Recorder.
   C.   A natural area may be designated as a deed-restricted portion of a
privately-owned lot or as a separate parcel . This parcel may be under the
ownership of a homeowners’ association or deeded to any organization willing to
accept responsibility for the perpetual preservation of the natural area,
subject to approval and acceptance by the City of Tucson.
   D.   To protect the natural areas, covenants that run with the land shall be
provided in favor of the City of Tucson and of all owners with record interest
in the natural area.
   E.   If natural areas are designated, then at least one such natural area,
if in a parcel of four acres or more in size, shall be at least one-half acre
in size or immediately adjacent and contiguous to other land also designated as
natural area that, in the aggregate, is at least one-half acre in size. Section
5.2.6 applies only to natural areas and not to other common areas and open
spaces , such as recreation areas, road medians, etc., that are not designated
as required natural area.
5.2.7.   HILLSIDE SITE IMPROVEMENT STANDARD
   A.   Building Height
   Buildings are limited to a building height of 24 feet for residential
development and 30 feet for nonresidential development or the maximum height
permitted by the underlying zone , whichever is more restrictive. If the
building is also located within the boundaries of other overlay zones , the
most restrictive of the standards shall apply. (See
Figure 5.2-E.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2986.jpg]
Figure 5.2-E: Height
   B.   Site Improvement Standard
   All proposed site work, including grading , shall comply with the Section
2-01, Excavating and Grading, of the Technical Standards Manual and the
following standards:
      1.   Grading
         a.   Site or Lot  Grading
         Projects subject to the provisions of the HDZ ordinance shall have a
grading plan approved by the City Engineer or designee. Review of a grading
plan may occur concurrently with the review of the subdivision , site plan , or
base plan. All development shall meet the following standards:
            (1)   The portions of the site to be graded must be shown on a site
or grading plan and by staking on the site . A City -approved grading plan is
required prior to any grubbing, grading , or clearing. Grubbing, grading , and
clearing shall occur only within the areas identified on the grading plan and
staked on the site or lot ; and,
            (2)   The portions of the site to be left ungraded shall remain
undisturbed and shall not be used for stockpiling of materials or excess fill ,
construction vehicle access, storage of vehicles during construction, or
similar uses. If natural areas are designated on a site or lot , temporary
fencing, as approved and Inspected by the City Engineer or designee, shall be
installed prior to construction where they abut construction areas in order to
prevent encroachment into the natural areas.
         b.   Cut and Fill
         The following are required of cut and fill  slopes :
            (1)   The maximum amount of cut shall not exceed 30 feet;
            (2)   The uppermost point of an exposed cut  slope shall be no
higher than 15 feet above design grade ;
            (3)   The uppermost point of a nonexposed cut  slope shall be no
higher than the highest point of any building set into the cut , provided that:
               (a)   This cut shall be concealed from view by a method such as
backfilling; and,
               (b)   The backfilled area must be revegetated in accordance with
Section
5.2.7.B.2.b.
            (4)   The vertical distance of exposed fill and/or exposed
retaining material shall not exceed 15 feet;
            (5)   Exposed cut and fill  slopes shall either be revegetated or
protected by constructed means, such as riprapping or retaining walls; and,
            (6)   Cut or fill  slopes that encroach into a floodplain require
City Engineer or designee approval.
      2.   Vegetation Retention and Revegetation
         a.   Vegetation Retention
            (1)   Existing viable and transplantable trees with four inch or
greater trunk diameter and cacti shall be preserved in their original
locations, except for building sites and access and utilities serving building
sites .
            (2)   When retention of the above trees and cacti in their original
locations is not possible due to building site location, the trees and cacti
shall be salvaged and replanted in areas requiring revegetation , whenever
possible.
         b.   Revegetation
         All cut or fill  slopes that are no steeper than three horizontal to
one vertical and all utility trenches or septic leaching fields that are not
located in parking or driveway areas shall be revegetated in compliance with
the following standards:
            (1)   All plants used in revegetation shall be the same as the
native vegetation on the site prior to grading or clearing or any adjacent
 site ; and,
            (2)   Revegetation shall be accomplished with the following minimum
standards for plants:
               (a)   Desert trees, a minimum of 15-gallon size with a minimum
trunk diameter of two inches measured at the soil level, or large specimen
cactus shall be placed at the same vegetation density found on the site prior
to any clearing, grubbing, or grading ; and,
               (b)   Seeds for trees, desert shrubs, and grasses shall be
planted with a density adequate to control erosion and may use one of the
following methods of planting: Raked into the soil with appropriate mulch
materials; hydroseeding; anchored mulches; or established on jute, rolled
straw, or similar material. Another method may be approved by PDSD.
            (3)   A temporary watering system shall be installed until the
revegetation materials are established.
      3.   Slope Stabilization
      All slopes steeper than a ratio of three horizontal to one vertical, with
the exception of retaining walls, shall be stabilized with properly engineered
stone riprapping or sculptured rock as follows:
         a.   Stone riprapping shall be hand-placed on the slope ;
         b.   The stabilizing material used shall blend with the natural
appearance of the site or lot and the surrounding terrain; and,
         c.   Vegetation retention and revegetation should be used in
conjunction with riprapping.
   C.   Color
   All exposed exterior walls and roofs of structures , retaining walls, and
accessory structures , except satellite dishes, shall be earth tone in color
and shall blend with the predominant natural colors found on the lot or parcel
. Satellite dishes may be black. White is not permitted.
5.2.8.   MAINTENANCE AND PROTECTION
   Measures may be required prior to approval of a subdivision  plat or
issuance of building permits, such as covenants, assurances , or homeowners’
associations , as may be necessary to ensure the long-term maintenance of slope
control measures.
5.2.9.   ENFORCEMENT
   A.   The developer and/or property owner shall be responsible for the
following:
      1.   Submitting a Hillside Development Zone Plan in accordance with
Section
9-01.0.0, Hillside Development Zone, of the Technical Standards Manual;
      2.   Submitting average natural cross-slope and sloped area analyses in
accordance with Section
9-01.3.0, Slope Analysis Standard, of the Technical Standards Manual, certified
by an Arizona registered professional, such as an engineer, land surveyor,
architect, or landscape architect, for review and verification by the City
Engineer or designee;
      3.   Surveying, staking, and inspection of the lot or parcel by a
certified engineer or land surveyor to determine compliance with the provisions
of this section; and,
      4.   On-site enforcement by certifying to the City Engineer or designee
that the development complies with the HDZ standards during the period of
development .
   B.   If violation of any provision of the HDZ occurs, the property owner is
responsible for bringing the violation into compliance with the HDZ standards.
This may require restoration of the site as closely as possible to its original
undisturbed condition, topography, and vegetation, in order to remove the
violation .
5.2.10.   VARIANCES
   A request for a variance from the 300-foot setback from a protected peak or
ridge as provided for in Section
5.2.6, Natural Areas, shall meet, in addition to the findings required for a
variance, the following conditions. Consideration shall be in accordance with
Sections
3.10.1 and
3.10.3, Board of Adjustment Variance Procedure.
   A.   The proposed development is for a single-family residence;
   B.   The only area to be graded within the protected peak and ridge setback
area is for a building pad and access to the building ;
   C.   The visible external portion of the building or structure, except for
doors, windows, and mechanical equipment, shall be constructed of materials
that will blend with the predominant natural colors found on the lot or parcel
;
   D.   The highest portion of the structure is no higher than the elevation of
the peak or ridge ;
   E.   No more than six feet of the external portion of the structure is
exposed, except at points of ingress and egress ;
   F.   All utilities on the lot or parcel are located underground; and,
   G.   The project is designed so that glass surfaces do not reflect beyond
the lot or parcel boundaries. This can be accomplished by methods such as using
nonreflective glass or providing overhangs or other window shading, structural
elements, or landscaping that, when mature, will screen windows.
5.3.   SCENIC CORRIDOR ZONE (SCZ)
5.3.1.   INTRODUCTION
   Tucson is located on a magnificent City  site , with mountain ranges in all
directions and attractive foothills leading up to the mountains. This setting
is a scenic resource of great value for the City , for its inhabitants, and for
its economy. Specifically, beautiful surroundings help to attract tourists to
the City , and nationwide experience indicates that the most desirable new
sources of employment have been locating in areas with the most attractive
environments. Preservation of scenic resources is, therefore, important for
both aesthetic and economic reasons. These valuable scenic resources encompass
views up to and into the mountains, including the mountain profiles and their
foothills, and views from the mountains across the valley. They also include
significant natural vegetation and geological formations along designated
Scenic Routes .
5.3.2.   PURPOSE
   To protect the City ’s unique visual setting and promote its economic well-
being, performance standards are required to assure design sensitivity to the
natural scenic quality. These standards are established to provide for the
preservation of:
   A.   Views of prominent mountain ridge lines that form the limits of scenic
viewsheds and provide a natural backdrop for sensitively designed development ;
   B.   Viewsheds that provide the observer with a visual perspective of the
area in terms of foreground, middle ground, and background;
   C.   The scenic quality of the desert and mountain environment through the
retention of native vegetation and natural topography; and,
   D.   View windows through an aesthetic screening or siting of developmental
elements that are incompatible with the natural qualities of the surrounding
area.
5.3.3.   APPLICABILITY
   A.   Except as provided below, the provisions of the Scenic Corridor Zone
(SCZ) apply to any portion of all real properties or parcels that are located
within 400 feet of the future right-of-way line of any Scenic Route designated
on the Major Streets and Routes (MS&R) Plan . (See
Figure 5.3-A.)
   B.   Exception. Utility facilities constructed or installed in accordance
with a certificate of environmental compatibility issued prior to the adoption
of this section, under the authority of A.R.S. Title 40, Chapter 2, Article
6.2, are exempt from the provisions of this section.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2988.jpg]
Figure 5.3-A: Scenic Corridor Zone
5.3.4.   SCENIC ROUTE BUFFER AREA
   A.   Requirement
      1.   A buffer area 30 feet wide, adjacent to the MS&R future right-of-way
line , is required and shall be preserved and maintained in its natural state;
      2.   No development or improvements shall occur in a Scenic Route buffer
area except as provided in Section
5.3.4.C, Permitted Improvements; (See
Figure 5.3-B.)
      3.   The buffer area shall be restored as closely to its natural state as
possible In areas where public safety or the delivery of public services
precludes preservation of existing vegetation; and,
      4.   The buffer area is in lieu of the landscape border required along
street frontages under Section
7.6, Landscaping and Screening Standards.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2990.jpg]
Figure 5.3-B: Preservation and Reestablishment of Vegetation Adjacent to Scenic
Route
   B.   Measurement of the Scenic Routes Buffer Area
      1.   The Scenic Routes buffer area is measured from the future MS&R
right-of-way , except as follows.
      2.   Exception. Where the MS&R roadway design includes installation of a
sidewalk , pedestrian way, or bike path, the buffer may be measured from the
MS&R projected back of the sidewalk , pedestrian way, or bike path if the
buffer does not encroach more than ten feet into the future MS&R right-of-way
with the written permission of the City of Tucson Department of Transportation.
The use of the MS&R right-of-way is permitted only if the area can be
landscaped.
   C.   Permitted Improvements
   The following improvements are permitted in the Scenic Routes buffer area:
      1.   Driveways or access lanes , if their area does not exceed 20% of the
Scenic Routes Buffer Area (Buffer Area). In this instance, the width of the
Buffer Area is 30 feet in accordance with Section
5.3.4.A.1. For the purposes here, the Buffer Area is calculated as follows:
Multiply the distance of the property’s frontage along the Scenic Route
measured at the MS&R right-of-way line by 30 feet. If, due to topographical or
engineering constraints, the driveway or access lane exceeds 20% of the Buffer
Area, the width of the Buffer Area shall be increased to accommodate the square
footage resulting from the following calculation: (Distance of the frontage
along the Scenic Route measured at the MS&R right-of-way line - total width of
driveways or access lanes ) x 24 feet = Required Buffer Area in square feet.
Specific sign types may also be placed in the Scenic Routes buffer area in
accordance with Article
7A.11.3 Scenic Corridor Zone (SCZ) District.
      2.   Trenching for the placement of utility lines, if the area is
revegetated in accordance with Section
5.3.4.D, Revegetation of Site;
      3.   An area not larger than 18 square feet and not exceeding 30 inches
in height per lot or parcel for the placement of utility transformers,
pedestals, and service meters and hookups for utilities ; and,
      4.   Selected vegetation may be removed when the Department of
Transportation determines that removal is necessary for public safety if the
removed plants are replaced with native vegetation .
   D.   Revegetation of Site
      1.   Any portion of the Scenic Route buffer area and the MS&R right-of-
way disturbed by development activity shall be revegetated with native
vegetation .
      2.   Within the SCZ, excluding the Scenic Routes buffer area, all
disturbed areas on the site that are visible from the Scenic Route and are not
covered by permanent improvements shall be revegetated with native plants,
plants from the Drought Tolerant Plant List, or a combination of both.
      3.   In areas not visible from the Scenic Corridor Zone , vegetation may
consist of native plants indigenous to the site or drought tolerant plant
material. Oasis area landscaping material may also be planted within this area
at the levels permitted by the landscaping ordinance.
   E.   Cut and Fill
   Exposed cut or fill  slopes shall be no greater than a one foot rise or fall
over a three foot length.
(Am. Ord. 11127, 11/6/2013; Am. Ord. 11803, 12/8/2020)
5.3.5.   STRUCTURE HEIGHT
   A.   The maximum height of a structure is one-third the distance of the
structure from the future right-of-way line , with the following exceptions.
(See
Figure 5.3-C.)
      1.   Principal structures , with a maximum height of 12 feet, may be
constructed anywhere within the buildable area of the parcel .
      2.   Nonresidential structures shall not exceed 30 feet in height.
      3.   Residential structures shall not exceed 24 feet in height.
   B.   Where there is a conflict between these structure height standards and
those of the existing underlying zone or Hillside Development Zone (HDZ)
(Section
5.2), the most restrictive standard shall apply.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2992.jpg]
Figure 5.3-C: Maximum Structure Height in Scenic Corridor Zone
5.3.6.   SITING AND VIEW CORRIDORS
   A.   Siting of structures shall be such that existing natural topography and
vegetation is minimally disturbed. Grading beyond that necessary for siting of
buildings , parking, private yards, and structural improvements is prohibited.
All existing viable and transplantable vegetation with a caliper of four inches
or greater and all Saguaro cacti shall be preserved or relocated on the site .
   B.   A site that has at least 200 feet of frontage along a Scenic Route must
provide view corridors as follows:
      1.   The view corridor(s) shall have a combined width of at least 20% of
that frontage ; and,
      2.   There must be at least one view corridor from the Scenic Route into
and through that portion of the project that lies within the SCZ. (See
Figure 5.3-D.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2994.jpg]
 Figure 5.3-D: View Corridors in Scenic Corridor
   C.   Drainageways shall be maintained in their natural states when possible,
and the discretionary authority shall be exercised only under unusual
circumstances. In situations where the discretionary authority is exercised by
the City Engineer or designee, modifications shall be in accordance with the
“Floodplain, Stormwater, and Erosion Hazard Management Regulations.”
5.3.7.   PARKING AREAS
   Landscaping and screening of parking areas shall comply with Section
7.6.4.B, Vehicular Use Areas.
5.3.8.   SCREENING
   Screening shall comply with Section
7.6.5, Screening Standards.
5.3.9.   UTILITIES
   A.   All new utilities for development on private property and on public
right-of-way along Scenic Routes shall be underground unless relief is
otherwise granted pursuant to UDC sections
5.3.14, Variances and/or through a Zoning Examiner special exception process
per section
4.9.11.A.12.
   B.   Where possible, existing poles shall be used to provide the required
transition to underground service to new developments  adjacent to scenic
corridors. However, a new pole set in line with the existing overhead system
when necessary to serve approved new developments is not deemed to be a new
utility. Upgrades and reinforcements of existing overhead facilities is allowed
to the extent that the total number of electrical circuits or communication
cables is not increased. Relocation of overhead utility facilities required by
public improvement districts along scenic corridors shall conform with existing
franchise standards.
   C.   When an existing development is expanded by 50% or more in floor area
or land area, new and existing utilities to all portions of the development
shall be located underground unless relief is otherwise granted pursuant to UDC
sections
5.3.14, Variances and/or through a Zoning Examiner special exception process
per Section
4.9.11.A.12. Incremental expansion shall be cumulative. Additions to single-
family dwellings are exempt from this standard.
(Am. Ord. 11942, 7/12/2022)
5.3.10.   ADDITIONAL DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS
   A.   Building or structure surfaces, that are visible from the Scenic Route
, shall have colors that are predominant within the surrounding landscape, such
as desert and earth tones. Single-family dwellings, except in subdivisions
recorded after May 28, 1985, are exempt from this standard.
   B.   Fencing and freestanding walls facing the Scenic Route shall meet the
material restrictions in Section
7.6.5, Screening Standards.
   C.   Signs are required to comply with the following:
      1.   
Article 7A.11.3, Scenic Corridor Zone (SCA) District;
      2.   Signs shall use colors that are predominant within the surrounding
landscape, such as desert and earth tones;
      3.   No commercial advertising sign, except a sign pertaining to a use
conducted on the premises or a sign advertising the sale or lease of the
property upon which the sign is located, and no billboard shall be erected
within 400 feet of the right-of-way line on any Scenic Route ; and,
      4.   When the standards of this section and Section 3-32 conflict, the
more restrictive of the two prevails.
(Am. Ord. 11803, 12/8/2020)
5.3.11.   REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURE
   A.   Applications for projects within the SCZ are reviewed and considered
for approval in accordance with Section
3.3.3, PDSD Director Approval Procedure.
   B.   At the request of the PDSD Director or applicant, the Design Review
Board (DRB) shall review building elevations, landscaping , parking areas , and
other contributing design features to substantiate compliance with the
standards required in making a decision.
   C.   The decision to approve or deny the project shall be based on the
purpose, intent, and specific standards of this section, on the objectives
specified in the Major Streets and Routes (MS&R) Plan for scenic corridor
development , and on the following standards that provide for the preservation
of:
      1.   Views of prominent mountain ridge lines that form the limits of
scenic viewsheds and provide a natural backdrop for sensitively designed
development ;
      2.   Viewsheds that provide the observer with a visual perspective of the
area in terms of foreground, middle ground, and background;
      3.   The scenic quality of the desert and mountain environment through
the retention of native vegetation and natural topography; and,
      4.   View windows through an aesthetic screening or siting of
developmental elements that are incompatible with the natural qualities of the
surrounding area.
5.3.12.   SUBMITTALS
   Submittals shall be in compliance with the Administrative Manual.
5.3.13.   GRADING
   Grading cannot occur until 30 days prior to building construction. For
commencement of grading , the building construction plans shall be, at minimum,
in the review process for permits, or the building construction permits shall
have already been ready to be issued. Grading permits shall cover only those
areas for which base plans have been approved.
5.3.14.   VARIANCES
   Variances from the SCZ standards are processed in accordance with Section
3.10.1 and
3.10.3, Board of Adjustment Variance Procedure. The Design Review Board review
all requests for variances from SCZ standards and forward a recommendation to
the Board of Adjustment as provided in Section
2.2.6.C.2.
5.3.15.   DESIGNATION, AMENDMENT, OR CHANGE OF BOUNDARIES FOR A SCENIC CORRIDOR
ZONE
   Designation, amendment, or change of boundaries for a Scenic Corridor Zone
are processed in accordance with Section
5.4.3, MS&R Map Adoption and Amendment.
5.4.   MAJOR STREET AND ROUTES  SETBACK  ZONE (MS&R)
5.4.1.   PURPOSE
   The purpose of this overlay zone is to implement policies in the City ’s
General Plan , the Regional Transportation Plan, and the Air Quality Plan, with
specific emphasis on the Major Streets and Routes (MS&R) Plan . The MS&R Plan
 projects the future arterial and collector street needs of the community and
is a tool to implement the development of a safe and efficient street system
and the design of all land uses serviced by that system, while assuring the
economic viability of new and expanding land uses and the continued economic
stability of the community. These goals are achieved by providing for the:
   A.   Capability of street widening in a timely manner in order to increase
the safety of the street system, allow for adequate street capacity, and
provide for the movement of traffic safely and efficiently;
   B.   Capability of timely improvement of the street system to assist in
reducing air pollution that:
      1.   Poses a significant threat to the health of the residents;
      2.   Negatively impacts on sectors of the economy dealing with
astronomical observation, research, tourism and convention, health, and
filmmaking; and,
      3.   Adversely affects the quality of life.
   C.   Economic viability of new land uses located on the MS&R system by
establishing design standards that will provide adequate on-site facilities to
accommodate and serve those land uses after street widening and improvement;
   D.   Improvement of the MS&R system by establishing standards that assure
availability of land for street widening purposes, including alternate modes of
transportation such as bicycle , pedestrian, and mass transit;
   E.   Stability of residential neighborhoods that are in close proximity to
streets on the MS&R system, minimizing any unsafe encroachment into adjacent
neighborhoods by requiring all new and expanding land uses located on the MS&R
system to maintain adequate facilities to serve their needs after any street
improvement; and,
   F.   Community’s continued economic stability by establishing design
standards to provide for the economic viability of all properties located along
the MS&R system after street  improvements .
5.4.2.   APPLICABILITY
   The MS&R standards apply to the following uses on property, any portion of
which abuts or is adjacent to a street designated on the City ’s or County ’s
MS&R Plan :
   A.   New structures ;
   B.   Changes of use, including new structures occurring on vacant land;
   C.   Uses of land or structures legally existing as of June 27, 1988, that
are expanded in floor area , lot coverage , parking, seating capacity, or any
other expansion of use, as listed below. Exception. An expansion of off-street
parking for a nonconforming existing use that increases the number of spaces to
the minimum required by the UDC for that use is exempt from counting toward the
25% expansion: (See
Figure 5.4-A.)
      1.   If the expansion is less than 25%, the MS&R applies to the proposed
expansion. The remainder of the use or structure shall be governed by
provisions in force at the time of initial approval for the use or structure;
      2.   If the expansion is 25% or more, the MS&R applies to the proposed
expansion and to the parking and landscaping standards that apply to the
overall development ; or,
      3.   Expansions that occur after the effective date of the MS&R shall be
cumulated in determining the 25% expansion; and,
   D.   When one or more of the standards of the MS&R, the Gateway Route , or
the Scenic Corridor Zone (SCZ) (Section
5.5) apply to the same street , the most restrictive standards apply.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2996.jpg]
Figure 5.4-A: Applicability of MS&R Setback Provisions
5.4.3.   MS&R ADOPTION AND AMENDMENT
   The major streets and routes applicable under these provisions are
established by the MS&R Map, which is adopted as a component of the MS&R Plan .
The adoption and amendment of the MS&R Plan , including designations of Scenic
Routes and Gateway Routes , are processed in accordance with Section
3.6, Land Use Plan Adoption and Amendment Procedure. Designations of extensions
of Scenic Routes and Gateway Routes may also be adopted with the adoption of
original City zoning in accordance with Section
3.5.3, Zoning Examiner Legislative Process.
5.4.4.   ESTABLISHMENT OF MS&R RIGHT-OF-WAY LINES AND GATEWAY ROUTES
   MS&R right-of-way line locations are established utilizing the future right-
of-way width for those streets identified in the MS&R Plan . The widths are
measured in accordance with the method established by the MS&R Plan . Gateway
Routes are those major streets or routes designated as Gateway Routes by the
MS&R Plan .
5.4.5.   PERMITTED USE OF MS&R RIGHT-OF-WAY AREA
   The area between the MS&R right-of-way lines is also referred to as the MS&R
right-of-way area , whether publicly or privately owned. In addition to roadway
 improvements in conjunction with and accessory to development on abutting
properties, the following are permitted in the MS&R right-of-way area :
   A.   No portion of the MS&R right-of-way area that is publicly owned shall
be used toward complying with UDC standards, unless specifically stipulated;
   B.   Landscaping in compliance with Section
7.6, Landscaping and Screening Standards;
   C.   Structural improvements , provided:
      1.   The MS&R is not a Scenic Route ;
      2.   The structure is not a building ;
      3.   That, if the improvement is for off-street parking , such parking is
in addition to the amount required for the existing use(s), and the area is
fully improved as required for any parking area . The screening and landscaping
required by Section
7.6, Landscaping and Screening Standards, for vehicular use areas , street
landscape borders , and Gateway Routes  may be located temporarily in the MS&R
right-of-way area  until such time as this area is used for right-of-way
purposes. Upon elimination of the parking area , all parking-related
improvements , such as required screening and landscaping , as specified on the
site plan  required by Section
5.4.5.F, shall be moved to the location specified on the site plan  at no cost
to the City ; (See
Figure 5.4-B.)
      4.   The structural improvement, other than landscaping , access, or
public improvements , is located at least eight feet from the edge of the
existing roadway (curb);
      5.   The improvement does not obstruct the existing street ’s sight
visibility triangle;
      6.   That, if the improvement is a sign, it is permitted as an on-site
sign by the Sign Code. Such sign shall be removed at the time of street
widening at no expense to the City ; and,
      7.   Approval is granted by the Mayor and Council for any structural
improvement located within publicly owned right-of-way.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3000.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3002.jpg]
Figure 5.4-B: Permitted Uses of the Major Street and Route Right-of-Way Area
   D.   The following applies when calculating the various standards:
      1.   On development projects that are not part of a subdivision  plat or
rezoning application, the site area within the MS&R right-of-way may be used as
follows:
         a.   For calculation of lot coverage or open space as non-lot coverage
or open space area, regardless of what improvements are located within that
area;
         b.   For calculation of an adjustment for nonresidential projects to
off-street parking in accordance with Section
5.4.6.B or floor area standards provided the adjustment does not reduce the
amount of required parking by 20% or more of the amount that would be required
without the adjustment.
         c.   For calculation as part of the site , floor area , and density
calculations. If the entire MS&R right-of-way area , excluding access and
public improvements , to the edge of the paved roadway is landscaped, that part
of the site within the MS&R right-of-way area may be included at one and one-
eighth its size (multiply the area size by 1.125), provided:
            (1)   The landscaping is visible from the public right-of-way ;
            (2)   The landscaping is over and above that required by the UDC ;
and,
            (3)   The street is not scheduled for construction within a period
of three years from the date of issuance of a building permit.
         d.   If, in addition to landscaping the entire MS&R area, that area is
dedicated to the City at nominal cost , the area may be included at one and
one-fourth its size (multiply the area dedicated by 1.25) in lieu of the 1.125.
In this situation, Section
5.4.5.D.1.c(3) would not apply.
      2.   On development projects that are part of a subdivision  plat
application but not part of a rezoning application, Section
5.4.5.D.1.c may be utilized.
   E.   Landscaping that is provided to achieve additional density or floor
area is considered a requirement of the UDC and shall be maintained in
compliance.
   F.   An approved site plan is required indicating how the project will
comply with UDC standards when the MS&R right-of-way can no longer be used as
part of the site . Such plan shall be an exhibit to an executed covenant for
recordation stating the responsibility of the property owner, successor, or
assignee as to the removal of improvements and compliance with the UDC at no
cost to the City .
5.4.6.   MS&R STREET  PERIMETER YARD AND PARKING ADJUSTMENT
   A.   Setback
   The required minimum street perimeter yard from a street that is designated
a major street or route on the MS&R Map shall be the same as the perimeter yard
for the base zoning district in accordance with Section
6.3.4, Dimensional Standard and Exceptions Tables, and other related sections
if the street  is not a designated Scenic Route  on the MS&R Map. Along a
street  that is designated a Scenic Route , the required perimeter yard  is
regulated in accordance with Section
5.3.4.A, Scenic Route Buffer Area.
   B.   Adjustment
   An adjustment to the amount of required off-street parking for
nonresidential projects is permitted to compensate for the setting aside of
property for eventual use as part of an MS&R improvement in accordance with
Section
5.4.5.F. The amount of adjustment depends on the individual situation. To
determine the amount, an adjustment factor is applied and calculated as
provided below.
   C.   Applying Adjustment Factor
   The adjustment factor (percentage) is utilized to accomplish one of the
following:
      1.   To lower the ratio of required off-street parking spaces to the
square footage of use;
      2.   To increase the square footage of use for the amount of off-street
parking provided; or,
      3.   To increase the seating capacity of a use for the amount of off-
street parking provided.
 
EXAMPLE 1: Application of Adjustment Factor
 
•   Required Parking Ratio: One space for every 200 square feet of floor area .
 
•   Adjustment Factor: 11.2 percent. (Refer to Section
5.4.6.C)
 
•   Proposed Building Square Footage: 30,440 square feet.
 
Application 1. Adjustment to the Parking Ratio. If the adjustment factor is applied
to the parking ratio, then the ratio (200) is multiplied by the adjustment factor
(0.112). The result (22.4) is added to the normally required ratio (200) to provide
the new adjusted ratio (222.4) that would be applicable.
 
Application 2. Adjustment to Building Size. If the adjustment factor (11.2%) is
applied to the floor area  (30,440), first the parking would be calculated on the
30,440 square feet that, at one space per 200 square feet, would equal 152 parking
spaces that shall be provided. Then, the 30,440 square feet is multiplied by the
adjustment factor (0.112). The result (3,409) is then added to 30,440 square feet to
provide a total building  square footage of 33,849 that could be placed on the
property.
 
Application 3. Adjustment to Seating Capacity. To apply the adjustment factor in a
situation where the required off-street parking  is calculated by the number of
seats, such as one space for every five seats, the adjustment factor (0.112) is
multiplied by the number of seats (5). The result (0.56) is added to the number of
seats (5) to provide the new adjusted ratio of one space for every 5.56 seats that
would be applicable.
 
   D.   Calculation of Adjustment Factor
      1.   The adjustment on each project is based on the amount (by
percentage) of site area that is within the MS&R right-of-way area (A). This
adjustment factor is calculated by dividing that area (A) by the gross site
area that includes area A. The adjustment factor is calculated to the nearest
thousandth as shown below. (See
Figure 5.4-C.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3004.jpg]
Figure 5.4-C: Adjustment of Off-Street Parking Requirements
   Formula: A ÷ (A + B) = Adjustment factor
   Where:
   A = Site area within MS&R right-of-way
   B = Site area outside the MS&R right-of-way
   A + B = Site area or gross site area
 
EXAMPLE 2: Utilization of Formula
 
A = 15,000 square feet
B = 75,000 square feet
A ÷ (A + B) = Adjustment factor (percentage)
15,000 ÷ (15,000 + 75,000) = Adjustment factor
15,000 ÷90,000 = Adjustment factor
.167 = 16.7% = Adjustment factor
 
EXAMPLE 3. Adjustment Utilizing Section
5.4.5.H.1.d.
 
If area A were dedicated  to the City , then area A would be allowed to count
at one and one-fourth its size in the adjustment calculation as provided in
Section
5.4.5.D.1.d. For example, utilizing the site  conditions in Example 1, where A
is equal to 15,000 square feet utilizing the provision of Section
5.4.5.D.1.d, area A would now be equal to 18,750 square feet (15,000 multiplied
by 1.25). The calculation would be as follows with B = 75,000 square feet:
 
A ÷ (A + B) = Adjustment factor
18,750 ÷ (18,750 + 75,000) = Adjustment factor
18,750 ÷ 93,750 = Adjustment factor
0.20 = 20% = Adjustment factor
 
(Am. Ord. 11171, 5/20/2014)
5.4.7.   MS&R RIGHT-OF WAY USE MODIFICATION REQUEST
   A.   Purpose
      This section provides an administrative process allowing improvements in
privately and publicly owned MS&R right-of-way areas . This procedure is
intended to allow flexibility in using right-of-way areas where no negative
impact is created for surrounding property or the City 's major streets and
routes planning and where there is a finding that the subject right-of-way area
will not be used for road expansion or similar uses in the future.
   B.   Applicability
      The following improvements may be considered under this Major Streets &
Routes Plan Right-of-Way Modification Request (MSMR): buildings , signs,
required parking and landscaping and any other improvement deemed similar by
the PDSD Director. The MSMR does not apply to scenic routes . Permission to use
MSMR shall not preclude any other necessary regulatory relief process, such as
a Design Development Option or Variance.
   C.   Application
      Applications must include property ownership information, a site plan ,
and other information as required by the PDSD and Department of Transportation
Directors as necessary to evaluate the request. Except as provided herein,
review of an MSMR is processed in accordance with Section
3.3.3, PDSD Director Approval Procedure.
   D.   Findings for Approval
      The PDSD Director may approve a MSMR as provided by this section if all
of the following applicable criteria are met and documented in findings.
      1.   There is a written finding by the Department of Transportation
Director that the subject right of way area will not be used for road, drainage
or other needed expansions in the future and any other special condition
required for approval has been met, and
      2.   The modification is not a request previously denied as a variance,
and
      3.   The modification is not to a condition of approval for a rezoning,
Special Exception Land Use, variance, or Individual Parking Plan, and
      4.   The modification does not adversely impact adjacent properties or
development, and
      5.   The modification does not impede sight visibility at points of
ingress into, egress from, or within the vehicular use area for either
vehicular or pedestrian traffic or otherwise create or increase a safety
hazard, and
      6.   The modification provides an improvement that is better integrated
into the design character of the immediate neighborhood, and
      7.   The MSMR does not replace the need for an approval as a Parking
Design Modification Request per Sec.
7.4.10.
(Am. Ord. 11171, 5/20/2014; Am. Ord. 11386, 7/6/2016)
5.5.   GATEWAY CORRIDOR ZONE (GCZ)
5.5.1.   PURPOSE
   The purpose of this overlay zone is to implement policies in the City ’s
General Plan , the Regional Transportation Plan, and the Air Quality Plan, with
specific emphasis on the Major Streets and Routes (MS&R) Plan . The MS&R Plan
 projects the future arterial and collector street needs of the community and
is a tool to implement the development of a safe and efficient street system
and the design of all land uses serviced by that system, while assuring the
economic viability of new and expanding land uses and the continued economic
stability of the community. These goals are achieved by providing for the
visual improvement of major streets and routes designated as Gateway Routes by
implementing standards for the design and landscaping of the roadway and
adjacent  development , thereby providing:
   A.   A favorable visual impression of Tucson to tourists and visitors at
entry points to the City and on routes leading to major recreation attractions;
   B.   Enhancement of the built environment along routes of important
commercial development ;
   C.   Incentives for private investment and economic development by providing
an attractive streetscape;
   D.   Aesthetic buffering through the implementation of screening or siting
of developmental elements that are incompatible with the urban character of
adjacent uses;
   E.   The improvement and use of the pedestrian environment along major
transit routes; and,
   F.   Some measure of air quality control by requiring landscaping with live
vegetation to assist in purifying the air of carbon dioxide through oxygenation
and dilution.
5.5.2.   APPLICABILITY
   The GCZ standards apply to the following uses on all property, any portion
of which abuts or is adjacent to a street designated on the City ’s or county
’s MS&R Plan :
   A.   New structures ;
   B.   Changes of use, including new structures occurring on vacant land; or,
   C.   Uses of land or structures legally existing as of June 27, 1988, that
are expanded in floor area , lot coverage , parking, seating capacity, or any
other expansion of use, as listed below. Exception. Expansion of off-street
parking for a nonconforming existing use that increases the number of spaces to
the minimum required by the UDC for that use is exempt from counting toward the
25% expansion.
      1.   If the expansion is less than 25%, the GCZ applies to the proposed
expansion. The remainder of the use or structure shall be governed by
provisions in force at the time of initial approval for the use or structure;
      2.   If the expansion is 25% or more, the GCZ applies to the proposed
expansion and to the parking and landscaping standards that apply to the
overall development ; or,
      3.   Expansions that occur after June 27, 1988, shall be cumulated in
determining the 25% expansion.
   D.   When one or more of the standards of the MS&R setback  zone , the
Gateway Route , or the Scenic Corridor Zone (SCZ) apply to the same street ,
the most restrictive standards apply.
   E.   At street  intersections where a Scenic Route  and Gateway Route
intersect, development  review and standards of the Gateway Route  apply for
700 feet along the Scenic Route  from each side of the intersection. The 700
feet shall be measured from the MS&R right-of-way line  of the Gateway Route .
This does not apply to
Article 7A, Sign Standards.
   F.   The following are exempt from the application of the Gateway Route
standard:
      1.   Utility facilities constructed or installed in accordance with a
certificate of environmental compatibility issued prior to June 27, 1988, under
the authority of A.R.S. Title 40, Chapter 2, Article 6.2;
      2.   Single-family  lot legally existing on June 27, 1988; or,
      3.   Development within the Downtown Redevelopment District .
   G.   Where widening of a Gateway Route is planned for construction within
three years after the date of a building permit application, landscaping is not
required to be implemented until the road project has been completed, provided
the developer posts financial assurances to ensure compliance.
(Am. Ord. 11803, 12/8/2020)
5.5.3.   REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURE
   Applications for projects within the GCZ are reviewed and considered for
approval in accordance with Section
3.3.3, PDSD Director Approval Procedure.
   The City shall not issue any type of approval or construction permit, nor
shall any improvement, construction, or alteration of a building or structure
be allowed along a Gateway Route , until approval is granted.
5.5.4.   DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
   In addition to other applicable standards in other sections of the UDC ,
such as landscaping and screening, the following development standards are
required of projects in the GCZ:
   A.   Signs
   Signs as permitted by
Article 7A, Sign Standards, are allowed within the required landscaped area
with the exception of billboards. Billboards are not permitted within 400 feet
of the MS&R right-of-way line .
   B.   Utilities
      1.   New Utilities
         a.   New utilities for development on private and on public right-of-
way along Gateway Routes shall be underground unless relief is otherwise
granted pursuant to UDC sections
5.3.14, Variances or through a Zoning Examiner special exception process per
section
4.9.11.A.12.
         b.   Existing poles shall be used to provide the required transition
to underground service to new development  adjacent to Gateway Routes . When
necessary to serve new development , a new pole set in line with, but not
extending, an existing overhead system used to serve new development is not
considered a new utility.
         c.   Upgrades and reinforcements of existing overhead facilities are
allowed to the extent that the total number of electrical circuits or
communication cables is not increased.
      2.   Existing Utilities
      Where an existing development is expanded in floor area or land area to
any degree, new and existing utilities to all portions of the development shall
be located underground unless relief is otherwise granted pursuant to UDC
sections
5.3.14, Variances or through a Zoning Examiner special exception process per
section
4.9.11.A.12. Additions to single-family dwellings are exempt from this
provision. Additions to single-family dwellings are exempt from this provision.
      3.   Relocation of Utilities
      Relocation of overhead utility facilities required by public improvement
districts along Gateway Routes shall conform with existing franchise
requirements.
(Am. Ord. 11803, 12/8/2020; Am. Ord. 11942, 7/12/2022)
5.5.5.   DESIGNATION, AMENDMENT, OR CHANGE OF BOUNDARIES
   Designation, amendment, or change of boundaries for a Gateway Route shall be
established through the amendment to the designation on the MS&R Map in
accordance with Section
5.4.3, MS&R Adoption and Amendment.
5.5.6.   VARIANCES
   Variances to the Gateway Corridor Zone standards are processed in accordance
with Sections
3.10.1 and
3.10.3, Board of Adjustment Variance Procedure. The Design Review Board shall
review variance requests as provided in Section
2.2.6.C.6 and forward its recommendations to the Board of Adjustment.
5.6.   AIRPORT ENVIRONS ZONE (AEZ)
5.6.1.   PURPOSE
   The purpose of this overlay zone is to protect the health, safety, and
welfare of persons and property in the vicinity of Tucson International Airport
(TIA) and Davis-Monthan Air Force Base (DMAFB) and protect the long term
viability of DMAFB. This is accomplished by: (1) Reducing noise and safety
hazards associated with aircraft operations; (2) preserving the operational
stability of these airports ; and (3) assisting in the implementation of
policies and recommendations in the City ’s General Plan and Airport Environs
Plan, the Air Installation Compatible Use Zone Report (AICUZ ), and the Airport
Noise Control, Land Use Compatibility (ANCLUC) Study and the Davis-Monthan
Joint Land Study (DMJLUS). The overlay district further:
   A.   Promotes the compatibility of uses with aircraft operations through the
establishment of standards for the regulation of building height and density ;
   B.   Addresses potentially life-threatening situations in areas exposed to
aircraft accident potential through restrictions on the congregation of large
numbers of people or high concentrations of people and by restrictions on
concentrations of people who are unable to respond to emergency situations,
such as children, the elderly, the handicapped, and persons undergoing medical
treatment;
   C.   Increases the protection of persons exposed to high levels of aircraft
noise by requiring acoustical treatment in buildings located within these areas
and regulating those uses that are sensitive to such noise;
   D.   Prohibits uses that create potential hazards to the safe approach and
departure of aircraft; and,
   E.   Recognizes the role of Davis-Monthan Air Force Base in the Tucson
community and protects the City ’s interest in ensuring the continued viability
and operation of Davis-Monthan AFB by limiting incompatible land uses in the
Approach-Departure Corridor (ADC).
5.6.2.   ESTABLISHMENT, DESIGNATION, AND AMENDMENT OF AEZ MAPS
   The Airport Environs Zone (AEZ) includes districts and zones that do not
necessarily have the same boundaries. The boundaries of these districts and
zones are identified for Tucson International Airport (TIA) and for Davis-
Monthan Air Force Base (DMAFB) by the Airport Environs Zone (AEZ) Overlay Map
series kept on file in the offices of the City Clerk and the Planning and
Development Services Department (PDSD). The AEZ Overlay Map series is hereby
established as the official AEZ Overlay Map series, The AEZ Overlay Map became
effective on May 16, 1990, as amended on January 28, 1991, April 27, 1992,
October 28, 2002 and January 1, 2005.
   The AEZ is made up of the following 11 zones and districts (See Illustrative
Maps 5.6-B and 5.6-C.):
   A.   The following zones and districts are established in the TIA environs:
      1.   Compatible Use Zone-One (CUZ-1) ;
      2.   Compatible Use Zone-Two (CUZ-2) ;
      3.   Compatible Use Zone-Three (CUZ-3) ;
      4.   Noise Control District 65 (NCD 65) - High Noise District with
exposures of 65-70 Ldn designated at TIA; and,
      5.   Noise Control District 70 (NCD 70 - High Noise District with
exposures of 70+ Ldn designated at TIA.
   B.   The following zones and districts are established in the DMAFB
environs:
      1.   Approach Departure Corridor One (ADC-1) - Northwest end of DMAFB
runway;
      2.   Approach Departure Corridor Two (ADC-2) - Southeast end of DMAFB
runway up to 30,000 feet from end of runway;
      3.   Approach Departure Corridor Three (ADC-3) - Southeast end of DMAFB
runway 30,000 to 50,200 feet from end of runway;
      4.   Noise Control District -A (NCD A) - High Noise District with
exposures of 65-70 Ldn designated at DMAFB; and,
      5.   Noise Control District - B (NCD B) - High Noise District with
exposures of 70+ Ldn designated at DMAFB.
   C.   The Airport Hazard District (AHD) apply to both the TIA environs and
the DMAFB environs. The AHD is a specifically designated area of land where
uses that constitute hazards to aircraft operations are prohibited and heights
are limited.
   D.   Designation, amendment, or change of boundaries for an Airport Environs
Zone shall be established through the amendment to the designation on the AEZ
Maps in accordance with Section
3.5, Rezoning (Change of Zoning) Procedure.
5.6.3.   APPLICABILITY IN THE TIA ENVIRONS
   A.   Sections
5.6.3,
5.6.4,
5.6.5,
5.6.6, and
5.6.11 apply to the TIA environs.
   B.   Where more than one district or zone applies to a property, the
standards of all applicable districts or zones shall apply. Where standards
conflict, the most restrictive standards shall apply.
   C.   The Airport Environs Zone (AEZ) applies to the following on all
property located within the TIA boundaries. For property partially within the
TIA, the provisions apply to only those portions within the boundaries of the
AEZ. For areas outside the City limits, the AEZ standards will apply upon
annexation.
      1.   New development ;
      2.   A change in, expansion of, or addition to the use of an existing
structure as follows:
         a.   The residential density , employee density , and emergency
evacuation plan and training standards of Section
5.6.5, Compatibility Use Zones for the TIA Environs, apply to the entire
existing structure if the change, expansion, or addition results in an increase
in any of the following:
            (1)   Employee density ;
            (2)   Residential density ;
            (3)   Number of employees; or,
            (4)   Number of persons of the general public for whom the
structure was intended or designed to accommodate.
         b.   The noise attenuation standards of Section
5.6.6, Noise Control Districts, apply to the entire existing structure if the
use of the existing structure is changed from any other land use to one or more
of the following uses:
            (1)   Residential;
            (2)   Place of public accommodation ; or,
            (3)   Administrative or Professional Office.
      3.   Expansion of an existing development as follows:
         a.   If the gross floor area of a structure or the gross floor area on
a project site is expanded by less than 50%, the AEZ applies only to the areas
of expansion;
         b.   If the gross floor area of a structure is expanded by 50% or
more, the standards of Section
5.6.6 apply to the entire structure. Exception: the sound attenuation standard
in this section does not apply to an expansion of the following types of
structures existing prior to May 16, 1990:
            (1)   A single-family or duplex dwelling;
            (2)   A mobile home; or,
            (3)   A manufactured housing unit.
         c.   If the gross floor area on a project site is expanded by 50% or
more, the employee density , lot coverage , and emergency evacuation plan and
training standards of Section
5.6.5 apply to the entire project site .
         d.   Cumulation of Expansions. Expansions are cumulated over time from
May 16, 1990. Once a structure or project site is brought into conformance with
the provisions of this section, subsequent expansions are accumulated as of the
date the existing structure or project site is brought into conformance .
      4.   Nothing contained in this section affects existing property or the
right to its continued use for the purpose legally used at the time these
requirements become effective, nor do these requirements affect any reasonable
repairs to, or alterations of, buildings or property used for such existing
purposes.
5.6.4.   TIA ENVIRONS
   The following provisions apply to the TIA Environs.
   A.   Permitted Uses
   The land uses permitted are those permitted by the underlying zone , except
as restricted by this section.
   B.   Posting of Occupancy Limitations
   Any restriction of occupancy required under this ordinance as a condition of
building permit issuance or certificate of occupancy shall be posted on the
premises. The owner/manager(s) of the premises cannot exceed these limitations.
5.6.5.   COMPATIBLE USE ZONES FOR THE TIA ENVIRONS
   Land use standards within the Compatible Use Zones are as follows:
   A.   CUZ-1
      1.   Single-family and multifamily dwellings and mobile homes are
permitted only if the property is zoned IR, RH, SR, RX-1 (UR), RX-2, R-1, R-2,
MH-1 (MH), MH-2 (MHP), or R-3 and such zone was in place prior to May 16, 1990.
Other uses allowed by the underlying zoning are permitted, except as modified
by Section
5.6.5.D, Prohibited Uses.
         a.   Flexible Lot Developments, Section
8.7.3, are not permitted; and,
         b.   Residential development shall comply with the underlying zoning,
with no more than 25 dwelling units per building .
      2.   No more than one employee for every 250 square feet of gross floor
area of all buildings on a project site at any time shall be accommodated by
intention, design, or in fact.
      3.   Structures or uses with 50 or more employees shall develop an
emergency evacuation plan and training program shall be developed and
implemented. Fire Department approval of this plan and program is required.
      4.   The maximum permitted height limit is the most restrictive of the
underlying zone , 75 feet, or as restricted by Section
5.6.11, Airport Hazard Districts for TIA and DMAFB Environs.
   B.   CUZ-2
      1.   Single-family and multifamily dwellings and mobile homes are
permitted, only if the property is zoned IR, RH, SR, RX-1 (UR), RX-2, R-1, R-2,
MH-1 (MH), MH-2 (MHP), or R-3 and such zone was in place prior to May 16, 1990.
Other uses allowed by the underlying zoning are permitted, except as prohibited
by Section
5.6.5.D, Prohibited Uses.
         a.   Flexible Lot Development (Section
8.7.3) are not permitted; and,
         b.   Residential development shall comply with underlying zoning, with
no more than 25 dwelling units per building .
      2.   Structures or uses with 50 or more employees shall develop an
emergency evacuation plan and training program shall be developed and
implemented. Fire Department approval of this plan and program is required.
      3.   The maximum permitted height limit is the most restrictive of the
underlying zone , 75 feet, or as restricted by Section
5.6.11, Airport Hazard Districts for TIA and DMAFB Environs.
   C.   CUZ-3
      1.   In CUZ-3 , single-family and multifamily dwellings and mobile homes
are permitted, only if the property is zoned IR, RH, SR, RX-1 (UR), RX-2, R-1,
R-2, MH-1 (MH), MH-2 (MHP), or R-3 and such zone was in place prior to May 16,
1990. Other uses allowed by the underlying zoning are permitted, except as
prohibited by Section
5.6.5.D, Prohibited Uses.
         a.   Flexible Lot Development, Section
8.7.3, are not permitted; and,
         b.   Minimum lot area per dwelling unit is 144,000 square feet.
      2.   In CUZ-3 , no development shall exceed 75% lot coverage and 0.375
Floor Area Ratio (FAR).
      3.   In CUZ-3 , no structure or use or contiguous  structure or use shall
accommodate, by intention or design, in whole or in part, at any one time, more
than 50 employees.
   D.   Prohibited Uses
      1.   Public assembly of more than 50 persons is prohibited within CUZ-1 ,
CUZ-2 , and CUZ-3 .
         a.   Exception: Accessory Food Service for employees only is permitted
provided such uses are provided on-site entirely within a structure devoted to
a permitted principal use .
      2.   In addition to public assembly , the following uses are prohibited
within CUZ-1 and CUZ-2 :
         a.   Adult care homes, adult care facilities, specialized treatment
homes, and group homes for the seriously mentally ill ;
         b.   Civic Assembly of 50 or more persons ;
         c.   Day Care;
         d.   Educational Use: Elementary and Secondary Schools; and,
         e.   Medical Service.
      3.   In addition to public assembly , the following uses are prohibited
within CUZ-3 :
         a.   Alcoholic Beverage Service (on premises);
         b.   Civic Assembly;
         c.   Cultural Use;
         d.   Day Care;
         e.   Educational Use;
         f.   Entertainment (indoor and outdoor);
         g.   Financial Service (except automated teller);
         h.   Food Service (on premises, except as accessory use );
         i.   General Merchandise Sales (retail stores over 2,500 square feet
gross floor area );
         j.   Medical Service - Major;
         k.   Medical Service - Outpatient;
         l.   Membership Organization;
         m.   Recreation (indoor and outdoor);
         n.   Religious Use;
         o.   Swap Meet or Auction; and,
         p.   Travelers’ Accommodation.
5.6.6.   NOISE CONTROL DISTRICTS
   A.   NCD-65
      1.   Within Noise Control District-65, the following uses shall be
provided with sound attenuation, to reduce the interior noise level to an Ldn
of 45 or less, as specified in Section
9-03.0.0, Sound Attenuation within the Airport Environs Zone, of the Technical
Standards Manual:
         a.   Site -built residential uses;
         b.   Places of public accommodation ; and,
         c.   Administrative and Professional Offices.
      2.   A manufactured housing unit is not considered equivalent to a
single-family dwelling within the boundaries of NCD-65 , unless located on a
property zoned MH-1 or MH-2 or unless it can be demonstrated that the unit
provides adequate sound attenuation to reduce the interior noise level to Ldn
45.
      3.   Prohibited Uses: Within NCD-65 , Day Care uses are prohibited.
   B.   NCD-70
      1.   Within Noise Control District-70, the following uses shall be
provided with sound attenuation to reduce the interior noise level to an Ldn of
45 or less, as specified in Section
9-03.0.0, Sound Attenuation within the Airport Environs Zone, the Technical
Standards Manual:
         a.   Site -built residential uses;
         b.   Places of public accommodation ; and,
         c.   Administrative and Professional Offices.
      2.   Single-family and multifamily dwellings are permitted, provided the
property is residentially zoned as of May 16, 1990, and provided the interior
noise level is reduced to an Ldn of 45 or less as specified in Section
5.6.6.B.1.
      3.   A manufactured housing unit is not considered equivalent to a
single-family dwelling within the boundaries of NCD-70 , unless located on a
property zoned MH-1 or MH-2 or unless it can be demonstrated that the unit
provides adequate sound attenuation to reduce the interior noise level to Ldn
45.
      4.   Special Exception Land Uses .
         a.   The following uses are generally considered to be inappropriate
within the high- noise area, NCD-70 . They may be approved as Special Exception
Land Uses upon application, review, and approval in accordance with Section
3.4.3, Zoning Examiner Special Exception Procedure. In addition to the standard
notice required for Special Exception Land Use applications, the Tucson Airport
Authority and Davis-Monthan Air Force Base shall be notified of all such
applications within the boundaries of the Airport  Environs Zone (AEZ) (Section
5.6).
            (1)   Civic Assembly;
            (2)   Cultural Use;
            (3)   Educational Use - Postsecondary Institution;
            (4)   Entertainment;
            (5)   Medical Service - Major; and,
            (6)   Swap Meet or Auction.
         b.   In addition to the required findings and conditions specified in
Sections
3.4.5 and
3.4.6, respectively, these uses shall be consistent with the intent of the
Airport Environs Zone (AEZ) and the Airport Environs Plan or the Air
Installation Compatible Use Zone Report (AICUZ ) Report and shall be capable of
sound attenuation to mitigate the effects of high noise. In addition, all
activity associated with the use shall be shown to take place within an
enclosed  building . An acoustical engineer shall demonstrate that the proposed
use is insulated to an interior noise level of an Ldn of 45 or less.
      5.   Prohibited Uses. Within NCD-70 , the following uses are prohibited:
         a.   Day Care; and,
         b.   Educational Use: Elementary and Secondary Schools.
5.6.7.   APPLICABILITY IN THE DMAFB ENVIRONS
   Sections
5.6.7,
5.6.8,
5.6.9,
5.6.10, and
5.6.11 apply to the DMAFB Environs.
   Where more than one district or zone is applicable to a property, the
standards of all applicable districts or zones shall apply. Where standards
conflict, the most restrictive shall apply.
   The Airport Environs Zone (AEZ) applies to the following on all property
located within the DMAFB Environs boundaries. For property partially within the
AEZ, the provisions shall apply to only those portions within the boundaries of
the AEZ. For areas outside the City limits, the AEZ overlay provisions will
apply upon annexation.
   A.   New Development
   Starting January 1, 2005, Section
5.6.8, Approach-Departure Corridors for DMAFB Environs, and Section
5.6.9, Noise Control Districts for DMAFB Environs, apply to property located
within the zones  and following districts: ADC-1. ADC-2, ADC-3, NCD-A and NCD-
B .
   B.   Changes, Expansions and Additions to Use of Existing Development
   The following provisions shall apply starting January 1, 2005.
      1.   For a change of use of an existing structure, the provisions of
Section
5.6.8, Approach-Departure Corridors for DMAFB Environs, applies to the entire
existing structure if it results in an increase in the number of employees.
      2.   The noise attenuation standards and performance standards
established by Section
5.6.9, Noise Control Districts for DMAFB Environs, applies to the entire
existing structure if the use of the existing structure is changed to one or
more allowed uses requiring sound attenuation.
      3.   Dwelling units existing within the AEZ prior to January 1, 2005 may
expand or reconstruct provided that the new construction conforms to AEZ
standards.
   C.   Nothing contained in this section shall affect existing property or the
right to its continued use for the purpose legally used at the time these
standards become effective, nor shall these standards affect any reasonable
repairs to, or alterations of, buildings or property used for such existing
purposes.
   D.   Nothing in these provisions shall preclude the renovation of existing
structures .
   E.   Proposed expansion of a nonconforming use or structure is subject to
the provisions of Sections
9.2.2 and
9.3.2, respectively.
   F.   Owners of property within the DMAFB Environs and in the vicinity of the
military airport should be aware that A.R.S. Title 28, and A.R.S., Title 32,
contain provisions that may apply to some properties regulated under this
section. The provisions require property owners to inform potential purchasers,
lessees, and renters that a property is in an airport  zoning district .
Nothing herein requires property owners to provide notice that is in addition
to the standards provided by state law.
   G.   The land uses permitted are those permitted by the underlying zone ,
except as restricted by Sections
5.6.8 and
5.6.9.
5.6.8.   APPROACH DEPARTURE CORRIDORS (ADC) FOR DMAFB
   The required land use standards within the ADCs are as follows.
   A.   ADC-1
      1.   Performance Standards
      The following performance standards are required in the ADC-1:
         a.   No more than 30 employees per acre of site area is permitted;
         b.   The minimum project site area is three acres ; and,
         c.   The maximum FAR is .50 of the project site area.
      2.   Prohibited Land Uses
      The following land uses are prohibited in the ADC-1:
         a.   Civic Use Group
            (1)   Civic Assembly- Outdoor and Indoor;
            (2)   Cultural Use;
            (3)   Religious Use; and,
            (4)   Educational Use.
         b.   Commercial Services Use Group
            (1)   Administrative and Professional Offices;
            (2)   Alcoholic Beverage Service;
            (3)   Commercial Recreation;
            (4)   Day Care;
            (5)   Entertainment - Outdoor & Indoor;
            (6)   Food Service;
            (7)   Medical Services;
            (8)   Personal Service;
            (9)   Transportation Service - Air Carrier;
            (10)   Travelers Accommodation-Campsite; and,
            (11)   Travelers Accommodation-Lodging
         c.   Industrial Use Group
            (1)   Hazardous Material Manufacturing.
         d.   Recreational Use Group
            (1)   Parks and Recreation.
         e.   Residential Use Group (all uses within the group)
         f.   Restricted Adult Activities Use Group (all uses within the group)
         g.   Retail Trade Use Group (all uses within the group, except for
Marijuana Dispensary Off-site Cultivation and Marijuana Dispensary Off-site
Manufacturing Location)
         h.   Storage Use Group
            (1)   Hazardous Material Storage.
         i.   Wholesaling Use Group
            (1)   Hazardous Material Wholesaling.
      3.   Exceptions
      The following are exceptions to the Prohibited Uses in ADC-1:
         a.   Land uses in the Commercial Services Use Group and Retail Trade
Use Group are permitted in ADC-1 only if the property was zoned RCV, NC, C-1,
C-2, C-3, C-3, P or RV prior to January 1, 2005. (Rezoning from these zones to
zones that provide for allowed uses in ADC-1 is encouraged);
         b.   Land uses in the Commercial Services Use Group and the Retail
Trade Use Group are permitted on property zoned P-I, I-1 or I-2 in ADC-1 only
if a protected development right plan was approved by Mayor and Council
specifically for such use prior to June 30, 2005;
         c.   Developments not in conformance with the performance standards of
5.6.8.A.1 are permitted only if a protected development right plan, was
approved by Mayor and Council specifically for such development prior to June
30, 2005;
         d.   Single-family  dwelling units are permitted only if the property
is zoned IR, RH, SR, RX-1, RX-2, R-1, R-2, or R-3, MH-1 or MH-2 and such zone
was in place prior to January 1, 2005. (Rezoning from these zones to zones that
provide for allowed uses in ADC-1 is encouraged).
            (1)   Flexible Lot Development, Section
8.7.3, are not permitted; and,
            (2)   Residential development is limited to no more than one
dwelling unit per acre .
         e.   Parcels less than the minimum size required in ADC-1 and recorded
prior to January 1, 2005 may be developed in conformance with all other
standards specified in Section
5.6.8.A.1., 2, and 3;
         f.   Individual parcels of less than three acres may be separately
owned provided each such parcel is part of a site plan and covenants provided
in this subsection that encompasses at least three acres . The City shall be a
party for notification purposes to the covenants; and,
         g.   Non-contiguous  parcels located within ADC-1 may be included
within a single plat or site plan for the purpose of determining employee
limits, floor area ratios and other performance standards provided there are
recorded covenants requiring conformance with the approved plat or site plan in
the form approved by the PDSD Director . Non-contiguous  parcels that do not
meet the above standards may be considered through Special Exception process as
specified in Section
5.6.10.
   B.   ADC-2
      1.   Performance Standards
      The following performance standards apply in the ADC-2:
         a.   No more than 20 employees per acre of site area at any time may
be accommodated by intention, design, or in fact;
         b.   The minimum project site area is five acres ; and,
         c.   The maximum FAR is .30 of the project site area.
      2.   Prohibited Land Uses
      The following land uses are prohibited in the ADC-2:
         a.   Civic Use Group
            (1)   Civic Assembly - Outdoor and Indoor;
            (2)   Cultural Use;
            (3)   Educational Use; and,
            (4)   Religious Use.
         b.   Commercial Services Use Group
            (1)   Administrative and Professional Offices;
            (2)   Alcoholic Beverage Service;
            (3)   Commercial Recreation;
            (4)   Day Care;
            (5)   Entertainment - Outdoor and Indoor;
            (6)   Food Service;
            (7)   Medical Services;
            (8)   Personal Service;
            (9)   Transportation Service - Air Carrier;
            (10)   Travelers Accommodation - Campsite; and,
            (11)   Travelers Accommodation - Lodging.
         c.   Industrial Use Group
            (1)   Hazardous Material Manufacturing.
         d.   Recreational Use Group
            (1)   Parks and Recreation.
         e.   Residential Use Group (all uses in the group)
         f.   Restricted Adult Activities Use Group (all uses in the group)
         g.   Retail Trade Use Group (all uses in the group except for
Marijuana Dispensary Off-site Cultivation and Marijuana Dispensary Off-site
Manufacturing Location)
         h.   Storage Use Group
            (1)   Hazardous Material Storage.
         i.   Wholesaling Use Group
            (1)   Hazardous Material Wholesaling.
      3.   Exceptions
      The following are exceptions to the Prohibited Uses in ADC-2:
         a.   Land uses in the Commercial Services Use Group and Retail Trade
Use Group are permitted in ADC-2 only if the property was zoned RCV, NC, C-1,
C-2, C-3, C-3, P or RV prior to January 1, 2005. (Rezoning from the previously
mentioned zones to zones that provide for allowed uses in ADC-2 is
encouraged.);
         b.   Land uses in the Commercial Services Use Group and the Retail
Trade Use Group are permitted in P-I, I-1 or I-2 in ADC-2 only if a protected
development right plan was approved by Mayor and Council specifically for such
use prior to June 30, 2005;
         c.   Developments not in conformance with the performance standards of
5.6.8.B.1 are permitted only if a protected development right plan was approved
by Mayor and Council specifically for such development prior to June 30, 2005;
         d.   Single-family  dwelling units are permitted only if the property
is zoned IR, RH, SR, RX-1, RX-2, R-1, R-2, R-3, MH-1 or MH-2 and such zone was
in place prior to January 1, 2005. (Rezoning from the previously mentioned
zones to zones that provide for allowed uses in ADC-2 is encouraged).
            (1)   Flexible Lot Development, Section
8.7.3, are not be permitted; and,
            (2)   Residential development is limited to no more than one
dwelling unit per acre .
         e.   Parcels less than the minimum size required in ADC-2, recorded
prior to January 1, 2005 may be developed in conformance with all other
standards specified in Section
5.6.8.B.1., 2, and 3;
         f.   Individual parcels of less than five acres may be separately
owned provided each such parcel is part of a site plan and covenants provided
in this subsection that encompasses at least five acres . The City shall be a
party for notification purposes to the covenants;
         g.   Non-contiguous  parcels located within ADC-2 may be included
within a single plat or site plan for the purpose of determining employee
limits, floor area ratios and other performance standards provided there are
recorded covenants requiring conformance with the approved plat or site plan in
the form approved by the PDSD Director . As provided in Section
5.6.10, non-contiguous  parcels that do not meet the above standards may be
considered in accordance with Section
3.4.3, Zoning Examiner Special Exception Procedure.
   C.   ADC-3
      1.   Performance Standards
      The following performance standards apply in the ADC-3:
         a.   For uses in the Industrial, Wholesaling and Storage land use
groups, the maximum FAR is .40 of the project site area;
         b.   For all other non-residential land use groups, the maximum FAR is
.20 of the project site area;
         c.   The minimum project site area is five acres ;
         d.   The maximum permitted building height is 62 feet from design
grade elevation or the height limit of underlying zone , whichever is more
restrictive; and,
         e.   Any meeting space and function areas where people gather in
excess of 5,000 square feet in area shall be located underground.
      2.   Prohibited Land Uses
      The following land uses are prohibited in the ADC-3:
         a.   Civic Use Group
            (1)   Education Use, Elementary and Secondary Schools.
         b.   Commercial Use Group
            (1)   Day Care; and,
            (2)   Medical Service, Major and Extended Care.
         c.   Industrial Use Group
            (1)   Hazardous Material Manufacturing.
         d.   Residential Use Group (all uses in the group)
         e.   Storage Use Group
            (1)   Hazardous Material Storage.
         f.   Wholesaling Use Group
            (1)   Hazardous Material Wholesaling.
         g.   Landfills or facilities providing services that are critical for
public health and safety, such as fire protection, police communications,
sewage and water treatment or storage are prohibited.
      3.   Exceptions
      The following are exceptions to the Prohibited Uses in ADC-3:
         a.   Developments not in conformance with the performance standards of
Section
5.6.8.C.1, Approach Departure Corridors (ADC) for DMAFB, are permitted only if
a protected development right  plan was approved by Mayor and Council
specifically for such development  prior to June 30, 2005.
         b.   Single-family  dwelling units are permitted only if the property
is zoned IR, RH, SR, RX-1, RX-2, R-1, R-2, R-3, MH-1 or MH-2 and such zone was
in place prior to January 1, 2005. (Rezoning from the previously mentioned
zones to zones that provide for allowed uses in ADCs is encouraged.)
            (1)   Flexible Lot Development, Section
8.7.3, are not permitted; and,
            (2)   Residential development is limited to no more than one
dwelling unit per acre .
         c.   Parcels , less than the minimum size required in ADC-3 and
recorded prior to January 1, 2005 may be developed in conformance with all
other standards specified in Section
5.6.8.C.1., 2, and 3.
         d.   Individual parcels of less than five acres may be separately
owned provided each such parcel is part of a site plan and covenants provided
in this subsection that encompasses at least five acres . The City shall be a
party for notification purposes to the covenants.
         e.   Non-contiguous  parcels located within ADC-3 may be included
within a single plat or site plan for the purpose of determining employee
limits, floor area ratios and other performance standards provided there are
recorded covenants requiring conformance with the approved plat or site plan in
the form approved by the PDSD Director . As provided in Section
5.6.10, non-contiguous  parcels that do not meet the above standards may be
considered in accordance with Section
3.4.3, Zoning Examiner Special Exception Procedure.
(Am. Ord. 11978, 12/20/2022)
5.6.9.   NOISE CONTROL DISTRICT FOR DMAFB ENVIRONS
   A.   NCD-A - 65-70 Ldn
      1.   Performance Standards
      The following performance standards apply in the NCD-A :
         a.   The following uses shall be sound attenuated, to reduce the
interior noise level by 25 decibels, to 40-45 Ldn , in accordance with the
Technical Standards Manual:
            (1)   Site -built residential uses;
            (2)   Places of public accommodation ; and,
            (3)   Administrative and Professional Offices.
         b.   A manufactured housing unit is not considered equivalent to a
single-family dwelling within the boundaries of NCD-A , unless located on a
property zoned MH-1 or MH-2 or unless it can be demonstrated that the unit
provides sound attenuation to reduce the interior noise level by 25 decibels in
accordance with the Technical Standards Manual.
      2.   Prohibited Uses
      The following land uses are not permitted within the NCD-A :
         a.   Civic Use Group
            (1)   Civil Assembly - Outdoor; and,
            (2)   Educational Use - Elementary and Secondary.
         b.    Commercial Use
            (1)   Day Care;
            (2)   Entertainment - Outdoor; and,
            (3)   Medical Services - Major and Extended Care.
         c.   Residential Use Group (all uses in the group except as provided
below)
      3.   Exceptions
      Single-family dwellings are permitted in the NCD-A only if the property
is zoned IR, RH, SR, RX-1, RX-2, R-1, R-2, R-3, MH-1 and MH-2 and such zone was
in place prior to January 1, 2005.
   B.   NCD-B - 70+ Ldn
      1.   Performance Standards
      The following performance standards apply in the NCD-B:
         a.   The following uses shall be provided with sound attenuation to
reduce the interior noise level by 25 decibels in accordance with the Technical
Standards Manual:
            (1)   Site -built residential uses;
            (2)   Places of public accommodation ; and,
            (3)   Administrative and Professional Offices.
      2.   A manufactured housing unit is not considered equivalent to a
single-family dwelling within the boundaries of NCD-B, unless located on a
property zoned MH-1 or MH-2 or unless it can be demonstrated that the unit
provides sound attenuation to reduce the interior noise level by 25 decibels in
accordance with the Technical Standards Manual.
      3.   Prohibited Uses
      The following uses are not permitted in the NCD-B:
         a.   Civic Uses Group
            (1)   Cemetery;
            (2)   Civic Assembly - Outdoor;
            (3)   Cultural Use;
            (4)   Educational Use; and,
            (5)   Religious.
         b.   Commercial Use
            (1)   Day Care;
            (2)   Entertainment - Indoor and Outdoor; and,
            (3)   Medical Services - Major and Extended Care.
         c.   Residential Use Group (all uses in the group except as provided
in Section
5.6.9.B.4 below).
      4.   Exceptions
      Single-family dwellings are permitted in the NCD-B only if the property
is zoned IR, RH, SR, RX-1, RX-2, R-1, R-2, R-3, MH-1 or MH-2 and such zone was
in place prior to January 1, 2005.
5.6.10.   SPECIAL EXCEPTION LAND USES
   A.   Projects proposing to exceed the limits of the Performance Standards
established in Sections
5.6.8.A, B. and C, are processed in accordance with Section
3.4.3, Zoning Examiner Special Exception Land Use Procedure. These applications
are analyzed for: 1) land use  compatibility  with base operations, 2)
proximity to the end of the runway, 3) location in relationship to major flight
tracks, and 4) compliance with the intent of the DM Joint Land Use Study.
   B.   In addition to the notice required for Special Exception Land Use
applications, the Davis-Monthan Air Force Base shall be notified of all such
applications within the boundaries of the DMAFB Environs.
5.6.11.   AIRPORT HAZARD DISTRICTS FOR TIA AND DMAFB ENVIRONS
   No structure, use of land, or tree may exceed the height limitations by the
Airport Hazard Districts within the Airport Environs Zone (AEZ). Refer to
official maps established. Certain uses are prohibited from these districts as
noted below and as determined by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).
   A.   The Airport Hazard Districts are identified on the Airport Environs
Zone (AEZ) Maps and are established as follows:
      1.   Tucson International Airport
      The height limits around Tucson International Airport are based on
distances away from the established ends of runways. The mean sea level (MSL)
elevations of the established ends of runways are as follows:
         a.   NE end of runway 21 is 2,567 feet MSL;
         b.   SW end of runway 3 is 2,561 feet MSL;
         c.   NW end of runway 11L is 2,575 feet MSL;
         d.   SE end of runway 29R is 2,641 feet MSL;
         e.   NW end of runway 11R is 2,583 feet MSL; and,
         f.   SE end of runway 29L is 2,660 feet MSL.
      2.   Davis-Monthan Air Force Base
      The height limits around Davis-Monthan Air Force Base are based on
distances away from the established ends of runways and also on a conical or
inclined surface extending outward and upward from the established runway
elevation at a ratio of 60:1. The established ends of runway MSL elevations are
as follows:
         a.   NW end of the NW/SE runway is 2,590 MSL; and,
         b.   SE end of the NW/SE runway is 2,705 MSL.
   B.   Height Measurement
   The height of a building , structure, or tree is measured from the MSL
elevation at the end of the runway to a point specified in Section
6.4.4, Height, or to the highest point of a tree. (See
Figure 5.6-A.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3006.jpg]
Figure 5.6-A: Height Measurement in Airport Hazard Districts
   C.   Conflicts in Heights
   Where two or more height restrictions are placed on a parcel , the more
restrictive height limit prevails. Section
6.4.4.C, Exceptions to Height, do not apply in the AEZ.
   D.   Prohibited Uses
   Airport hazards as defined in Section
11.4.2 are prohibited within the boundaries of the Airport Hazard Districts .
   E.   Variances
   Variances from the provisions of Section
5.6.11 are allowed as set forth in accordance with A.R.S. Title 28.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3008.jpg]
Figure 5.6-B: AEZ Base Map 1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3010.jpg]
Figure 5.6-C: AEZ Base Map 2
5.7.   ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCE ZONE (ERZ)
5.7.1.   PURPOSE
   These standards are intended to recognize the value of Tucson’s natural open
space resources, particularly the critical and sensitive wildlife habitat of
eastern Pima County associated with public monuments, forests, and preserves.
These standards relate to areas associated with Tucson’s public lands and
preserves, including Saguaro National Park, Coronado National Forest, and
Tucson Mountain Park. It is the intent of these standards to protect valuable
habitat resources to the greatest extent possible. Development , compatible
with these public resources, is allowed. This overlay zone specifically serves
to:
   A.   Recognize the social, economic, environmental, biologic, and cultural
importance of Saguaro National Park and Tucson Mountain Park to the City of
Tucson;
   B.   Buffer Saguaro National Park and Tucson Mountain Park from the impacts
of new development by allowing development that is compatible with preservation
of critical wildlife habitat and the Park environs;
   C.   Conserve certain designated washes that extend from the Parks as areas
of natural and scenic resources and provide valuable wildlife habitat;
   D.   Complement the City of Tucson Interim Watercourse Improvement Policy
that provides for flood control, erosion  mitigation , and groundwater recharge
through the preservation of designated washes in natural and undisturbed
states; and,
   E.   Assist in implementing the General Plan policies that call for the
preservation of Tucson’s significant natural areas along designated
watercourses where identified in adopted area and neighborhood plans.
5.7.2.   APPLICABILITY
   A.   Areas Mapped
   Parcels that may contain critical riparian habitat are shown on a series of
maps approved by the Mayor and Council called the Environmental Resource Zone
Overlay Maps (ERZ Maps). The ERZ Maps include all parcels along the subject
washes that may contain riparian habitat, including those parcels that are not
vacant. These maps are based on the Critical and Sensitive Wildlife Habitat Map
that the Mayor and Council adopted by Resolution #15149.
   B.   Resource Corridors
   Critical riparian habitat is associated with resource corridors along the
following washes and their tributaries as shown on the ERZ Maps: 1) Agua
Caliente; 2) Ajo; 3) Anklam; 4) Camino de Oeste; 5) Coronado Ridge ; 6)
Cuprite; 7) Enchanted Hills; 8) Escalante; 9) Este; 10) Fagan; 11) Flato; 12)
Franco; 13) Greasewood; 14) Julian; 15) North Fork Airport ; 16) Petty Ranch;
17) Race Track; 18) Reyes; 19) Rincon Creek; 20) San Juan; 21) Silvercroft; 22)
South Fork Airport ; 23) Summit; 24) Tanque Verde Creek; 25) Thomas Sousa; 26)
portions of the West Branch of the Santa Cruz; and 27) West Speedway (Painted
Hills).
   C.   New Development
   New development that occurs on parcels or proposed subdivisions that include
property designated as an ERZ wash are reviewed for compliance with these
standards in accordance with Section
3.3.3, PDSD Director Approval Procedure.
   D.   Designation, Amendment and Change of Boundaries for ERZ Washes
   Designations of new areas subject to this section and changes to existing
designations are processed in accordance with Section
3.5, Rezoning (Change of Zoning) Procedure. For designation of new area within
the City , the proposed designation shall be reviewed by the Stormwater
Advisory Committee (SAC) and Stormwater Technical Advisory Committee (STAC)
prior to the public hearing before the Zoning Examiner. The recommendations of
the SAC and STAC are forwarded to the Zoning Examiner prior to the public
hearing.
   E.   Approved Subdivisions
   Where a recorded plat shown on the ERZ Maps is resubdivided, it shall comply
with these standards.
   F.   Annexation
   As annexation occurs, additional resource corridors or extensions of
resource corridors may be added to the ERZ Maps.
   G.   Exceptions
   The ERZ standards do not apply to the following:
      1.   Any single-family residence or other development existing as of July
3, 1990, or any expansion of up to 25% of either an existing residence or other
development ;
      2.   Any lot or parcel to be developed with one single-family residence
where all development and the residence and any accessory structures are
located outside of the critical riparian habitat area ;
      3.   Any subdivision that was recorded prior to August 3, 1990, as long
as:
         a.   Substantial construction occurred within five years of August 3,
1990; and,
         b.   Construction occurs in accordance with the approved plat .
      4.   Where these standards affect a parcel that is also subject to the
Hillside Development Zone (HDZ) standards, these standards do not apply as long
as there is no encroachment into the 100-year floodplain.
5.7.3.   DEVELOPMENT OPTIONS
   Development subject to the ERZ may use one of the two following options.
   A.   No Encroachment in Floodplain
   Where the owner of a lot or parcel affected by these standards chooses to
leave the 100-year floodplain undisturbed, the ERZ does not apply except that
temporary fencing shall be placed between the project site and the floodplain
area as provided in Section
5.7.5.B, Temporary Fencing Required. Encroachment of the floodplain is limited
to utilities , roadway  improvements , walkways, or bike paths as provided in
Section
5.7.5 , Standards for Roadway /Utility Encroachment. (See
Figure 5.7-A.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3012.jpg]
Figure 5.7-A: No Encroachment in Floodplain (ERZ)
   B.   Study of Resource Corridor
   The following information is required when an applicant affected by these
standards chooses to do a study of the resource corridor :
      1.   An Environmental Resource Report (ERR) in accordance with the
provisions in the Administrative Manual is required. The ERR is a study of the
resource corridor and documents locations of the resource corridor and critical
riparian habitat ;
      2.   A mitigation plan in accordance with Section
5.7.4.D, Mitigation Plan, is also required if preservation of the critical
riparian habitat  cannot be accomplished as required by the ERZ standards;
      3.   The ERR and, when applicable, the mitigation plan is reviewed and
considered for approval in accordance with Section
3.3.3, PDSD Director Approval Procedure; and,
      4.   Permits for grubbing, grading , construction, or any other
improvements shall not be issued until all applicable standards of Section
5.7.4,
5.7.5, and
5.7.6 are met.
5.7.4.   DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
   A.   Preservation of Critical Riparian Habitat
   Preservation of 100% of critical riparian habitat areas within the resource
corridors for parcels shown on the ERZ Maps are required, except as provided in
Sections
5.7.3, Development Options, and
5.7.5, Standards for Roadway /Utility Encroachment. The critical riparian
habitat area  may be included as part of any required open space  on the site .
   B.   Residential Development
   Residential development of four or more dwelling units are allowed only as
provided in Section
8.7.3, Flexible Lot Development (FLD), except as provided in Section
5.7.2.G.2. Use of the FLD shall provide for the maximum amount of critical
riparian habitat  preservation while preserving density  options.
   C.   Nonresidential Development
   Nonresidential development is allowed based on underlying zoning.
   D.   Mitigation Plan
      1.   Where preservation of the critical riparian habitat area cannot be
accomplished as provided in these standards, the owner is required to submit a
mitigation plan;
      2.   The mitigation plan shall include the following:
         a.   A statement of findings as to why 100% preservation of the
critical riparian habitat area cannot be accomplished;
         b.   A description of the specific impact of the development on
existing critical riparian habitat areas within the resource corridor ;
         c.   The proposed techniques to lessen the impacts of the development
on the critical riparian habitat areas . The techniques employed by the
development project should protect remaining critical riparian habitat and
restore critical riparian habitat areas disturbed during construction. This may
be done through clustering development away from substantial amounts of
critical riparian habitat , enhancement of degraded critical riparian habitat
areas through revegetation or restoration, or other means appropriate to the
type of project (see
Figure 5.7-B); and,
         d.   A plan for 100% restoration of the critical riparian habitat area
disturbed during construction as detailed in Section
5.7.5.A.6, 7, and 8;
         e.   A mitigation plan is reviewed and considered for approval in
accordance with Section
3.3.3, PDSD Director Approval Procedure. In reviewing the statement of findings
and the mitigation  plan, such factors as the amount, quality, and
predisturbance condition of the critical riparian habitat  within the resource
corridor ; the contiguity of the critical riparian habitat ; the presence of
any endangered species; the upstream or downstream characteristics of the
designated wash; the alternatives to the layout and design of the project ; and
any other pertinent factors relating to the proposed development  or the
critical riparian habitat  that may be provided by the owner and the reviewing
parties shall be taken into consideration.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3014.jpg]
Figure 5.7-B: Mitigation Options
   E.   Temporary Fencing Required
   No grubbing, grading , or construction shall occur on a project site until
areas designated to be retained in a natural state are temporarily fenced.
   F.   Inspection of Fencing
   All temporary fencing shall be field inspected by PDSD before any
construction on the site begins. Fencing shall be removed only on completion of
construction.
5.7.5.   STANDARDS FOR ENCROACHMENT
   A.   Standards
   The following standards are required as part of the mitigation plan, when
applicable. They are also required for any allowed encroachment into critical
riparian habitat areas . Encroachment that may be allowed is limited to
utilities , roadway  improvements , walkways, or bike paths.
      1.   Roadway , bike path, and walkway improvements and utility
encroachments into critical riparian habitat areas are limited and approved
only if there are no other alternatives in the design of the project . Where
allowed, roadway , bike path, and walkway improvements and utility
encroachments shall cross critical riparian habitat areas and not run parallel
to the critical riparian habitat .
      2.   Where roadway , bike path, and walkway improvements are allowed to
encroach into critical riparian habitat areas , they are allowed only at the
narrowest point of the critical riparian habitat . (See
Figure 5.7-C.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3016.jpg]
Figure 5.7-C: Riparian Crossing
      3.   All utilities in critical riparian habitat areas shall be located
underground. Utilities shall be placed either along roadway , bike path, or
walkway improvements or within approved easements. Water and sewer utility
trenches must be set beneath the 100-year scour depth.
      4.   Any roadway , bike path, or walkway improvement that impedes the
movement of wildlife shall be constructed in such a manner as to provide means
for safe and accessible passage. Improvements or encroachments into critical
riparian habitat areas shall be constructed to minimize disruption of
vegetation and critical riparian habitat . Where culverts are used, they should
be box culverts a minimum of six feet in height.
      5.   Where a roadway , walkway, or bike path improvement or utility
encroachment occurs within the critical riparian habitat area , revegetation
shall be required for any area disturbed because of such construction.
      6.   Revegetation should include plant material salvaged from the site .
      7.   Revegetation should recreate the critical riparian habitat through
the planting of trees, shrubs, and seed mix native to the site and be equal to
the predisturbance plant density , diversity, and volume on the net site .
      8.   A maintenance program is required for revegetated/restored or
enhanced areas so that plant material is replaced as needed.
   B.   Temporary Fencing Required
   No grubbing, grading , or construction shall occur on a project site until
areas designated to be retained in a natural state are temporarily fenced. All
temporary fencing will be field inspected by PDSD before any construction on
the site begins. Fencing shall be removed only on completion of construction.
5.7.6.   STANDARDS FOR FENCES, WALLS, AND EXTERIOR LIGHTING
   A.   Fences and Walls
   Neither fences nor walls are allowed that impede wildlife movement through
designated critical riparian habitat areas except for temporary fencing. If
barbed wire fencing is used, the bottom and top wire shall be barbless and a
bottom clearance of at least 18 inches from the ground is required.
   B.   Exterior Lighting
   Lighting sources shall be confined to wall-mounted fixtures or standards a
maximum of 42 inches in height, spaced to create pools of light rather than a
saturated condition. Neither high-pressure sodium nor mercury vapor lighting
shall be used. All lighting sources shall be shielded to reduce dispersed
light.
5.7.7.   VARIANCES AND AMENDMENTS
   A.   Variance Requests
      1.   Variances from the ERZ standards are reviewed and considered for
approval in accordance with Sections
3.10.1 and
3.10.3, Board of Adjustment Variance Procedure. As provided in Section
2.2.6.C.5, the Design Review Board (DRB) reviews all ERZ variance request and
forwards its recommendations to the Board of Adjustment.
      2.   If the City Engineer or designee, a notified property owner, or the
applicant for the variance requests consideration of stormwater management
issues related to the variance, the Stormwater Technical Advisory Committee
(STAC) may review the variance request concurrently with the DRB and may
provide written or oral testimony at the public hearing for the variance
request. Any such testimony shall address the required findings.
   B.   Proposed Unified Development Code (UDC) Amendments
   The Stormwater Advisory Committee (SAC) may review all proposed amendments
to this section and may provide written conclusions and recommendations to the
PDSD Director of the Department of Transportation to be forwarded to the
Planning Commission and the Mayor and Council prior to public hearings on the
proposed amendments.
5.8.   “H” HISTORIC PRESERVATION ZONE (HPZ) AND “HL” HISTORIC LANDMARK (HL)
5.8.1. PURPOSE
   The purpose of the HPZ and HL designation is to promote the educational,
cultural, economic, and general welfare of the community and to ensure the
harmonious growth and development of the municipality by encouraging the
preservation and rehabilitation of significant historic districts,
neighborhoods, buildings , structures , sites, objects, and archaeological
resources. These designations are intended to ensure the preservation of
significant historic and archaeological resources, and to keep them in active
use or management in their historic appearance, settings, and locations. It is
also intended that new or remodeled buildings or structures located within HPZs
or HL properties be designed and constructed to harmonize and be compatible
with existing buildings and structures within the sites and development zones
in order to preserve property values, provide for appropriate future
development , and promote an awareness of the heritage of Tucson among both
residents and visitors to the community.
(Am. Ord. 11070, 5/14/2013; Am. Ord. 11150, 3/18/2014)
5.8.2. APPLICABILITY
   A.   The HPZ and HL designation is an overlay zone superimposed over
underlying zoning.
   B.   The HPZ and HL designation applies to specifically mapped areas where
there is an individual historically important building , structure , site , or
object; a group of surviving related historic resources in their original
setting; or an archaeological site that gives a historic dimension to the City
. A list of established HPZs and HLs is provided in Section
9-02.8.0, Historic Preservation Zones, Sites, and Structures, of the Technical
Standards Manual and is updated by the City Historic Preservation Office based
on Mayor and Council action. Demolition requests in pending HPZs or HLs are
subject to the standards of Section 5.8.10. To identify each HPZ or HL on the
City of Tucson Zoning Maps , the preface "H" or "HL" is added to the assigned
residential, office, commercial, or industrial zone designation, e.g., R-
1 becomes HR-1.
   C.   The designation, amendment, and change to boundaries of a HPZ or HL are
established by the Mayor and Council in accordance with Sections
5.8.4, Steps to Establish or Amend a HPZ,
5.8.6, Steps to Establish or Amend a HL, and
3.5, Rezoning (Change of Zoning).
(Am. Ord. 11150, 3/18/2014)
5.8.3. STANDARDS FOR ESTABLISHING AND AMENDING HPZs
   A.   The following standards should be considered when determining if an
area, neighborhood, or district shall be established as a HPZ, or whether the
boundaries of an existing HPZ shall be changed or dissolved:
      1.   A HPZ shall include historic sites , historic buildings, or historic
structures , as defined in Section
11.4.9, and which are listed or eligible for listing in the National Register
of Historic Places as a district at the local, state, or national level of
significance;
      2.   A HPZ should include a group of related sites, buildings , and
structures in their original setting that contribute to an understanding of the
heritage of the community;
      3.   The group of sites, buildings , and structures should provide the
area with a sense of uniqueness, and should be readily distinguishable from
other areas of the community;
      4.   There should be a sufficient number of buildings and structures of
related or similar characteristics to make a recognizable entity; and,
      5.   Properties that meet the aforementioned criteria may be proposed for
designation as a HPZ Contributing Property.
   B.   Proposed HPZ
      1.   An area may be proposed for HPZ designation or amendment by any of
the following:
         a.   The Mayor and Council;
         b.   The property owners of fifty-one percent or more of the land area
of the proposed HPZ (for calculation only, one owner per property); or,
         c.   Sixty-five percent or more of the property owners within the
proposed HPZ (for calculation only, one owner per property).
(Am. Ord. 11150, 3/18/2014)
5.8.4. STEPS TO ESTABLISH OR AMEND A HPZ
   A.   Nomination Proposal
   A nomination proposal for a proposed HPZ is provided to both the City
Historic Preservation Office and the PDSD Director for review and
recommendation to the Tucson-Pima County Historical Commission Plans Review
Subcommittee for formal consideration of the nomination. The nomination
proposal should include a completed application form, with a map outlining the
geographic boundaries of the proposed area, a summary of the historic resources
in the proposed HPZ, and a completed National Register of Historic Places form,
or National Register nomination, or a State of Arizona Historic Property
Inventory Form. Multiple photographs and attached Statements of Significance
and Integrity must also be attached to the nomination proposal. Proposed HPZs
will also require a list of recommended Advisory Board Members.
   Staff shall review the survey and inventory information and accept or reject
the application within 14 days of submittal.
   B.   Tucson-Pima County Historical Commission Plans Review Subcommittee
      1.   Public Meeting
      The applicant presents the nomination proposal materials and any other
evidence of historical significance and integrity in a public meeting. The
Tucson-Pima County Historical Commission Plans Review Subcommittee votes to
recommend approval or denial of the nomination.
      2.   Recommendation
      If the Tucson-Pima County Historical Commission Plans Review Subcommittee
votes to recommend approval, the applicant receives a recommendation letter
from the PDSD Director as formal notification that the nomination proposal will
be forwarded to the Mayor and Council to initiate the establishment or
amendment of the HPZ.
   C.   Initiation
   The Mayor and Council make a decision whether to initiate the establishment
or amendment of a HPZ. An amendment to the designations of properties within an
established HPZ does not require initiation by the Mayor and Council.
      1.   Public Meeting
      Requests to initiate the consideration of establishing or amending a HPZ
are considered by the Mayor and Council in a public meeting.
      2.   Decision
      The Mayor and Council shall make the decision whether to initiate the
process to consider the establishment of, or amendment to, a HPZ. As part of
the decision to initiate, the Mayor and Council shall determine the proposed
boundaries of the HPZ and appoint a HPZ Advisory Board to assist in the
evaluation. Appointment, terms, and qualifications of the HPZ Advisory Board
shall be in accordance with Section
2.2.8.
      The nomination proposal and decision are forwarded to the Zoning Examiner
in accordance with Section
3.5, Rezoning (Change of Zoning).
      3.   Expiration of Initiation
      The initiation by the Mayor and Council of the establishment of, or
amendment to, a HPZ expires five years from the date the Mayor and Council make
the decision to initiate.
   D.   Additional Requirements for HPZs
      1.   Design Standards and Cultural Inventory and Survey
      It is the responsibility of the applicant and HPZ Advisory Board to
recommend design standards for the proposed HPZ. The proposed design standards
shall be submitted to the Mayor and Council with the survey and inventory. The
applicant shall consult with the City Historic Preservation Office during the
preparation of the Cultural Inventory and Survey and Design Standards . Refer
to Section
5.8.6, Design Standards and Technical Standards Manual Section
9-02.0.0.
   E.   Change of Zoning
   Upon acceptance of the Design Standards and Inventory and Survey information
by the City Historic Preservation Office and the PDSD Department, the
application is reviewed by the Zoning Examiner and considered for approval in
accordance with Section
3.5, Rezoning (Change of Zoning). The Zoning Examiner recommendation is then
forwarded to the Mayor and Council. The Mayor and Council decision on the
change of zoning may include the designation of buildings , structures , or
sites as Contributing, Non-Contributing or Intrusive, and the designation of
the boundaries of the HPZ.
   F.   Dissolution of a HPZ
   Dissolution of a HPZ is reviewed and considered for approval in accordance
with Section
3.5, Rezoning (Change of Zoning).
(Ord. 11150, 3/18/2014)
5.8.5. STANDARDS FOR ESTABLISHING AND AMENDING HLs
   A.   The following standards should be considered when determining if an
area shall be established as a HL or whether the boundaries of an existing HL
shall be changed or dissolved.
      1.   A HL shall include historic sites , historic buildings, or historic
structures , as defined in Section
11.4.9, Definitions, and which are individually listed or individually eligible
for listing in the National Register of Historic Places at the local, state, or
national level of significance.
      2.   A HL should include a group of related sites , buildings , and
structures in their original setting that contribute to an understanding of the
heritage of the community.
      B.   Proposed HL
      An area may be proposed for HL designation or amendment by any of the
following:
      1.   The Mayor and Council;
      2.   The owner(s) of the proposed HL, if it is a single property, or all
of the owners if more than one property; or
      3.   The Tucson-Pima County Historical Commission Plans Review
Subcommittee.
(Ord. 11150, 3/18/2014)
5.8.6. STEPS TO ESTABLISH OR AMEND A HL
   A.   Nomination Proposal
   A nomination proposal for the proposed Historic Landmark is provided to the
City Historic Preservation Office, the PDSD Director and the Tucson-Pima County
Historical Commission Plans Review Subcommittee for review and recommendation
to the Zoning Examiner. The nomination proposal shall include a map outlining
the geographic boundaries of the proposed area, a summary of the historic
resources in the proposed HL, and a completed National Register of Historic
Places form, or National Register nomination, or a State of Arizona Historic
Property Inventory Form. Multiple photographs and attached Statements of
Significance and Integrity must also be attached to the nomination proposal.
         Staff shall review the survey and inventory information for
eligibility criteria and completeness. Staff shall accept or reject the
nomination proposal within 14 days of submittal.
   B.   Tucson-Pima County Historical Commission Plans Review Subcommittee
      1.    Public Meeting
      The applicant presents the nomination proposal materials and any other
evidence of historical significance and integrity in a public meeting. The
Tucson-Pima County Historical Plans Review Subcommittee votes to recommend
approval or denial of the nomination.
      2.   Recommendation
      If the Tucson-Pima County Historical Commission Plans Review Subcommittee
votes to recommend approval of the nomination proposal, the applicant receives
a letter from the PDSD Director. This letter acts as formal notification that
the nomination proposal has been recommended for approval, and the applicant
may proceed with the submittal of the HL rezoning application and materials.
   C.   Change of Zoning
      The rezoning application and nomination materials are reviewed by the
Zoning Examiner and considered for approval in accordance with Section
3.5 Rezoning (Change of Zoning) and must comply with all rezoning steps. The
Zoning Examiner recommendation shall include findings verifying designation
eligibility and any land use impacts of the proposed HL. The Zoning Examiner's
recommendations regarding land use impacts are for consideration by the Mayor
and Council but are to be presented separately from findings regarding the HL
eligibility, and are not intended to place special rezoning conditions on the
proposed HL. The Zoning Examiner's recommendations are forwarded to the Mayor
and Council. The Mayor and Council decision on the change of zoning may include
the designation of buildings, structures, or sites as Contributing, Non-
Contributing or Intrusive, and the designation of a HL.
   D.   Additional Requirements for HLs
      1.   Design Standards
      Refer to Section
5.8.9 for HL Design Standards. Consultation with the City Historic Preservation
Office may be necessary in special cases.
   E.   Dissolution of a HL
   Dissolution of a HL is reviewed and considered for approval in accordance
with Section
3.5, Rezoning (Change of Zoning).
(Ord. 11150, 3/18/2014; Am. Ord. 11411, 11/22/2016)
5.8.7. PERMITTED USES
   The following land uses are permitted in the HPZ.
   A.   Uses Permitted by the Underlying Zoning
   Uses permitted by the underlying zoning and reasonably accommodated within
existing structures without altering the historic nature or significance of the
structure.
   B.   Retail Sales by Resident Artisans
   Retail sales by resident artisans may be permitted notwithstanding
limitations of the underlying zoning standards. A proposed resident artisan use
is reviewed and considered for approval in accordance with Section
3.3.4, 100' Notice Procedure. A resident artisan  use may be allowed as an
accessory use  to a principal residential in accordance with the following
standards:
      1.   The resident artisan use applies only to the applicant’s use and the
property for which approval was sought;
      2.   Retail sales are limited to goods produced on the premises by an
artisan residing on the premises limited to the following:
         a.   Fine and commercial art, sculpture, and writing;
         b.   Crafts, including ceramics, metal, wood, jewelry, leather,
weaving, antique repair, and custom furniture;
         c.   Photography; or,
         d.   Similar activities as may be approved by the PDSD Director .
      3.   The exterior appearance of the existing structure is not altered for
the purposes of the nonresidential use;
      4.   A sign shall identify only the resident artisan or residence and
conform to the standards of the HPZ and
Article 7A, Sign Standards, except that the size of the sign is limited to one
and one-half square feet in area;
      5.   Storage, parking, and working areas are landscaped and screened in
accordance with Section
7.6, Landscaping and Screening Standards, with materials compatible  with those
in the HPZ as approved by the PDSD Director ;
      6.   The resident artisan use occupies no more than 25% of the floor area
of the site , nor is there exterior display, activity, or advertisement of
products or services;
      7.   No more than one nonresident is employed on the premises; and,
      8.   The activity does not create traffic, parking, noise, odors, waste
materials, electrical interference, or any other negative impact that would
adversely affect the character of the HPZ.
(Am. Ord. 11150, 3/18/2014; Am. Ord. 11732, 2/19/2020; Am. Ord. 11803, 12/8/
2020)
5.8.8. DESIGN REVIEW REQUIRED
   A.   General
      1.   Review and approval, of all properties, buildings , signs, and
structures within an HPZ, is required for all development and improvements ,
including new construction or improvements that do not require building
permits. Proposals are reviewed for compliance with Section
5.8.9, Design Standards.
      2.   Prior to the submittal of a proposal, the applicant should consult
with the applicable historic HPZ Advisory Board and refer to the Secretary of
the Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation.
      3.   Projects are reviewed in accordance with the Full or Minor HPZ
Review Procedures.
   B.   Full HPZ Review Procedure
      1.   Applicability
      The following project types are reviewed for compliance with the
applicable standards in accordance with the Full HPZ Review Procedure:
         a.   Grading or the erection or construction of a new structure;
         b.   A permit for any alteration involving the modification, addition,
or moving of any part of an existing structure, including signs, that would
affect the exterior appearance, except as provided in Section
5.8.8.C, Minor HPZ Review;
         c.   Repairs or new construction as provided for in Section
5.8.8.C, Minor HPZ Review, that the PDSD Director  determines shall be approved
under the full review process due to the cumulative effect of phased work that
would normally be subject to the applicability of the full HPZ review process;
         d.   The construction or enlargement of a parking lot within a HPZ or
on a property containing a Historic Landmark ; and,
         e.   Exceptions. The following project types are reviewed using the
Minor HPZ Review Procedure: installation of solar panels or cisterns or
installation of or repairs to a roof.
      2.   Preliminary Staff Review
      The applicant must submit a site plan and elevation drawings to the PDSD
for preliminary staff review. The PDSD staff reviews the proposed plans for
compliance with applicable UDC requirements and any LUC requirements that need
to be addressed either through the historic design criteria or a special
application for relief. The applicant will be informed in writing of any
requirements the proposed plan does not meet.
      3.   Application Required
      Submittal of an application to the PDSD is required in order to process
the request.
      4.   HPZ Advisory Board - Review and Recommendation
      The applicable HPZ Advisory Board shall review and make a recommendation
on the application. The recommendation is forwarded to the Tucson-Pima County
Historical Commission.
      5.   Tucson-Pima County Historical Commission Plans Review Subcommittee -
Review and Recommendation
      The Tucson-Pima County Historical Commission (TPCHC) Plans Review
Subcommittee shall review and make a recommendation on the application. The
subcommittee’s recommendation is forwarded to the PDSD Director .
      6.   Decision
      The PDSD Director reviews the application and decides whether to approve,
approve with conditions, deny, or refer the application back for additional
review/recommendation based on revisions to the original proposal. The PDSD
Director shall consider the recommendations of the HPZ Advisory Board and the
TPCHC Plans Review Subcommittee when considering a decision. The decision shall
be provided in writing to the applicant, applicable HPZ Advisory Board, and the
TPCHC Plans Review Subcommittee. No building permits will be issued prior to
the expiration of the appeal period.
      7.   Appeals
      A party of record may appeal the PDSD Director ’s decision to the Mayor
and Council in accordance with Section
3.9.2, Mayor and Council Appeal Procedure. Appeals must be filed within 14 days
of the effective date of the Director ’s decision. For purposes here, the
parties of record are the applicant, the applicable HPZ Advisory Board, and the
Tucson-Pima County Historical Commission Plans Review Subcommittee.
      8.   Documentation Required Upon Approval
      Applicants must submit three copies of the site plan and elevation
drawings to the PDSD for formal approval prior to application for building
permits.
   C.   Minor HPZ Review
      1.   Applicability
      In general, the Minor HPZ Review Procedure is for projects that do not
require building permits. Specifically, the following project types are
reviewed for compliance with the applicable standards in accordance with the
Minor HPZ Review Procedure:
         a.   Minor or necessary repairs to a structure provided that:
            (1)   The total cost of such improvement is under $1,500, except
for the replacement cost of appliances and mechanical equipment; and,
            (2)   The repairs involve replacement with materials of identical
or historically accurate design, size, and color to those being replaced.
         b.   Emergency repairs provided that the repairs involve replacement
with materials of identical or historically accurate design, size, and color to
those being replaced;
         c.   The change in copy of a sign;
         d.   Any alteration that does not require a permit involving the
modification, addition, or moving of any part of an existing structure that
would affect the exterior appearance. Alterations include, but are not limited
to, fences and walls, except those alterations that the PDSD Director
determines shall be approved under the full review process due to the
cumulative effect of phased work that would normally be subject to the
applicability of the HPZ review; and,
         e.   Installation of solar panels or cisterns or installation of or
repairs to a roof.
      2.   Application Required
      An application, including site plan and elevation drawings, is required.
      3.   On-Site Review Required
      Upon submittal of the application, a date and time will be scheduled for
the applicant, representatives from the applicable HPZ Advisory Board, Tucson-
Pima County Historical Commission (TPCHC) Plans Review Subcommittee, and City
staff to meet at the project site to discuss the proposal.
      4.   Recommendation
      The representatives from the applicable HPZ Advisory Board and the TPCHC
Plans Review Subcommittee review the proposal and make a recommendation on the
application to the PDSD Director .
      5.   PDSD Director Decision
      The PDSD Director reviews the application and decides whether to approve,
approve with conditions, deny, or refer the application back for additional
review/recommendation based on revisions to the original proposal. The PDSD
Director shall consider the recommendations of the HPZ Advisory Board and the
TPCHC Plans Review Subcommittee when considering a decision.
      6.   Documentation Required
      If approved, the applicant must submit three copies of the plans for
formal approval by PDSD staff prior to application for building permits, if
required.
(Am. Ord. 11150, 3/18/2014)
5.8.9. DESIGN STANDARDS
   The HPZ Advisory Boards, Tucson-Pima County Historical Commission, staff,
PDSD Director , and Mayor and Council shall be guided by the design standards
in this section and the Technical Standards Manual when evaluating proposed
development applications within the HPZ. Proposed development within the HPZ
shall be in compliance with the following standards and the standards of the
applicable HPZ as provided in Section
9-02.7.0, Specific Historic Preservation Zone Guidelines, the Technical
Standards Manual.
   A.   Generally
      1.   Historic Landmark
      Alterations or additions to a Historic Landmark shall properly preserve
the historic and architectural characteristics that make it unique, and any
changes or additions shall conform to the intrinsic and unique character of the
building or structure itself. Any alterations to the interior of a publicly
owned Historic Landmark shall be reviewed. The applicant should refer to the
Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation when tax certification
for rehabilitation work is contemplated.
      2.   Contributing Property
      Alterations or additions to a Contributing Property within an HPZ shall
reflect the architectural style and characteristics of the existing structure.
The property may be renovated to an earlier historic style that applied to the
property. In addition, such alterations or additions shall generally conform to
the design standards of Contributing Properties within the development zone of
the site .
      3.   New Construction or Noncontributing Property
      New construction or alterations or additions to a Noncontributing
Property within an HPZ shall reflect the architectural style of, and be
compatible with, the Contributing Properties located within its development
zone .
   B.   Height
   Heights of principal structures in the project 's development zone are used
to compare to proposed new construction of, or additions to, principal
structures . Likewise, the height of proposed accessory structures is compared
to other accessory structure heights in the development zone , except in the
case of Accessory Dwelling Units, where height is compared to the height of
other principal structures in the development zone (See
Figure 5.8-A.)
      1.   Historic Landmark
      Alterations or additions to a Historic Landmark shall be no higher than
the tallest comparable feature of the existing structure.
      2.   Contributing Property
      Alterations or additions to a Contributing Property shall be constructed
no higher than the tallest Contributing Property located within its development
zone and shall generally conform to the typical height within the development
zone .
      3.   New Construction or Noncontributing Property
      New construction or alterations or additions to a Noncontributing
Property shall be constructed no higher than the tallest Contributing Property
located within its development zone and shall generally conform to the typical
height within the development zone .
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3018.jpg]
Figure 5.8-A: Height Compatibility
   C.   Setbacks (See
Figure 5.8-B.)
      1.   Historic Landmark
      Alterations or additions to a Historic Landmark shall maintain the
original front setback of the existing structure or the prevailing setback
existing within its development zone , provided that such a setback is
compatible with the historic character of the existing structure. Interior
perimeter yard  setbacks shall be consistent with those existing within the
development zone .
      2.   Contributing Property
      Alterations or additions to a Contributing Property shall maintain the
prevailing street and interior perimeter yard  setbacks existing within its
development zone .
      3.   New Construction or Noncontributing Property
      New construction or alterations or additions to a Noncontributing
Property shall maintain the prevailing street and interior perimeter yard
 setbacks existing within its development zone .
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3020.jpg]
Figure 5.8-B: Prevailing Setbacks
   D.   Proportion
      1.   Historic Landmark
      Alterations or additions to a Historic Landmark shall reflect the
proportions of the existing structure.
      2.   Contributing Property
      Alterations or additions to a Contributing Property shall be consistent
with the proportions of the existing structure and with the prevailing
proportions of Contributing Properties within its development zone .
      3.   New Construction or Noncontributing Property
      New construction or alterations or additions to a Noncontributing
Property shall reflect the prevailing proportions of Contributing Properties
within its development zone .
   E.   Roof Types
      1.   Historic Landmark
      Alterations or additions to a Historic Landmark shall have a roof
compatible in configuration, mass, and materials to that of the architectural
style of the existing structure.
      2.   Contributing Property
      Alterations or additions to a Contributing Property shall have a roof
compatible in configuration, mass, and materials to that of the architectural
style of the existing structure.
      3.   New Construction or Noncontributing Property
      New construction or alterations or additions to a Noncontributing
Property shall have a roof compatible in configuration, mass, and materials to
the prevailing historic style and period of the existing structures within the
development zone in which the proposed structure will be constructed.
   F.   Surface Texture
      1.   Historic Landmark
      Surface texture of alterations or additions to a Historic Landmark shall
be appropriate to the historic style of the existing structure and the period
in which it was constructed.
      2.   Contributing Property
      Surface texture of alterations or additions to a Contributing Property
shall be appropriate to the historic style of the existing structure.
      3.   New Construction or Noncontributing Property
      New construction or alterations or additions to a Noncontributing
Property shall have a surface texture that is appropriate to the historic style
of similar structures within the development zone and shall reflect the
historic periods existing within the HPZ.
   G.   Site Utilization
      1.   Historic Landmark
      Site utilization of a Historic Landmark shall be appropriate to the
historic period in which the existing structure was built.
      2.   Contributing Property
      Site utilization of alterations or additions to a Contributing Property
shall be consistent with the site utilization of Contributing Properties within
the development zone .
      3.   New Construction or Noncontributing Property
      Site utilization of new construction or alterations or additions to a
Noncontributing Property shall be consistent with the site utilization of
Contributing Properties within the development zone .
   H.   Projections and Recessions
      1.   Historic Landmark
      Projections and recessions of a Historic Landmark , such as porches,
steps, awnings, overhangs, entrances, and windows, shall be appropriate to the
style of the existing structure and the historic period in which it was built.
      2.   Contributing Property
      Projections and recessions of a Contributing Property , such as porches,
steps, awnings, overhangs, entrances, and windows, shall be appropriate to the
style of the existing structure.
      3.   New Construction or Noncontributing Property
      New construction or alterations or additions to a Noncontributing
Property shall have projections and recessions, such as porches, steps,
awnings, overhangs, entrances, and windows, that are compatible with the
existing historic styles within the development zone and reflect the historic
periods of the HPZ.
   I.   Details
      1.   Historic Landmark
      Architectural details of a Historic Landmark , such as cornices, lintels,
arches, grill work, shutters, window and door trim, and canales, shall be
appropriate to the historic style of the existing structure and the historic
period in which it was built.
      2.   Contributing Property
      Architectural details of a Contributing Property , such as cornices,
lintels, arches, grill work, shutters, window and door trim, and canales, shall
be appropriate to the historic style of the existing structure.
      3.   New Construction or Noncontributing Property
      New construction or alterations or additions to a Noncontributing
Property shall have architectural details, such as cornices, lintels, arches,
grill work, shutters, window and door trim, and canales, that are compatible
with the existing historic styles and historic periods of Contributing
Properties within the development zone .
   J.   Building Form
      1.   Historic Landmark
      Size, mass, and scale of alterations or additions to a Historic Landmark
shall be compatible with those of the existing structure.
      2.   Contributing Property
      Size, mass, and scale of alterations or additions to a Contributing
Property shall be compatible with the existing structure and with the
Contributing Properties within the development zone .
      3.   New Construction or Noncontributing Property
      New construction or alterations or additions to a Noncontributing
Property shall have size, mass, and scale that are compatible with the existing
Contributing Properties within the development zone .
   K.   Rhythm
      1.   Historic Landmark
      The proportion , pattern, and rhythm of openings of additions or
alterations to a Historic Landmark shall be compatible with those of the
existing structure.
      2.   Contributing Property
      The proportion , pattern, and rhythm of openings of additions or
alterations to a Contributing Property shall be compatible with those of the
existing structure and with those of Contributing Properties in its development
zone .
      3.   New Construction or Noncontributing Property
      New construction or alterations or additions to a Noncontributing
Property shall reflect the proportion , pattern, and rhythm of openings of
Contributing Properties in its development zone .
   L.   Additional Review Standards
   To provide flexibility in the review of applications that reflect the
diverse and unique characteristics of the various HPZs, other pertinent factors
generally affecting the appearance, harmony, and efficient functioning of the
HPZ may be used as appropriate for the particular application, such as the
following:
      1.   Color
      Color of a building or structure, including trim, roof, and other
details, shall be appropriate to the architectural style of the subject
structure and its historic period. Color may be reviewed in the context of a
required HPZ review; painting alone shall not be considered through an HPZ
review.
      2.   Landscaping
      Plantings and other ornamental features shall reflect the historic period
of the subject structure. Landscaping may be reviewed in the context of a
required HPZ review; landscaping alone shall not be considered through an HPZ
review.
      3.   Enclosures
      Fences, walls, or other physical features used to enclose open space or
provide privacy shall be compatible with the architectural style of the subject
structure and with Contributing Properties within the development zone and
shall reflect the historic period of the HPZ.
      4.   Utilities
      New aboveground power and telephone line installation and new utility
connections shall be reviewed for appropriateness and compatibility ,
especially the use of electric utility boxes on front facades.
   M.   Signs
   The appearance, color, size, position, method of attachment, texture of
materials, and design of signs within an HPZ shall be in keeping with the
collective characteristics of the structures located within the appropriate
development zone . Signs allowed in the underlying land use zone shall be
further regulated by
Article 7A, Sign Standards. The signs allowed in the underlying land use  zone
are further limited as follows (see
Figure 5.8-C):
      1.   Historic District Advisory Board Approval
         All sign permit applications must be approved by the appropriate
historic district advisory board.
      2.   Off-site signs are not permitted;
      3.   Business signs are limited to one sign only for each street frontage
per premises. Businesses having frontage on more than two streets are allowed a
total of three signs. Businesses are limited to one freestanding sign per
premises;
      4.    Maximum Sign Area
      Signs in Residential Zones may be up to eight square feet; signs in
Commercial Zones may be up to 40 square feet. The sign shall be appropriately
sized, result in minimal damage to historic fabric, and avoid adverse effects
on qualities that make a building eligible for listing in the National Register
of Historic Places.
      5.   Height. Signs shall not extend above the top of the nearest facade,
eaves, or fire wall of a building or structure ;
      6.    Design and materials of signs
         Visible bulbs, not exceeding 20 watts per bulb, are allowed. Bulbs
within fixtures are not limited in wattage. Neon tubing may be allowed on
commercially zoned properties, where historically appropriate. Clear plexiglas
and acrylic, when used as a substitute for glass, is allowed; otherwise,
plastics are not allowed. Luminous paints are not allowed;
      7.   Permitted Signs
         a.   Signs generally permitted and sign types listed in Section
7A.10, except as modified by this subsection for this district , and signs
exempt under Section
7A.8 Exempt and Prohibited Signs.
         b.    Awning signs.
         c.   Banners, building and curbside.
         d.    Freestanding signs, monument and low profile only.
            (1)   Maximum number: One per premises.
            (2)   Freestanding signs that include or consist of a three-
dimensional representation of a figure or object are prohibited.
         e.    Portable signs.
            (1)   May be permitted in this district only after review and
approval by the planning and development services director , the applicable
historic district advisory board and the Tucson Pima County Historical
Commission.
            (2)   Use is subject to the provisions of Section
7A.10.3, Sign Types and General Standards.
         f.    Projecting signs.
            (1)   Allowed use: Limited to commercial uses only.
            (2)   Maximum height: 20 feet from grade (pedestrian surface) to
top of sign or two feet below the parapet, whichever is more restrictive.
            (3)   Minimum clearance: Eight feet between grade and bottom of
sign.
            (4)   Maximum projection from building : Five feet.
         g.    Temporary signs.
         h.   Wall signs.
         i.   Canopy signs, limited to properties zoned HO-2, HO-3, HNC, HC-1,
HC-2, HC-3, HOCR-1 and HOCR-2.
         j.   Heritage landmark signs (HLS), all types. The first HLS on a
premise does not count toward the maximum total sign area.
      8.   Prohibited Features
         Visible bulbs, neon tubing, luminous paints, and plastics are
prohibited, except as provided in Section
5.8.9 HPZ Design Standards and approved in accordance with Section
5.8.8 Design Review Required.
      9.   Illumination. Buildings and signs within the HPZ may be illuminated
by remote light sources, provided that these light sources are shielded to
protect adjacent properties; and,
      10.   The applicant may apply for a variance from these standards where
it can be shown that the proposed sign is consistent with the purpose and
intent of the HPZ and is historically authentic. In the alternative, the
applicant may request to vary these standards under
Article 7A Sign Design Options.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-14852.png]
Figure 5.8-C: Signs
   N.   Motor Vehicle and Bicycle  Parking Areas
   Parking in accordance with Section
7.4, Motor Vehicle and Bicycle Parking, is required. Parking may be provided
on- or off-site  with zoning that allows parking as a principal use . Off-site
parking spaces for uses within the HPZ shall not be located more than 600 feet,
within the same or another block , from the land use the spaces serve, except
within the boundaries of the El Presidio HPZ where required parking spaces may
be provided not more than 600 feet beyond the HPZ boundary (See
Figure 5.8-D). All new or modified vehicular use areas  within the HPZ shall be
landscaped and screened as required by Section
7.6, Landscaping and Screening Standards, using compatible  structural and
plant materials.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3024.jpg]
Figure 5.8-D: Parking Areas
(Am. Ord. 11150, 3/18/2014; Am. Ord. 11803, 12/8/2020; Am. Ord. 12131, 10/22/
2024)
5.8.10. DEMOLITION REVIEW REQUIRED
   It is the intent of this section to preserve the historic and architectural
resources within the HPZ and the Rio Nuevo District (RND) in their original
appearance, setting, and placement. Demolition of a historic property can cause
an irreplaceable loss to the quality and character of the City of Tucson.
However, it is recognized that there can be circumstances beyond the control of
a property owner that may result in the necessary demolition of a structure
within the HPZ or RND. These circumstances include a building that constitutes
an imminent safety hazard, involves a resource whose loss does not diminish or
adversely affect the integrity of the HPZ, or prevents a reasonable economic
use of the property. A proposed change of use is not considered in the analysis
of reasonable economic use.
   No demolition permit shall be issued by the City for demolition or
relocation of all or any part of a structure, site , sign, or Historic Landmark
that would affect its exterior appearance within the HPZ before review and
approval occurs. Review is required under the following procedures.
   A.   Emergency Demolition
   If the Building Official determines a structure to be an imminent hazard to
public safety and repairs would be impractical, emergency demolition procedures
are conducted in accordance with Chapter 16-66, Historic Structures, of the
Tucson Code.
   B.   Intrusions and Noncontributing, Nonhistoric Structures
   For structures designated as intrusions or noncontributing, nonhistoric
properties in HPZs, the PDSD Director shall consult with the appropriate HPZ
Advisory Board and the Tucson-Pima County Historical Commission Plans Review
Subcommittee to ensure that the structure is properly classified at the time of
the request for demolition. If the structure is an intrusion or
noncontributing, nonhistoric, no further review shall be required. If the PDSD
Director determines that the structure has not been properly designated, the
PDSD Director may delay the issuance of the permit until the proper designation
is determined by the Zoning Administrator or may proceed with the appropriate
review process as if the designation had been changed.
   C.   Independent Portions of Structures
   A request may be made for the demolition of a portion of a structure if the
demolition will not adversely affect the historical character of the property.
For portions that may be independently designated as intrusions or
noncontributing, nonhistoric elements, the PDSD Director shall consult with the
HPZ Advisory Board or the Tucson-Pima County Historical Commission Plans Review
Subcommittee to ensure that the portion of the structure has been properly
classified and that demolition will not have any adverse impact on the
contributing or historic character of the property. If the portion of a
structure is designated under this section as an intrusion or nonhistoric
element, no further review is required. At least four days prior to issuance of
a demolition permit, the PDSD Director shall notify the applicant, the
appropriate HPZ Advisory Board and the Tucson-Pima County Historical Commission
Plans Review Subcommittee of the decision. A decision by the PDSD Director may
be appealed by the HPZ Advisory Board or the Tucson-Pima County Historical
Commission Plans Review Subcommittee to the Zoning Examiner within three days
of the effective date of the decision.
   D.   Contributing Properties , Nonhistoric
   Review by staff, the applicable HPZ Advisory Board, and the Tucson-Pima
County Historical Commission is required before a decision is made by the PDSD
Director . The procedure for review shall be in accordance with Section
3.3.4, 100' Notice Procedure. The appropriate HPZ Advisory Board and the
Tucson-Pima County Historical Commission Plans Review Subcommittee are parties
of record for the purpose of determining notice and the right to appeal the
decision. The standards used to make this decision are as follows:
      1.   The structure or site is of no historic or architectural value or
significance and does not contribute to the historic value of the property;
      2.   Loss of the structure would not adversely affect the integrity of
the HPZ or the historic, architectural, or aesthetic relationship to adjacent
properties, and its demolition would be inconsequential to the historic
preservation needs of the area;
      3.   Whether there are definite plans for reuse of the property if the
proposed demolition is carried out and what effect such plans will have on the
architectural, cultural, historic, archaeological, social, aesthetic, or
environmental character of the surrounding area as well as the economic impact
of the new development ; and,
      4.   Whether reasonable measures can be taken to save the building ,
object, site , structure, or cluster from further deterioration, collapse,
arson, vandalism, or neglect.
   E.   Historic Contributing Properties and Historic Landmarks
   Approval for the demolition of historic landmarks , demolition of structures
on Contributing Historic Properties in HPZs, and demolition of structures
listed in the National Register of Historic Places or the Arizona Register of
Historic Places in the Rio Nuevo District (RND) is determined by the Mayor and
Council. The criterion used to make this decision is that the owner of the
structure would be subject to reasonable economic use if the building were not
demolished. The procedure for approval is required below.
      1.   Application
      Submittal of an application shall be in accordance with the applicable
provisions of Section
2-06.0.0, Development Package, in the Administrative Manual.
      2.   Reasonable Economic Use
      When reasonable economic use of the property is prevented due to the
effect of this ordinance, the owner has to prove that reasonable use of the
property cannot be made. The public benefits obtained from retaining the
historic resource are analyzed and duly considered by the PDSD Director , the
applicable HPZ Advisory Board, and the Tucson-Pima County Historical Commission
Plans Review Subcommittee. The owner shall submit the following information by
affidavit to the PDSD Director for transmittal to the review bodies for
evaluation and recommendation:
         a.   Except as provided in Section
5.8.10.E.2.a(10), for all property:
            (1)   The assessed value of the land and improvements thereon
according to the two most recent assessments;
            (2)   Real estate taxes for the previous two years;
            (3)   The date of purchase of the property or other means of
acquisition of title, such as by gift or inheritance;
            (4)   Annual debt service, if any, for the previous two years;
            (5)   All appraisals obtained within the previous two years by the
owner or applicant in connection with the purchase, financing, ensuring, or
ownership of property;
            (6)   Any listing of the property for sale or rent, price asked,
and offers received, if any;
            (7)   Any consideration by the owner as to profitable adaptive uses
for the property;
            (8)   The current fair market value of the property as determined
by at least two independent appraisals; and,
            (9)   An estimate of rehabilitation cost to restore the structure
to active use.
            (10)   Exceptions. When a property owner is financially unable to
meet the standards set forth in this subsection, the PDSD Director may waive
some or all of the standards and/or request substitute information that a
property owner may obtain without incurring any costs. An applicant may request
a waiver of one or more of the submittal requirements based on the specific
nature of the case. The PDSD Director , who may consult with the Tucson-Pima
County Historical Commission, shall make a determination on the waiver request.
If a determination cannot be made based on information submitted and an
appraisal has not been provided, the PDSD Director shall request that an
appraisal be made by the City .
         b.   In addition to the requirements in Section
5.8.10.E.2.a, owners of income-producing property shall submit the following:
            (1)   Annual gross income from the property for the previous two
years;
            (2)   Itemized operating and maintenance expenses for the previous
two years, including proof that adequate and competent management procedures
were followed;
            (3)   Annual cash flow, if any, for the previous two years; and,
            (4)   Proof that efforts have been made by the owner to obtain a
reasonable return on investment based on previous service.
      3.   Negotiations Prior to Decisions on Demolition Applications
         a.   The application is scheduled for a public hearing with the Mayor
and Council no sooner than 90 days from the date the application is accepted.
During this time period, City staff shall discuss the proposed demolition with
the property owner and other City officials to see if an alternative to
demolition can be found before a formal consideration of the application by the
Mayor and Council. The PDSD Director shall analyze alternatives to demolition
and request, from other City departments or agencies, information necessary for
this analysis.
         b.   If within this 90 day period either one of the following two
events occurs, the Mayor and Council may defer hearing the application for six
months, and it is considered to have been withdrawn by the applicant during
such six-month period:
            (1)   The owner enters into a binding contract for the sale of the
property; or,
            (2)   The City of Tucson acquires the property by available legal
process for rehabilitation or reuse by the City or other disposition with
appropriate preservation restrictions.
         c.   If within the 90-day period neither of the two events summarized
above occurs, a public hearing with the Mayor and Council on the demolition
application shall be scheduled on the next available agenda.
      4.   Review of Application
      The Tucson-Pima County Historical Commission and the HPZ Advisory Board
review demolition applications. Within five days after acceptance of the
application, staff transmits one copy of the accepted site plan to the
appropriate HPZ Advisory Board and one copy to the Tucson-Pima County
Historical Commission Plans Review Subcommittee for review and recommendation.
The HPZ Advisory Board may forward a recommendation to the Tucson-Pima County
Historical Commission and the PDSD Director within 22 days after acceptance of
the application. The Tucson-Pima County Historical Commission shall forward a
recommendation to the PDSD Director and the HPZ Advisory Board within 31 days
after acceptance of the application.
      5.   Recommendations
      The recommendations of the PDSD Director , the Tucson-Pima County
Historical Commission, and the appropriate HPZ Advisory Board shall be
forwarded to the Mayor and Council for consideration.
      6.   Mayor and Council Public Hearing
      The Mayor and Council consider the application in a public hearing.
Mailed notice and published notice shall be provided not less than 15 days
prior to the public hearing. Notice shall be mailed to property owners within
400 feet of the site , neighborhood associations within one mile of the site ,
the applicable HPZ Advisory Board, and the Tucson-Pima County Historical
Commission.
      7.   Mayor and Council Decision
      The Mayor and Council decide whether to approve an application to
demolish a Historic Landmark or historic Contributing Property . To approve the
application, the Mayor and Council shall find that the owner will not have a
reasonable economic use of the property if a demolition permit is not approved.
An approval is subject to the following:
         a.   The applicant shall seek approval of replacement plans prior to
receiving a demolition permit and all other necessary permits. Replacement
plans for this purpose shall include, but shall not be restricted to, project
concept, preliminary elevations, site plans , and dimensional schematic design
drawings that are reviewed in accordance with Section
3.3.3, PDSD Director Approval Procedure;
         b.   A demolition permit shall be issued concurrently with the
building permit for replacement following submittal by the applicant of proof
of financial ability to complete the replacement project ;
         c.   A decision on a demolition application shall result in the
administrative closure of the case file by staff. A decision on a demolition
application applies to the property; and,
         d.   Reapplication for demolition permits for a structure that was
previously denied for demolition cannot be submitted to the City for three
years from the date of the Mayor and Council decision. A change in property
ownership is not considered a basis for reapplication. Substantially new
conditions, as determined by the PDSD Director in consultation with the HPZ
Advisory Board and the Tucson-Pima County Historical Commission, is a basis for
earlier reapplication.
      8.   Provisions for Vacant Lots and Areas After Demolition
         a.   When a site , sign, Historic Landmark , or structure is
demolished and the area left vacant, the area shall be maintained in a clean
and inoffensive manner.
         b.   When a structure is demolished and the area is converted to
another use not requiring buildings , such as a parking lot , the area shall be
buffered by landscaping and walls or fences that comply with Section
7.6, Landscaping and Screening, and generally conform to the character of the
other buildings  and structures  located within its development zone . The site
plan  required as part of the review procedure shall indicate how the
landscaping  and screening will be accomplished.
      9.   Penalties and Remedies for Unauthorized Demolition; Notice of Entry
of Judgment
      In addition to the general remedies authorized by Sections
10.4.1 through
10.4.3, any property owner, individual, company, or person , as defined in
Tucson Code Section 1-2(16), who causes a structure, site , or Historic
Landmark located within a HPZ to be demolished, without following procedures as
established in this section, are subject to the following:
         a.   A mandatory fine of:
            (1)   Not less than $250 nor more than $1,000 per violation for
demolition of an accessory structure that is a Noncontributing Property , or
not less than $1,500 nor more than $2,500 per violation for demolition of a
principal structure or site that is a Noncontributing Property ; or,
            (2)   Not less than $2,000 nor more than $2,500 per violation for
demolition of a Historic Landmark or Contributing Property .
         b.   In addition to any fine imposed in accordance with Section
5.8.10.E.9.a, the PDSD Director shall, upon finalization of judgment:
            (1)   Issue a formal complaint with the Arizona State Registrar of
Contractors against any contractor or company involved with an unauthorized
demolition; and,
            (2)   Issue a formal notification of the violation to the State
Historic Preservation Office regarding the unauthorized demolition of any
structure, site , or Historic Landmark .
         c.   In addition to any fine imposed in accordance with Section
5.8.10.E.9.a, one of the following shall be imposed as a penalty or remedy:
            (1)   Reconstruction or restoration of a Contributing Property or a
Historic Landmark to its appearance prior to the violation ;
            (2)   Prohibition or restriction of building permits for new
construction on the site for not more than seven years, but not less than 30
days , for a Noncontributing Property or two years for a Contributing Property
or Historic Landmark and prohibition or restriction of permits involving work
in the public right-of-way for not more than seven years, but not less than 30
days , for a Noncontributing Property or two years for a Contributing Property
or Historic Landmark ; or,
            (3)   Upon finalization of judgment setting forth a remedy as
provided in Sections
5.8.10.E.9.a and .b, the PDSD Director or designate shall file the judgment in
the office of the Pima County Recorder and Assessor’s Office.
         d.   The following factors are considered when imposing any penalty or
remedy in accordance with Section
5.8.10.E.9.c(1) and (2):
            (1)   Whether the structure, site , or Historic Landmark is one of
the last remaining examples of its kind in the neighborhood, City , or region;
            (2)   Whether there exists sufficient documentation, plans, or
other data so as to make reconstruction feasible;
            (3)   The age of the original structure, site , or Historic
Landmark and all subsequent additions and modifications;
            (4)   The physical condition of the structure, site , or Historic
Landmark immediately prior to its total or partial demolition;
            (5)   The amount of demolition sustained by the structure, site ,
or Historic Landmark ;
            (6)   Whether or not, had total or partial demolition occurred, the
structure, site , or Historic Landmark could have been put into a reasonable
economic use either prior to or after rehabilitation;
            (7)   Whether the structure, site , or Historic Landmark was
eligible for inclusion on the National Register of Historic Places immediately
prior to its total or partial demolition;
            (8)   Whether the structure, site , or Historic Landmark is
included on the National Register of Historic Places; or,
            (9)   Whether the responsible party has a legal or equitable
interest in the structure, site , or Historic Landmark .
(Am. Ord. 11150, 3/18/2014; Am. Ord. 11732, 2/19/2020)
5.8.11.    MAINTENANCE
   A.   Maintenance of historic resources is important for property owners to
maintain property values and for the cultural and aesthetic value to the
community. Maintaining historic structures and sites preserves the special
sense of place that encourages tourism and further investment in historic
areas.
   B.   All historic resources shall be preserved against decay and
deterioration and kept in a state of good repair and free from certain
structural defects. The purpose of this section is to prevent an owner or other
person having legal custody and control over a property from facilitating the
demolition of a historic resource by neglecting it or permitting damage to it
by weather or vandalism.
   C.   Consistent with all other state and City codes requiring that buildings
and structures be kept in good repair, the owner or other person having legal
custody and control over a property shall maintain such buildings or structures
in the same or better condition than that indicated in the most recently
available inventory for the HPZ in which the property is located. The following
defects shall be indicators of a need for repair:
      1.   Building elements are in a condition that they may fall and injure
members of the general public or damage other property;
      2.   Deteriorated or inadequate foundation;
      3.   Defective or deteriorated flooring;
      4.   Walls, partitions, or other vertical support members that split,
lean, list, or buckle due to defective material or deterioration;
      5.   Ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof support members, or other
horizontal members that sag, split, or buckle due to defective materials or
deterioration;
      6.   Fireplaces or chimneys that list, bulge, or settle due to defective
material or deterioration;
      7.   Deteriorated, crumbling, or loose exterior plaster;
      8.   Deteriorated or ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roofs,
foundations, or floors, including broken windows or doors;
      9.   Defective or lack of weather protection for exterior wall coverings,
including lack of paint, or weathering due to lack of paint or other protective
covering; or,
      10.   Any fault, defect, or deterioration in the building that renders
the same structurally unsafe or not properly watertight.
   D.   If the Tucson-Pima County Historical Commission has reason to believe
that a property is being neglected and subject to damage from weather or
vandalism, the Tucson-Pima County Historical Commission shall so advise City
staff. Staff shall meet with the owner or other person having legal custody and
control of the property and discuss ways to improve the condition of the
property and shall assist those persons with an economic hardship in obtaining
financial resources to accomplish such improvements . If there is no subsequent
attempt, or insufficient effort is made, to correct any noted conditions after
such meeting by the owner or other such person having legal custody and
control, the Tucson-Pima County Historical Commission may make a formal request
that the Building Official take action to require corrections of defects in the
subject building or structure so that it is preserved in accordance with the
purposes of this section. The Building Official may also require the property
owner to remedy any defect or deterioration that constitutes a threat to the
public health, safety, and welfare in accordance with the authority vested in
him by the adopted building codes and neighborhood preservation ordinances.
Deterioration caused by deliberate neglect of maintenance or repairs are not
considered valid grounds for the approval of a demolition permit application.
   E.   Vacant properties shall be maintained in a clean and orderly state.
(Am. Ord. 11127, 11/6/2013; Am. Ord. 11150, 3/18/2014)
5.8.12.    PENDING HISTORIC PRESERVATION ZONES
   A.   Purpose
   It is the purpose of this section to preserve structures of historic or
architectural significance, but it is recognized that all areas of significance
cannot be identified, analyzed, and designated at one time. However, it is
important to protect properties with potentially qualifying buildings from
inappropriate demolitions until review and hearings can be completed for
possible HPZ designation.
   B.   Applicability
   The following process is established for the review of proposed demolitions
of structures that are located in areas of the City where the Mayor and Council
have initiated the process of HPZ formation and imposed interim standards:
      1.   These procedures apply to any building or structure located within
an area of an application for an HPZ between such time the Mayor and Council
either initiate the establishment of an HPZ or enact an ordinance to apply
these standards and the time action is taken on the application by the Mayor
and Council, but for no more than one year.
      2.   The provisions of this section apply to all areas of the City under
application for HPZ designation on the effective date of this ordinance and to
all areas of the City for which applications for HPZ designation are initiated
after the effective date of this ordinance.
      3.   An application for a demolition permit is exempt from these
demolition review standards if the Building Official makes a written
determination, and the PDSD Director concurs, that the building currently is an
imminent hazard to the public safety, is structurally unsound, and should be
demolished.
   C.   Review and Decision
   Procedures for review of, and decisions on, applications for demolition
permits shall be the same as those outlined in Section
5.8.10.D, Contributing Properties ; Nonhistoric.
   D.   Temporary Stay of Demolition
   In the event a demolition application is denied, no permit for demolition
shall be issued unless a subsequent demolition approval has been requested and
granted or until adoption of HPZ zoning for the property.
      1.   If the HPZ has not been placed on the property at the time of
expiration of the temporary restraint on demolition, the PDSD Director shall
grant a demolition approval for the subject property.
      2.   At the time of HPZ adoption, the temporary restraint of demolition
and any stays of demolition in effect shall expire. The PDSD Director ’s
decision on demolition requests, at that time, is regulated by Section
5.8.10, Demolition Review Required. The demolition request shall be finalized
in accordance with the procedures of that section.
(Am. Ord. 11150, 3/18/2014)
5.9.   DRACHMAN SCHOOL OVERLAY ZONE (DSO)
5.9.1.   INTRODUCTION
   The Drachman School has existed since 1902 on a parcel comprising lots 5
through 12, Block 120, City of Tucson (Book 2, Maps and Plats , Page 4). The
site is bounded by Seventh Avenue, Eighteenth Street , Eighth Avenue (also
known as Convent Avenue), and residential development on lots 3 and 4 on the
northern portion of Block 120. The school use was established prior to current
Unified Development Code (UDC) standards, but the site is no longer used as a
school. This overlay zone recognizes the benefits to be realized from adaptive
reuse of this property and portions of the existing building . Reflection of
the historical elements of the school in the redevelopment of the site is also
recognized as an important consideration. The purpose of this overlay zone is
to ensure the viability of development of the Drachman School site with housing
for the elderly, as permitted within the existing R-3 zone , while ensuring
that this use does not contribute to the deterioration of the living
environment, the downgrading of property values, and the diminishment of the
health, safety, and general welfare conditions of the adjacent residential
area.
5.9.2.   PURPOSE
   The purpose of the Drachman School Overlay (DSO) Zone is to assure
redevelopment of the site with a Residential Care Service facility for the
elderly and to protect existing neighborhoods from negative impacts caused by
the redevelopment of the historic school site and building through establishing
use and site standards to maintain a scale that will be compatible with
adjacent residential development .
5.9.3.   ESTABLISHMENT
   A.   The DSO Zone is a zoning district that provides for the establishment
of distinct standards by Mayor and Council. The DSO may have land use standards
different from the zoning standards applicable to other zoning districts in the
UDC .
   B.   Where a provision in the DSO zone varies from the UDC , the provisions
in the DSO zone shall govern.
5.9.4.   APPLICABILITY
   The provisions of the DSO Zone apply to the specifically mapped area bounded
by Seventh Avenue, Eighteenth Street , Eighth (or Convent) Avenue, and the
southern boundaries of lots 3 and 4, Block 120, City of Tucson, as provided in
the
Figure 5.9-A below:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3026.jpg]
Figure 5.9-A: Drachman School Overlay (DSO) Zone
5.9.5.   PERMITTED LAND USES
   The DSO may be used for a Residential Care Service facility for the elderly,
as provided in this section. All other uses permitted in the underlying zone
are subject to the regulations and standards of the UDC .
5.9.6.   ACCESSORY LAND USES
   Accessory uses are permitted in accordance with Section
6.6, Accessory Uses and Structures.
5.9.7.   HEIGHT AND SETBACK STANDARDS
   Development in the DSO shall comply with the following:
   A.   Height
   The maximum building wall height is 21 feet; and,
   B.   Setbacks
   Setbacks are measured from the back of the curb within the adjacent public
rights-of-way and must be a minimum of 14 feet from back of curb. Setbacks from
the northern property line shall be a minimum of ten feet.
5.9.8.   PARKING
   Residential Care Service projects for the elderly are required to provide
0.50 motor vehicle parking spaces per dwelling unit . Up to 50% of the required
parking may be located in the adjacent  rights-of-way .
5.9.9.   LIGHTING
   The following is required of outdoor lighting:
   A.   Lighting shall be shielded and directed downward;
   B.   Lighting within 100 feet of a residential zoning or use shall not
exceed 15 feet in height; and,
   C.   All other lighting on site shall not exceed 25 feet in height.
5.9.10.   LANDSCAPING
   A.   Street Landscape Borders
   A landscape border is required along the street  frontage of the site as
follows:
      1.   The street landscape border is the area between the back of the
sidewalk within the adjacent  rights-of-way and the face(s) of the building (s)
fronting on the street or the projected alignment of the face(s) of the
building (s) but shall not include any vehicular access points.
      2.   Sixty percent or more of the street landscape border shall be
covered with shrubs or vegetative ground cover. The required ground coverage
shall be achieved within two years of planting.
      3.   A minimum of one canopy tree for every 20 linear feet of street
 frontage is required along Convent Street , Eighteenth Avenue, and Seventh
Street , excluding vehicular ingress or egress points.
   B.   Interior Landscape Border
   The interior landscape border along the north property line shall consist of
the area between the property line and the face(s) of the building (s) adjacent
to the property line or the projected alignment of the face(s) of the building
(s). A minimum of one canopy tree for every 30 linear feet of landscape border
is required.
   C.   Screening
      1.   Screening along the adjacent  street frontages shall consist of the
building faces. Where the buildings are not continuous, no additional screening
is required.
      2.   A six-foot high wall shall be provided along the northern boundary
of the property.
5.9.11.   ALL OTHER DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
   Development shall comply with all other applicable standards of the UDC ,
except as provided in the DSO.
5.9.12.   DESIGN STANDARDS AND REVIEW
   Development in the DSO shall comply with the design standards of this
Section and is subject to site plan review in accordance with Section
3.3.3.G, PDSD Director Approval Procedure of Site Plans.
5.10.   NEIGHBORHOOD PRESERVATION ZONE (NPZ)
5.10.1.   PURPOSE
   Preserving and enhancing Tucson’s established neighborhoods is critical to
conserving the cultural and historic heritage of the City . The purposes of the
Neighborhood Preservation Zone (NPZ) are:
   A.   To provide a process for the establishment of NPZ districts to
preserve, protect and enhance the unique character and historical resources of
established City neighborhoods; and,
   B.   To provide for the creation and establishment of a neighborhood-
specific design manual for each NPZ district, containing architectural and
design standards and guidelines to ensure that development is compatible with
the neighborhood character overall, as well as with the character of the
applicable Development Zone .
5.10.2.   ESTABLISHING AN NPZ
   A.   Establishment or Dissolution of, or Amendment to a Neighborhood
Preservation Zone
      1.   An NPZ is initiated by the Mayor and Council at their sole
discretion.
      2.   An NPZ is established, amended, or dissolved by the Mayor and
Council by ordinance in accordance with Section
3.5, Rezoning (Change of Zoning) Procedure.
   B.   Eligibility and Applicability
      1.   The NPZ is an overlay zone superimposed over the development
standards of the underlying zoning. The land uses permitted within the NPZ
district are those permitted by the underlying zoning;
      2.   Neighborhoods listed on the National Register of Historic Districts,
include a National Register Historic District, or are eligible to be listed on
the National Register of Historic Districts and have completed a National
Historic District Nomination or Eligibility Assessment application are eligible
for the NPZ; and,
      3.   An NPZ applies to residential zones only.
   C.   Design Manual
      1.   The Design Manual is created upon initiation of the NPZ district and
shall, at a minimum contain the following:
         a.   NPZ District Neighborhood Character
            (1)   Identification of Contributing Properties within the NPZ
District;
            (2)   Identification of the defining characteristics of the NPZ
district. Such identification may include excerpts or references to those
portions of the National Register nomination or eligibility document that
summarize the defining characteristics of the district ; and,
            (3)   Illustrations and narratives describing (1) and (2) above.
         b.   NPZ District Map
         The Design Manual shall include a map of the boundaries of the NPZ
district showing the Contributing Properties and the boundaries of the National
Register District or area eligible for a National Register District.
         c.   Compatibility Review Standards
         The Compatibility Review Standards determine a proposed development ’s
compatibility with the contributing properties in the development zone . The
basis for the Compatibility Review Standards is the defining characteristics of
the National Register Historic District as identified in the district ’s
nomination or eligibility document. A description and examples of each of the
following elements shall be provided in the Design Manual:
            (1)   Scale and proportion , such as height, bulk and massing, and
number of stories;
            (2)   Architectural style and detail, such as roof types,
projections and recessions (e.g., porches, awnings, overhangs, steps, and
entrances), window sizes and spacing, materials, and surface texture and
colors;
            (3)   Spatial relationships and site utilization , such as spacing
between adjacent  buildings , front and rear side setbacks , open spaces ,
attachments (e.g., carports and garages ), and outbuildings; and,
            (4)   Landscaping . Landscaping shall only be reviewed for
compatibility when a project proposes a comprehensive change to the streetscape
such as the construction of a new residential unit.
         d.   Privacy Mitigation Measures
         The Design Manual shall recommend specific privacy mitigation measures
to be considered in a NPZ Design Review in accordance with Section
5.10.3.A.2. Examples of privacy mitigation include vegetative or other
screening or siting elements, walls, siting of buildings or windows, and
eliminating balconies or similar features to reduce views towards the existing
dwellings.
         e.   Other Standards
         Dimensional, spatial, and access standards, if adopted by Mayor and
Council as mandatory in accordance with Section
5.10.2.C.2, shall be included in the Design Manual.
      2.   Dimensional, Spatial, and Access Standards
      The Design Manual may contain dimensional, spatial, or access standards,
subject to the following:
         a.   The dimensional, spatial, and access standards may differ from
the standards in Article 6 and Article 7 of the UDC . Such standards may be
more or less restrictive than those of the underlying zone provided they comply
with the following:
            (1)   Do not create a nuisance or intrude on the privacy of
adjoining or surrounding properties;
            (2)   Create a more historically compatible setting, accommodate
energy efficiency or, ensure enhanced resource conservation greater than
current standards; and,
            (3)   In the case of alley access standards, specify mitigation
measures to ensure safe access.
         b.   The Mayor and Council may adopt dimensional, spatial, and access
standards as mandatory requirements upon a finding by the Director of PDSD that
the proposed standard complies with this section.
         c.   Dimensional, spatial, and access standards not adopted as
mandatory requirements shall be advisory for purposes of a compatibility
review.
   D.   Districts Established
      1.   NPZ districts are established upon adoption of a rezoning ordinance
for a neighborhood. The Design Manual created in accordance with Section
5.10.2.C is a condition of the NPZ district.
      2.   Adopted NPZ districts shall use the following format: “NPZ-1" - NAME
OF DISTRICT - Adopted on XXX, by Ordinance No. XXX.
   E.   Zoning Maps
   To identify each of the NPZ districts on the City of Tucson Zoning Maps ,
the preface “N” is added to the assigned residential zoning designation, i.e.,
R-1 becomes NR-1.
5.10.3.   NEIGHBORHOOD PRESERVATION ZONE (NPZ) DESIGN REVIEW PROCEDURE
   The purpose of the NPZ Design Review Procedure is to ensure compliance with
the requirements of this ordinance and the applicable NPZ.
   A.   Applicability
      1.   An NPZ Design Review is required of all development that:
         a.   Is zoned NRX-1, NRX-2, NR-1, NR-2, NR-3, NRH, NSR, and NSH;
         b.   Requires a building permit; and,
         c.   Is visible from a street that is not classified as an alley ,
unless the PDSD Director makes a finding that a proposed development ’s
visibility from the street is so minimal as to be immaterial for purposes of
the application of this section.
      2.   Compliance with the privacy mitigation standards of the applicable
design manual is required when the following types of development are proposed
adjacent to existing single story residences:
         a.   Construction of a multistory residence;
         b.   Addition of a story to an existing residence; or,
         c.   Additions to existing second or higher stories.
      3.   An NPZ Design Review is not required of the following:
         a.   Interior renovations or construction within the interior of a
building ;
         b.   Building maintenance, repairs, or painting or minor building
 alterations , such as window or door alterations or replacements, or minor
additions to an existing residence that do not affect the external appearance
of the structure as seen from the street ; or,
         c.   Exterior development that is not visible from the street , except
the Privacy Mitigation Measures, Section
5.10.3.A.2, apply to any proposed development that exceeds the height of
residential structures on adjacent properties.
      4.   Where there is a conflict between the standards of the applicable
Historic Preservation Zone (HPZ) and the standards of the NPZ, the standards of
the HPZ prevail.
   B.   Pre-Application Conference
   A pre-application conference between the applicant, the PDSD, and the Design
Professional is required when projects are required to be reviewed in
accordance with the NPZ Design Review Procedure. The purpose of the pre-
application conference is to review the project and identify all applicable
requirements, including the Compatibility Review Standards, and whether privacy
mitigation is required.
   C.   Application
   Submittal of an application to the PDSD is required in order to process the
request. Applications are reviewed for completeness. If an application is
rejected, the applicant may resubmit the application.
   D.   Review
   Accepted applications are forwarded to PDSD staff and the Design
Professional . The PDSD staff reviews the application for compliance with
applicable UDC requirements. The Design Professional reviews the application to
determine compliance with the neighborhood specific design manual.
      1.   Contributing Properties within a project ’s development zone as
determined by Section
11.4.5 (Definitions - D) shall be used when identifying the Compatibility
Review Standards.
      2.   If the development zone for the proposed development does not
contain Contributing Properties , the development zone shall be expanded in
every direction until the development zone includes at least one Contributing
Property .
      3.   The Design Professional shall consider the relative impact and
intensity of the proposed development when reviewing the application and in
rendering his or her findings and recommendations.
      4.   Approval of proposed development may be subject to special
conditions to provide for compliance with the Compatibility Review Standards.
   E.   Findings and Recommendation
   The Design Professional shall submit a written report that includes the
Compatibility Review with findings and a recommendation to the PDSD Director .
   F.   PDSD Director Decision
   The PDSD Director shall review the application and render a decision finding
compliance or noncompliance with the NPZ and the neighborhood specific design
manual within five days of receiving the Design Professional ’s report.
   G.   Notice of Decision
   Notice of the decision shall be mailed to the applicant, property owners
within 100 feet of the subject site , and to the neighborhood association that
includes the subject site within three days of the date of the decision.
   H.   Appeal to the Design Review Board (DRB)
   A party of record may appeal the PDSD Director ’s decision on NPZ Design
Review applications. Appeals are considered by the Design Review Board in
accordance with Section
3.9.1, Design Review Board (DRB) Appeal Procedure. A notice of intent to appeal
must be received y the PDSD within 14 days  of the effective date of the
Director ’s decision. The complete appeals material must be filed within 30
days  of the effective date of the decision. An appeal under this section shall
be based upon an error in the Director ’s decision finding compliance or
noncompliance with the neighborhood specific design manual and compatibility
review standards.
   I.   Appeal to the Board of Adjustment (B/A)
   A party of record may submit an appeal of the DRB’s decision to the B/A in
accordance with Sections
3.10.1 and
3.10.2, Board of Adjustment Appeals Procedure. A notice of intent to appeal
must be received by PDSD within 14 days  of the effective date of the DRB’s
decision. The complete appeals material must be filed within 30 days  of the
effective date of the decision.
(Am. Ord. 11732, 2/19/2020)
5.11.   COMMUNITY CORRIDORS TOOL (CCT)
5.11.1.   PURPOSE
   A.   The primary purpose of the Community Corridors Tool (CCT) is to be a
catalyst for infill development along Tucson's corridors in a way that allows
them to evolve from auto-centric to pedestrian-friendly places. This tool
strives to maintain Tucson's livability and sense of place while providing
opportunity for new building innovations, housing units, and residents. The
tool strives to open up the possibility for a range of housing options,
commercial businesses, and mixed-use centers. This will be accomplished in the
following ways:
      1.   Removing barriers to building attainable housing;
      2.   Promoting transit-oriented infill development that supports climate
action goals;
      3.   Updating zoning to make it easier to permit the full spectrum of
housing types; and
      4.   Simplifying reuse of underutilized buildings and vacant sites .
   B.   The following design principles should be considered by staff,
applicants, and other parties in decision-making on proposed projects . These
principles are intended to help frame the intent of specific regulations and
provide a broader understanding when flexibility is requested.
      1.   Design sites and buildings to respond to the context, such as the
existing street network, building orientation, or landscape and topography, of
the corridor and surrounding area.
      2.   Honor and integrate historic places, buildings , and landscapes in
proposed designs when appropriate.
      3.   Orient building entrances to streets , sidewalks , or common open
spaces , not only parking areas .
      4.   Articulate buildings at appropriate façade intervals to avoid
monotony and provide interest and depth, especially at the pedestrian scale, to
enhance the urban experience.
      5.   Provide shaded and active ground floors with frequent doors and
windows facing onto streets and open spaces .
      6.   Provide opportunities for active ground floor retail, commercial,
institutional, service, and community spaces with special attention to either
continuity in frontage or clustering of activity.
      7.   Provide transitions to neighborhoods by locating larger, taller
buildings  adjacent to the corridor and smaller scaled buildings  adjacent to
existing neighborhoods.
      8.   Minimize the impact of parking areas , access driveways, service
areas and utilities on the pedestrian environment.
      9.   Include green infrastructure , such as water harvesting, shade,
landscaping , and open spaces , as essential components of a successful project
.
      10.   Create and maintain street connections with a cohesive network of
human-scaled blocks served by a hierarchy of street types.
   C.   The CCT is intended to provide the following areas of flexibility on
eligible sites in exchange for higher quality design that furthers the purpose
and design principles as described above. Below is a summary of the benefits of
utilizing the tool:
      1.   Additional neighborhood-serving uses permitted in office and
commercial zones .
      2.   Additional housing types permitted on eligible sites with
residential zoning.
      3.   Simplified dimensional standards with decreased setbacks and
increased height.
      4.   Reductions in minimum lot size (when required) and removal of
density limits for housing development .
      5.   Reductions in required parking while also requiring new parking
areas to be better designed.
      6.   Exceptions to some landscaping and commercial rainwater harvesting
standards .
      7.   Creativity when providing streetscape improvements and landscape
borders.
      8.   Height bonuses for providing affordable housing, mixed uses, and
maintaining historic properties.
      9.   Allowances to deal with split zoned properties or sites .
      10.   Administrative modifications to allow for integration of best
design practices and to work with existing conditions.
(Ord. 12152, 3/18/2025)
5.11.2.   APPLICABILITY AND ZONING CLARIFICATIONS
   A.   The Community Corridors Tool (CCT) provides modified development
 standards and permitted land uses that vary from the underlying zoning of a
property. The existing zoning on the site does not change. These modified
standards and uses are available as an option for proposed development . If a
proposed development chooses to use the CCT, they are subject to all applicable
requirements of Section
5.11. If Section
5.11 is silent on a use or development standard, the typical standards of the
Unified Development Code shall apply.
   B.   When opted into, the CCT applies to the following on the subject
property:
      1.   A change of use;
      2.   An expansion of an existing use or existing structure or existing
site; or
      3.   New development or a redevelopment project .
   C.   The CCT may be applied to properties with R-1, R-2, R-3, O-1, O-2, O-3,
C-1, C-2, C-3, OCR-1, and OCR-2 zoning which are part of a contiguous site
where any portion of which abuts or is adjacent to a Corridor. A Corridor is
considered a street designated on the City's Major Streets and Routes Plan, as
currently adopted. Exceptions are as follows:
      1.   By exception, R-1 and R-2 zoned properties are only eligible for the
CCT if:
         a.   They were part of a site which included the CCT eligible
nonresidential zones as of March 18, 2025, and such documentation is provided
by the applicant;
         b.   They are part of a R-1 or R-2 site which fronts directly on a
Corridor and adjacent  sites also fronting onto a Corridor are CCT-eligible
sites ;
         c.   They are part of a R-1 or R-2 site which fronts directly on a
Corridor and the site is undeveloped as of March 18, 2025; or
         d.   They are part of a R-1 or R-2 site which includes a nonconforming
use per Section
9.2 as of March 18, 2025.
Figure 5.11.2.-A: Applicability of R-1 and R-2 Properties in the CCT
[image]
      2.   With authorization of the Zoning Administrator in accordance with
Section
5.11.9.C, a CCT-ineligible property may be included in a proposed CCT
development  project . Authorization will be based upon the existing vacancy or
use of the property, impacts to adjacent properties, and the proposed
development's compliance with the CCT purpose and design principles.
Additionally, the property must:
         a.   Be zoned MH-1, MH-2, P, P-I, or I-1; and
         b.   Be part of an existing split zoned CCT-eligible site ; or
         c.   Have frontage on a Corridor and adjacent  sites also fronting
onto a Corridor are CCT-eligible.
      3.   Properties which do not meet the preceding criteria but are adjacent
to a CCT-eligible property or within the same block , may request to opt into
the CCT, except for R-1 or less intense zoned properties. Requests are
processed in accordance with Section
3.4.3., Zoning Examiner Special Exception Land Use Procedure. These
applications are analyzed for 1) compliance with the CCT purpose and design
principles; and 2) compatibility with adjacent land uses.
   D.   A site which is divided by a zoning boundary into two or more separate
zoning categories, may utilize the following exceptions:
      1.   A use which is permitted in the majority of the nonresidential zoned
area of a site may be permitted across the entirety of the nonresidential zoned
area of the site .
      2.   A dimensional standard which is permitted in the majority of the
nonresidential zoned area of a site may be permitted across 50% of the
nonresidential zoned area of the site with a less intense dimensional standard,
with the exception of building height and setbacks .
      3.   All land uses in the Residential land use group which are permitted
in the CCT-eligible zones are permitted on all CCT-eligible sites , except for
Multifamily Development which is not permitted in the R-1 zone .
      4.   Portions of a CCT site which are zoned R-1 or R-2 may be used for
required site elements which may not typically be permitted in the zone , such
as parking, landscaping , stormwater retention, public spaces, etc. Buildings
which include uses not permitted in the R-1 and R-2 zones are not permitted.
      5.   In the case where a CCT-ineligible property is included in a
proposed CCT development per Section
5.11.2.C.2 or .3, the dimensional standards and permitted uses shall be based
on the most appropriate corollary zone . The corollary zones shall be
considered as: MH-1 shall be equal to R-1, MH-2 shall be equal to R-2, P and P-
I shall be equal to C-1, and I-1 shall be equal to C-3.
   E.   Adjacent  sites that meet the criteria in Section
5.11.2.C may be combined into a single site as part of a proposed development
 project .
   F.   The following zones are ineligible to use the CCT:
      1.   Planned Area Development;
      2.   Historic Preservation Zone ;
      3.   City of Tucson Historic Landmark ;
      4.   Urban Overlay District ;
      5.   Neighborhood Preservation Zone ; or
      6.   Downtown Area Infill Incentive District .
   G.   The CCT may be used for a development  project which includes an
individually listed or Contributing Property in the National or Arizona
Register of Historic Places, however complete demolition of the structure or
property is not permitted. Any modification including alteration , addition, or
partial demolition is permitted if the City Historic Preservation Officer
determines the proposal will not cause de-listing. In no event may the CCT be
used if development would, in the opinion of the City Historic Preservation
Officer, cause an individually listed or Contributing Property to be de-listed.
   H.   If the proposed development  project is also subject to the Hillside
Development Zone (HDZ), Scenic Corridor Zone (SCZ), the Gateway Corridor Route
(GCZ), the Airport Environs Zone (AEZ), or the Environmental Resource Zone
(ERZ) the more restrictive standards shall apply.
(Ord. 12152, 3/18/2025)
5.11.3.   REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURE
   A.   The Planning and Development Services Department (PDSD) administers CCT
plan and permit review and approval procedures. Review by the PDSD is pursuant
to Section
3.3.3.G., Site Plan Approvals. The PDSD Director may request review by the
Design Professional for select design standards , based on the project scope,
and related development fees will be assessed.
   B.   Pre-Application Conference. A pre-application conference with City
staff as outlined in Section
3.2.1 is required. Multiple pre-application meetings may be scheduled, as
requested by either the PDSD or applicant, to confirm the approvability of
preliminary designs. A pre-application conference is used to determine the
following:
      1.   Whether the proposed development  project meets applicability
standards ;
      2.   Whether the proposed development  project meets use and development
 standards , including building form standards as applied to preliminary
concepts for new building construction;
      3.   Whether the proposed parking statement is in compliance with Section
5.11.6.G.;
      4.   Whether clarification can be provided on any requirements of the CCT
or other requirements of the Unified Development Code; and
      5.   To clarify submittal and process requirements for sites which
require a Master Plan in accordance with Section
5.11.8.
   C.   Prior to formal submittal of a CCT development  project , the applicant
shall send notice of the application to neighborhood associations within one
mile, property owners within 400 feet, and the applicable Ward office. This
notice must be sent following the required pre-application meeting and not less
than ten days nor more than 60 days prior to the submission of the application.
Format of the required notice shall be provided by PDSD to the applicant upon
request.
(Ord. 12152, 3/18/2025)
5.11.4.   PERMITTED USES
   A.   PERMITTED USES
      All land uses permitted by the underlying zoning are permitted in the
CCT, except as listed in Section
5.11.4.B Excluded Uses. Any use permitted by underlying zoning which is
regulated by a use specific standard which is found to conflict with the
purpose or intent of the CCT may be waived by request to the Zoning
Administrator in accordance with Section
5.11.9.C. The following additional uses are permitted and regulated by the use
specific standards listed after the zone . Only those uses which are a change
to the underlying zoning are listed below.
      1.   Commercial Services Land Use Group.
         a.   Administrative and Professional Office.
            (1)   R-3: 4.9.4.R and 4.9.13.J.
         b.   Alcoholic Beverage Service: Excluding a Large Bar.
            (1)   O-2, O-3, C-1: 4.9.13.O.2.
         c.   Alcoholic Beverage Service: with a Microbrewery as an accessory
use .
            (1)   O-2, O-3, C-1: 4.9.5.E.6, 7, & 8.
         d.   Artisan Residence.
            (1)   R-3, O-1, O-2, O-3: 4.9.4.E.1, .2, .3, .4, & .5 and
4.9.13.O.2.
         e.   Commercial Recreation.
            (1)   O-1, O-2, O-3: 4.9.13.O.2.
         f.   Day Care: Adult.
            (1)   O-1: 4.9.13.J.
         g.   Day Care: Child, Maximum 30 children.
            (1)   O-1: 4.9.4.H.1-5, 6.a & 7.d and 4.9.13.J.
         h.   Food Service: Food Court.
            (1)   O-1, O-2, O-3: 4.9.4.M.1 & 5-7.
         i.   Food Service: Excluding Soup Kitchens.
            (1)   O-1, O-2, O-3: 4.9.4.M.1 & 5.
         j.   Food Service: with Alcoholic Beverage Service as an accessory use
to a Food Service use.
            (1)   O-1, O-2, O-3: 4.9.4.V.1, 3, & 5-9, 4.9.4.C.3, and
4.9.13.O.2.
         k.   Personal Service.
            (1)   O-1, O-2, O-3: 4.9.4.T.1 and 4.9.13.O.2.
         l.   Parking: as an accessory use .
            (1)   O-1, O-2, O-3.
         m.   Technical Service.
            (1)   O-1, O-2, O-3: 4.9.4.W.1 and 4.9.13.O.2.
         n.   Travelers' Accommodation, Lodging.
            (1)   O-1, O-2, O-3: 4.9.13.O.2.
      2.   Residential Land Use Group.
         a.   Duplex.
            (1)   R-1: 4.9.7.B.6, .9, & .10.
         b.   Home Occupation: Travelers' Accommodation, Lodging as an
accessory use to any permitted Family Dwelling use.
            (1)   R-1: 4.9.7.E.10, .11, & .13 and 4.9.7.H.2 & .5, .7 & .8.
            (2)   R-2: 4.9.7.E.10, .11, & .13 and 4.9.7.H.3 & .5, .7 & .8.
         c.   Single-Family , Attached.
            (1)   R-1: 4.9.7.B.6, .9, & .10.
         d.   Single-Family , Detached.
            (1)   R-1: 4.9.7.B.5 - 9.
      3.   Retail Land Use Group.
         a.   Food and Beverage Sales: excluding Large Retail Establishment.
            (1)   O-1, O-2, O-3: 4.9.13.O.2.
         b.   General Merchandise Sales: excluding Large Retail Establishment.
            (1)   O-1, O-2, O-3: 4.9.9.B.1 and 4.9.13.O.2.
   B.   EXCLUDED USES
      The land uses excluded from the CCT are those that are not permitted by
the underlying zone , as well as those that are listed below.
      1.   Automotive Service and Repair, Automotive Washing, Billboard,
Construction Service, Heavy Equipment Sales, Gas Stations, Smoke Shop, all
Storage uses, Trade Service and Repair Major, Vehicle Rental and Sales, all
drive-through lanes for any permitted use.
      2.   In cases where development is proposed to an existing site , uses
which are permitted by the underlying zoning but which are excluded from the
CCT may remain if the excluded use is not expanded.
(Ord. 12152, 3/18/2025)
5.11.5.   DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
   A.   APPLICABILITY
      The Tables contained herein indicate all the dimensional standards and
measurements within the CCT. UDC Section
6.3. shall not apply. In all cases:
      1.   Both the maximum building height and the number of stories shall not
be exceeded;
      2.   If two dimensions apply to the same situation, the more restrictive
dimension shall be enforced;
      3.   There is no limit on maximum residential density ;
      4.   Street  setbacks shall be based on the location of the existing
property line , unless a variation is either required or authorized by the City
Engineer based on a future right-of-way width; and
      5.   Perimeter yard  setbacks shall be regulated along adjacent private
property lines along the CCT site boundary and not within the CCT site .
   B.   DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS FOR HOUSE-SCALED BUILDINGS
      House-scaled buildings contribute to smaller-scale environments.
Buildings range in height from one to two stories. Buildings are generally
detached or attached and may have deep or shallow setbacks from the property
line , street , and sidewalk . They are similar in form to a single-family
house, but also include multi-family  buildings such as duplexes, bungalow
courts, courtyard buildings , townhouses, and mixed-use main street  buildings
.
TABLE 5.11.5.-1 DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS FOR CCT R-1, R-2, & O-1
 R-1* R-2* O-1
TABLE 5.11.5.-1 DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS FOR CCT R-1, R-2, & O-1
                                    R-1*          R-2*          O-1
MIN. LOT AREA                       2,000 sq ft   1,500 sq ft   1,500 sq ft
MAX. LOT COVERAGE                   90%           90%           90%
MAX. # OF STORIES                   2             3             3
MAX BUILDING HEIGHT                 25 feet       36 feet       36 feet
PERIMETER YARD  SETBACK                                       
Side                                0 feet        0 feet        0 feet
Rear (with alley or shared driveway 0 feet        0 feet        0 feet
parking)
Rear (without alley or shared       10 feet       10 feet       10 feet
driveway)
Adjacent to O-1 or R-2 or more      6 feet        6 feet        6 feet
restrictive zoned parcel
STREET  SETBACK                    Min: 6 feet** Min: 6 feet** Min: 10 feet**
                                    Max: 30 feet  Max: 30 feet  Max: 30 feet
Percentage of Building at Setback   N/A           N/A           50%
*R-1 & R-2 standards may only be utilized according to the requirements in
5.11.2
**When facing existing single-family homes, the minimum street  setback shall
be 15 feet
 
   C.   DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS FOR LARGE HOUSE-SCALED AND SMALL BLOCK-SCALED
BUILDINGS
      Large house-scaled and small block-scaled buildings serve as a transition
from larger block-scaled building into smaller-scale residential neighborhoods.
They are a mix of block and house scale buildings that range in height from one
to four stories. Buildings along walkable corridors are mostly attached
buildings that have minimal setbacks . Buildings along neighborhood streets are
detached and setback from the street and sidewalk .
TABLE 5.11.5.-2 DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS FOR CCT R-3, O-2, & C-1
 R-3 O-2 & C-1
TABLE 5.11.5.-2 DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS FOR CCT R-3, O-2, & C-1
                                                 R-3          O-2 & C-1
MIN. LOT AREA                                    N/A          N/A
MAX. LOT COVERAGE                                95%          N/A
MAX. # OF STORIES                                4            4
MAX BUILDING HEIGHT                              50           50
PERIMETER YARD  SETBACK                                      
Side                                             0 feet       0 feet
Rear (without alley )                            15 feet      15 feet
Rear (with alley )                               6 feet       6 feet
Adjacent to O-1 or R-2 or more restrictive zoned 10 feet      10 feet
parcel
STREET  SETBACK                                 Min: 0 feet  Min: 0 feet
                                                 Max: 30 feet Max: 30 feet
Percentage of Building at Setback                50%          60%
 
   D.   DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS FOR MID-RISE BLOCK-SCALED BUILDINGS
      Mid-rise block -scale buildings contribute to larger-scale environments.
Buildings are individually as large as a city block or attached along a street
to form a continuous façade along most, or all, of a block . They typically
have minimal setbacks and are often mixed-use with non-residential uses on the
ground floor and housing or office on upper stories. Mid-rise block -scale
buildings range in height from four to seven stories. Examples include
multiplexes, mid-rise buildings , and stacked flats.
TABLE 5.11.5.-3 DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS FOR CCT C-2, O-3, & C-3
 C-2 & O-3 C-3
TABLE 5.11.5.-3 DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS FOR CCT C-2, O-3, & C-3
                                                 C-2 & O-3    C-3
MIN. LOT AREA                                    N/A          N/A
MAX. LOT COVERAGE                                N/A          N/A
MAX. # OF STORIES                                5            7
MAX BUILDING HEIGHT                              60 feet      85 feet
PERIMETER YARD  SETBACK                                      
Side                                             0 feet       0 feet
Rear (with or without alley )                    0 feet       0 feet
Adjacent to O-1 or R-2 or more restrictive zoned 10 feet      10 feet
parcel
Adjacent to R-3, O-2 or C-1 zoned parcel         6 feet       6 feet
STREET  SETBACK                                 Min: 0 feet  Min: 0 feet
                                                 Max: 30 feet Max: 30 feet
Percentage of Building at Setback                60%          60%
 
   E.   DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS FOR HIGH-RISE BLOCK-SCALED BUILDINGS
      High-rise block -scale buildings contribute to larger-scale environments.
Buildings are individually as large as a city block or attached along a street
to form a continuous façade along most, or all, of a block . They typically
have minimal setbacks and are often mixed-use with non-residential uses on the
ground floor and housing or office on upper stories. They may have integrated
parking structures . High-rise block -scale buildings may be ten stories or
more in building height. Examples include high-rise buildings and large towers.
TABLE 5.11.5.-4 DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS FOR CCT OCR-1 & OCR-2
 OCR-1 OCR-2
TABLE 5.11.5.-4 DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS FOR CCT OCR-1 & OCR-2
                                                 OCR-1        OCR-2
MIN. LOT AREA                                    N/A          N/A
MAX. LOT COVERAGE                                N/A          N/A
MAX. # OF STORIES                                13           29
MAX BUILDING HEIGHT                              140 feet     300 feet
PERIMETER YARD  SETBACK                                      
Side                                             0 feet       0 feet
Rear (with or without alley )                    0 feet       0 feet
Adjacent to O-1 or R-2 or more restrictive zoned 25 feet      25 feet
parcel
Adjacent to R-3, O-2 or C-1 zoned parcel         10 feet      10 feet
STREET  SETBACK                                 Min: 0 feet  Min: 0 feet
                                                 Max: 30 feet Max: 30 feet
Percentage of Building at Setback                80%          80%
 
(Ord. 12152, 3/18/2025)
5.11.6.   DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
   A.   The development  standards found in this section shall apply to the
development  project types based upon the magnitude of the project as shown in
Table 5.11.6.-1. Additionally, the standards shall apply as follows:
      1.   In the case of expansions to existing structures , Section
5.11.6.B Building Form shall apply only to the new portion of the building .
      2.   All plant material used for landscaping must be selected from the
Arizona Department of Water Resource's Low Water Use/Drought Tolerant Plant
List.
      3.   Alternative pervious paving materials are permitted to be used for
any hardscape area (parking, vehicle use areas , sidewalks , public places) and
may be used to satisfy retention/detention and commercial rainwater
requirements.
TABLE 5.11.6.-1 APPLICABILITY OF CCT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
                       TYPE 2:     TYPE 3:
             TYPE 1:   Building or Building or
Development  Change of site        site        TYPE 4: Site  development or
Project Type Use       expansion   expansion   redevelopment
                       (<2,500 sf  (>2,500 sf
                       GFA)        GFA)
TABLE 5.11.6.-1 APPLICABILITY OF CCT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
                                        TYPE 2:   TYPE 3:
                                 TYPE   Building  Building
Development Project Type         1:     or site   or site   TYPE 4: Site  development or
                                 Change expansion expansion redevelopment
                                 of Use (<2,500   (>2,500
                                        sf GFA)   sf GFA)
Building Form                    -      -         -         -
   •   Façade Standards        X         X         X
   •   Ground Floors            X         X         X
   •   Setback Exceptions       X         X         X
Building Placement and Scale     -      -         -         -
   •   Step Backs               X         X         X
   •   Building Orientation     X         X         X
Connectivity                     -      -         -         -
   •   Integrated Street Network          X         X
   •   Pedestrian Connections   X         X         X
Pedestrian Amenities             -      -         -         -
   •   Shading                            X         X
   •   Streetscape Features     X         X         X
   •   Public Places     X      X         X         X
Services and Utilities           X      X         X         X
Passenger Vehicles               -      -         -         -
   •   Parking RequiremenXs     X         X         X
   •   Vehicle Placement X      X         X         X
 
   B.   BUILDING FORM
      1.   Façade Standards .
         a.   Each ground floor commercial street façade shall provide a
minimum of 60% doors and windows, with each suite providing a primary entrance
from the street .
         b.   Each ground floor residential façade shall provide a minimum of
25% doors and windows, with each unit providing a primary entrance from a
shared entry or a direct entry from the street .
         c.   Primary entrances shall be visible or identifiable from the
street . Secondary entrances may be provided from off-street parking areas.
         d.   A single plane of a façade at the street level may not be longer
than 50 feet without architectural relief by features such as but not limited
to windows, trellises, arcades, public art, or doors.
         e.   Buildings shall not exceed 160 feet in façade length along
streets , public spaces, pedestrian only streets , or private streets that have
permanent public access easements, in the R-1, R-2, and O-1 zones . In all
other zones , buildings shall not exceed 500 feet in façade length or 1,800
feet in total perimeter length.
         f.   Privacy mitigation is required when buildings over two stories
are proposed within 50 feet of adjacent single-story residences which are zoned
R-2 or more restrictive. Balconies, windows (except for clerestory and
translucent windows), or any other features that overlook the rear and side
yards of adjacent residences are discouraged. Privacy mitigation measures, such
as the incorporation of vegetation, screening elements, walls, building
placement and orientation, balcony and window placement and orientation, or
other design strategies shall be incorporated.
         g.   All façade standards shall be reviewed and considered for final
approval as part of the building permit review. Preliminary review and feedback
may be obtained during the pre-application and site plan (development package)
review. Standards shall be met, regardless of prior site approvals for a
subdivision  plat , site plan , development package or other permits related to
the development  project .
Figure 5.11.6-A: Commercial Building Form Standards
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-16561.png]
 
Figure 5.11.6-B: Residential Building Form Standards
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-16563.png]
      2.   Ground Floors.
         a.   The minimum residential ground floor height measured from floor
to floor shall be ten feet.
         b.   If a residential façade is less than five feet from a property
line , then it shall be elevated one to five feet above finish floor of the
adjacent  sidewalk to provide privacy for the individual residential unit.
         c.   The minimum nonresidential ground floor height measured from
floor to floor shall be 12 feet.
         d.   Street facing ground floors should have active uses. Buildings
with residential ground floors are encouraged to have gyms, leasing offices and
other tenant common space on the ground floor facing the street .
      3.   Setback Exceptions.
         a.   Porches, patios, and terraces without any vertical structural
elements may be established all the way to the property line .
         b.   Porches, patios, terraces, balconies, and porte-cocheres with
vertical structural elements may project into required setback area up to ten
feet, provided the setback area is not reduced to less than is required per the
adopted building code.
         c.   Bay and bow windows may project into the setback up to three
feet, provided the setback area is not reduced to less than is required per the
adopted building code.
   C.   BUILDING PLACEMENT AND SCALE
      1.   Step Backs.
         a.   Building Step backs shall be required along any CCT site
boundaries which are adjacent to an O-1 or R-2 or less restrictive zoned
private property line or public alley as follows:
            (1)   Within 30 feet of the shared property line , the building
shall be no taller than two stories (25 feet).
            (2)   Within 50 feet of the shared property line , the building
shall be no taller than four stories (50 feet).
            (3)   Within 80 feet of the shared property line , the building
shall be no taller than six stories (75 feet).
            (4)   Any boundary along an alley may include the width of the
alley in the total step back required distance.
Figure 5.11.6.-B: Step Backs Between O-1 or R-2 or Less Restrictive Adjacent
Property
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-16565.png]
      2.   Building Orientation.
         a.   Maximum Street  Setback . Non-residential and multi-family
 buildings which do not meet the minimum street  setback shall provide any of
the following in the area between the minimum and maximum setback area:
            (1)   Required streetscape features per Section
5.11.6.E.2.;
            (2)   Required public places per Section
5.11.6.E.3.;
            (3)   Enhanced landscaping (beyond the standard requirements) which
includes 75% coverage with vegetative ground cover, or
            (4)   Landscaping in conjunction with other amenities which
contribute to the purpose of the CCT as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
         b.   Street Corners. When two or more public or private streets
intersect as part of a site , the buildings shall be located at the street
corners and meet the minimum setback  standards as required for the two streets
.
         c.   Buildings with Amenities. On sites with multiple street types,
medium traffic volume streets are generally best suited for a range of uses
such as retail, commercial, multifamily residential, and community spaces.
Ground floor spaces are particularly suitable for pedestrian-focused amenities.
Buildings fronting on public spaces or designated trails shall provide
pedestrian amenities, active ground floor uses, or outdoor dining options.
         d.   Street Relationship. Any development  project with Corridor
street  frontage shall maintain a relationship with the Corridor street by
either orienting the primary entrances to the Corridor, providing public places
along the Corridor, or designing for mixed use  development along the Corridor.
   D.   CONNECTIVITY
      1.   Integrated Street Network.
         a.   Existing public streets or an element identified in Section
5.11.D.1.b. shall be extended through the site , from the adjacent
neighborhoods, and into and through the proposed development  site .
         b.   Public spaces, pedestrian only streets , or private streets that
have permanent public access easements may be utilized in lieu of a public
street to connect neighborhoods and development  sites .
         c.   Existing or planned greenways, shared use paths, or other
dedicated facilities which are separated from vehicle traffic shall be
connected and extended through the development  site .
         d.   To the extent feasible, public alleys shall be extended through
the site to provide access to parking, loading, and service areas .
         e.   Blocks shall be interspersed with Open Space , Private or Public
Streets , Alleys or Private Driveways. In the R-1, R-2, and O-1 zones , block
length shall not exceed 400 feet from property line to property line . In all
other zones , block length shall not exceed 500 feet from property line to
property line .
      2.   Pedestrian Connections.
         a.   Pedestrian connections shall be provided from any rear parking
area either through or adjacent to a building , to at least one publicly
accessible street  sidewalk . Connections shall be provided with one per every
200 feet of street  frontage .
         b.   At least one connection shall be provided within 200 feet of a
corner.
         c.   Connections shall be designed with a clear height of at least ten
feet and a clear width of at least eight feet or 25% of the length, whichever
is greater, and shall be surfaced with ADA compliant materials.
         d.   Connections shall be designed to ensure visibility and safety for
pedestrians by maintaining sightlines between destinations and including
uniform lighting.
   E.   PEDESTRIAN AMENITIES
      1.   Shading.
         a.   Shade shall be provided for at least 50% of all sidewalks and
pedestrian access paths and 35% of all public or private open space as measured
at 2:00 pm on June 21 when the sun is 82 degrees above the horizon.
         b.   Shade may be provided by trees, arcades, canopies, shade
structures or buildings .
         c.   Shading devices, attached or detached to a building , may
encroach into the setback area by ten feet, provided the setback area is not
less than required per the adopted building code.
         d.   The use of plantings and shade structures in the City  right-of-
way is permitted to meet this standard with the approval of the Department of
Transportation and Mobility and will be evaluated for compliance with required
utility setbacks .
      2.   Streetscape Features.
         a.   When Type 2-4 projects are proposed with more than 75 feet of
corridor street  frontage , sidewalks and street  landscape areas shall be
provided on all existing and new public and private streets . The minimum width
of sidewalk and landscape areas is provided below based upon street type.
Information on the streets types may be found in the Department of
Transportation and Mobility Street Design Guide.
            (1)   Urban or Suburban Thoroughfare: eight feet sidewalk , ten
feet landscape border.
            (2)   Urban or Suburban Connector: eight feet sidewalk , eight feet
landscape border.
            (3)   Industrial Street : six feet sidewalk , eight feet landscape
border.
            (4)   Downtown/University District : ten feet sidewalk , ten feet
landscape border.
            (5)   Neighborhood Commercial District : ten feet sidewalk , ten
feet landscape border.
            (6)   Neighborhood Street : six feet sidewalk , ten feet landscape
border.
            (7)   Shared Street : maintain existing sidewalk , ten feet
landscape border.
         b.   Sidewalk and landscape areas are required for the length of the
corridor street  frontage of the site . Sidewalks must be designed to connect
to existing sidewalks at the termination of the site boundaries.
         c.   Sidewalk and landscape areas which are provided beyond a project
site's  frontage along an existing street may substitute for shading
requirements per Section
5.11.6.E.1. and public space requirements per Section
5.11.6.E.3. Once 100 linear feet of streetscape improvements are provided
beyond the site's frontage , shading requirements are considered fully
substituted. For each 50 linear feet of streetscape improvements which are
provided beyond the site's frontage , 500 square feet of public space may be
substituted. An agreement granting permission to construct and assuming future
maintenance responsibility shall be recorded with any affected property owners
along the frontage area.
         d.   Along the existing City corridors, there are a variety of
conditions and creative solutions will be necessary. In many cases, existing
sidewalks or landscape areas may already exist. In some cases, combining
(widening) existing and required areas will be feasible and desired, in other
cases it will be more appropriate to duplicate required areas on private
property. Preference will be given to designs which prioritize a safe and
enjoyable experience for pedestrians with landscaping serving as a buffer from
automobile traffic. Final placement of required sidewalks and landscape areas
will be determined in consultation with PDSD and DTM staff.
Figure 5.11.6.-C: Example Sidewalk and Landscape Design Alternatives
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-16567.png]
         e.   Required street landscape borders and sidewalks may be located
entirely within the adjacent  right-of-way area or within the Major Streets and
Routes right-of-way area with approval of the City Engineer or designee.
Maintenance shall be the responsibility of the adjacent property owner.
         f.   Sidewalks provided on private property shall be connected to any
sidewalks , bike infrastructure , or on-street parking located in the public
right-of-way .
         g.   Outdoor seating, dining areas, and landscaping may be located in
the sidewalk area where minimum accessible width around the design feature can
be provided per U.S. Access Board Public Right-of-Way Accessibility Guidelines.
         h.   Street landscape borders as required per section
7.6.4 shall be modified per the CCT to require one canopy tree for every 25
linear feet of landscape border or fraction thereof, excluding vehicular
ingress or egress points. Trees shall be planted in an unpaved depressed
planting area, which must be a minimum of 100 square feet in area and eight
feet in width.
         i.   Street landscape borders provided as part of a CCT development
 project shall serve to meet the requirements of Section
7.6.4.
      3.   Public Spaces.
         a.   Public spaces shall be provided for all development  projects .
The minimum amount of public space is based on project type and size.
            (1)   Type 1 project : 500 square feet or 5% of total site area ,
whichever is greater.
            (2)   Type 2 project , less than one acre: 1,000 square feet or 5%
of total site area , whichever is greater.
            (3)   Type 2 project , more than one acre: 5% of total site area .
            (4)   Type 3 project , less than one acre: 1,000 square feet or 5%
of total site area , whichever is greater.
            (5)   Type 3 project , more than one acre: 10% of total site area .
            (6)   Type 4 project : 10% of total site area .
         b.   Public spaces are intended for community gathering focal points
and may be provided as plazas, courtyards, enhanced walkways, pocket parks, or
other areas. Public spaces may be in different areas of the project , but each
space must be a minimum of 300 square feet of usable space with a minimum width
of 15 feet. Public spaces shall not be leftover areas of the site and may not
include parking, loading, or maintenance areas.
         c.   Public spaces shall be designed with the following:
            (1)   Features which provide for active observation on the majority
of the public spaces' sides. This shall include ground floor building entrances
and windows. When a commercial or retail space is proposed, outdoor dining,
vendors, or outdoor retail displays would also be appropriate.
            (2)   Connections to the space from the site and to nearby areas;
and
            (3)   Lighting which is uniform and provides for safety.
         d.   Plazas or parks shall incorporate at least three of the following
features to activate the area:
            (1)   Seating that is a minimum 16 inches in height and 30 inches
wide. Ledge benches shall be a minimum 30 inches deep.
            (2)   50% shade.
            (3)   Water features.
            (4)   Public art.
            (5)   Outdoor eating areas or food vendors.
            (6)   Playgrounds or play features.
            (7)   Splash pads.
            (8)   Recreational equipment.
            (9)   Bike amenities.
         e.   Public spaces may be private or semi-private. For residential
development , half of the required public space may be provided within private
or resident-only areas located on the ground floor or street level. For
nonresidential development , patron-only spaces such as restaurant seating may
also serve as required public space.
         f.   Commercial rainwater harvesting is required for projects meeting
the criteria of Technical Standards Manual 4-01. as follows:
            (1)   Type 1 project : not required.
            (2)   Type 2 and 3 projects : only required for new landscape
areas. New landscape areas must be depressed six to nine inches to maximize
water harvesting. If hardscape is removed or reconfigured it must be redesigned
to create positive drainage towards landscape areas and any curb cuts that feed
water harvest infiltration areas. Other standards of
TSM 4-01. shall not apply. Modifications to this standard may be granted by the
Landscape Architect when negative drainage impacts are created related to
existing conditions.
            (3)   Type 4 project : Full compliance with
TSM 4-01. is required.
         g.   Interior landscape borders required per Section
7.6.4. may be satisfied by providing public spaces in accordance with this
section, except for landscape borders required adjacent to residential zones on
the site boundary.
   F.   SERVICES AND UTILITIES
      1.   Mechanical equipment, trash enclosures, and loading areas shall be
located outside of the required street  setback area and may not be located
within 20 feet of any off-site residentially zoned property or within 30 feet
of any on-site public space.
      2.   Passengers drop off or loading areas may be located between a street
and the building .
   G.   PASSENGER VEHICLES
      1.   Parking Requirements. Vehicular parking shall be required based upon
a parking statement which identifies the proposed uses, proposed vehicular
parking, existing and future transportation and mobility conditions, and
anticipated needs. Parking may be provided on a public or private street , in
parking lots , or in parking structures . Decisions regarding parking
statements will be made by staff from Planning and Development Services in
consultation with traffic engineering staff from the Department of
Transportation and Mobility. The parking statement must provide the following:
         a.   The sources used in establishing the parking statement.
         b.   Type and approximate square footage of all uses, specifically
including:
            (1)   The amount of combined residential and non-residential
development which could share parking based on hours of operation and peak use;
and
            (2)   The amount of residential development which typically
includes a low car-ownership rate, such as housing for the elderly, for those
with physical disabilities, or for low-income families.
         c.   The number and location of proposed vehicular parking spaces,
including:
            (1)   Standard, accessible, and electric vehicle parking spaces;
            (2)   Spaces both within and outside the site that can accommodate
shared parking arrangements; and
            (3)   On-street parking spaces within the proposed site and those
within 500 feet walking distance of the site boundary, including current
approximate utilization rates during daytime and evening hours.
         d.   The availability, location, and distance to any alternative mode
of transportation, including:
            (1)   Public transit stops;
            (2)   Multimodal paths, greenways, or bike boulevards; and
            (3)   Bicycle parking spaces which are above and beyond the
standard requirement.
         e.   The planned interventions to mitigate safety hazards and minimize
parking impacts relative to any established residential use within 500 feet
walking distance of the site boundary.
         f.   Any other information deemed appropriate by the PDSD Director ,
or their designee, such as a traffic study.
      2.   Accessible parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the
adopted building code and is based on the number of standard parking spaces
provided. In instances where standard parking is not provided, the City of
Tucson Building Official shall determine the appropriate amount of accessible
parking spaces required during review of the Development Package.
      3.   Vehicle Placement. Parking areas and driveways should be located to
minimize the impact on walkable streets , the pedestrian experience, and
pedestrian safety.
         a.   Parking lots .
            (1)   New parking lots or garages shall be situated to the rear of
a building . If placement to the rear is not feasible, the parking lot or
garage shall be located with the lesser dimensional width facing the street and
shall include enhanced landscaping on the street -facing side that includes 75%
coverage with vegetative ground cover.
            (2)   Existing parking lots that are in the front of an existing
building may remain without improvements when:
               (a)   The parking lot includes ten or less vehicular parking
spaces;
               (b)   A Type 1 project is proposed; and
               (c)   No other vehicular parking is available on the site .
            (3)   Existing parking lots that are in the front of an existing
building may remain with improvements when:
               (a)   The parking lot includes 11 or more vehicular parking
spaces;
               (b)   A Type 2, 3, or 4 project is proposed;
               (c)   A designated pedestrian amenity or public open space area
of a minimum of 1,000 square feet is provided to break up the parking lot ;
               (d)   The parking lot  improvements include all reasonable
attempts to comply with the connectivity, landscaping , and rainwater
harvesting development  standards ; and
               (e)   The parking lot  setback  standards in
Table 5.11.6.-1. shall not apply.
            (4)   Existing or proposed parking lots intended for transit
ridership (park and ride) are permitted along a street  frontage but not at a
street corner upon confirmation with SunTran regarding the usage of the parking
lot .
            (5)   Parking lots which have any frontage along a street shall be
screened by a minimum 29-inch masonry wall.
            (6)   Parking lots shall provide canopy trees as follows:
               (a)   Parking lots in Type 1 and 2 projects with ten or less
vehicular parking spaces shall provide at least one canopy shade tree.
               (b)   Trees shall be planted in an unpaved depressed planting
area, which must be a minimum of 150 square feet in area and eight feet in
width.
               (c)   Parking lots which provide green space for large trees may
reduce tree planting requirements if the following criteria are met. The green
space may be counted towards required rainwater harvesting and public space per
5.11.6.E.3. if all other standards are met. The required tree planting shall be
one tree per eight parking spaces for the parking spaces which meet the
distance requirement. The green space must:
                  i.   Be publicly usable or densely vegetated with 50%
coverage of vegetative ground cover;
                  ii.   Allow for large-scale mature growth of shade trees;
                  iii.   Provide trees which are located within ten feet of the
parking spaces of which only those spaces are eligible for the reduction; and
                  iv.   Be a minimum of 1,000 square feet in area.
               (d)   Parking spaces which are covered by shade from parking
canopies, plantings in the right-of-way , or a building as measured at 2:00 pm
on June 21 when the sun is 82 degrees above the horizon may be excluded from
providing the required tree plantings.
         b.   Access.
            (1)   Driveways may be shared between adjacent  parcels or for a
single site but shall not exceed maximum allowed width. If a driveway is shared
between adjacent  parcels or for a single site , a recorded shared access
agreement or easement shall be required.
            (2)   In multi-family or single-family , attached developments ,
one or two space garages and carports shall be accessed by alleys or on-site
drive aisles only.
            (3)   Driveways should follow the recommendations of the City of
Tucson Street Design Guide (2021) and the City of Tucson's Transportation
Access Management Guidelines. Should conflicts in standards exist, priority
should be given to designs which optimize pedestrian safety and maintain safety
for other travel modes.
         c.   Garages and structured parking.
            (1)   Semi-subterranean garages may project above the adjacent
finished grade by up to three and one-half feet.
            (2)   Structured parking shall not be a street -facing façade.
            (3)   Where structured parking is integrated with a building , a
"wrap" with a minimum depth of 20 feet of habitable ground floor space shall be
provided between the parking structure and the street .
TABLE 5.11.6.-2: PASSENGER VEHICLE PARKING LOCATION & ACCESS STANDARDS
SETBACKS
 Residential Use Non-Residential Use or Mixed Use Subterranean Parking
TABLE 5.11.6.-2: PASSENGER VEHICLE PARKING LOCATION & ACCESS STANDARDS
SETBACKS
                                                         Non-
                                             Residential Residential Subterranean
                                             Use         Use or      Parking
                                                         Mixed Use
All Streets                                  15 feet     20 feet     0 feet
Perimeter Yard  Adjacent to Residential Zone6 feet      6 feet      0 feet
Perimeter Yard  Adjacent to Non-Residential 0 feet      0 feet      0 feet
Zone
Perimeter Yard  Adjacent to Alley           0 feet      0 feet      0 feet
ACCESS
                                             Must be located along side of lot
Street                                       (within 20 feet of side lot line )
                                             and at least 50 feet from another
                                             driveway (curb cut edge).
                                             Permitted when minimum 20 feet
Rear (Alley )                                width, free of obstructions, and
                                             surfaced to approval of City
                                             Engineer.
PARKING ENTRANCES (CURB CUT WIDTH)
One-Way Entrance                             10 to 12 feet
Two-Way Entrance                             16 to 20 feet
 
(Ord. 12152, 3/18/2025)
5.11.7.   INCENTIVES
   A.   APPLICABILITY
      Development projects that utilize incentives must demonstrate compliance
with the purpose and intent of the CCT. In addition, a project may utilize all
or none of the following incentives on a site to maximize the height for the
entire site . The maximum additional height a building may achieve is two
stories (24 feet). Two incentives can be stacked on each other to increase the
height by an additional two stories (24 feet) on a single building . However,
the maximum height a project can achieve using these incentives is six stories
(75 feet). In addition, different incentives may be used on different buildings
on the same site .
   B.   AFFORDABLE HOUSING HEIGHT INCENTIVE
      1.   To encourage the provision of housing for low- to moderate-income,
disabled, and elderly residents, an additional height incentive is offered in
exchange for the incorporation of Affordable Units into a project . Additional
height of one story (12 feet) may be added to any residential building which
includes Affordable Units. To be eligible, the following criteria must be met:
         a.   Cannot be an R-1, C-3, OCR-1, or OCR-2 zoned parcel .
         b.   All the Affordable Housing Units shall be located within a single
site . Affordable Housing Units shall be incorporated throughout the site and
shall not be distinguishable in any manner from market-rate units, access to
amenities, location, grouping, or exterior design.
         c.   At least 15% of the total number of dwelling units in the Project
shall be Affordable Housing Units for households earning 80% of AMI or less
(fractions are rounded up or down to the nearest whole number).
      2.   Terms of Affordability.
         a.   The terms of affordability for residential units, for sale,
lease, or rent, is a minimum of 30 years from Certificate of Occupancy (C of
O).
      3.   Compliance measures will be required at the time of approval,
including but not limited to contracts, restrictive covenants, deed
restrictions and stipulated penalties. Compliance with these requirements will
be verified by the Housing and Community Development Department (HCD) staff
prior to permitting approval. Compliance will be monitored and enforced by HCD
on an ongoing basis.
      4.   The developer or manager shall provide an annual report to the HCD
Director verifying the units qualify as Affordable Housing Units . The report
shall identify the income of persons residing in the Affordable Housing Units
and the housing costs, including rents, mortgages, utilities and association
fees being charged, and any other relevant information requested by the HCD
Director to verify the units are being utilized for affordable housing.
   C.   VERTICAL MIXED-USE HEIGHT INCENTIVE
      1.   To encourage the provision of active ground floor uses that provide
daily services (i.e. coffee shops, restaurants, hair salons, grocery stories
etc.) and ground floor activity, an additional height incentive is offered in
exchange for providing vertical mix use along streets or public open spaces .
Additional height of one story (12 feet) may be added to any building which
meets the mixed-use criteria. To be eligible, the following criteria must be
met:
         a.   Cannot be an R-1, R-2, R-3, C-3, OCR-1, or OCR-2 zoned parcel .
         b.   A minimum 50% of ground floor facing front streets and open space
shall be commercial or retail uses.
         c.   A minimum 14-foot ground floor height will be provided.
         d.   A minimum of 20-foot ground floor depth will be provided.
      2.   Mixed-use  projects may also be eligible for a reduction in City
impact fees as provided in Tucson City Code Section 23A-81.F.
   D.   CONTRIBUTING HISTORIC BUILDINGS INCENTIVE
      1.   To encourage the preservation of historic Formally Eligible (DOE),
Contributing or Individually Listed structures or City of Tucson zoned Historic
Landmark , an additional height incentive is offered in exchange for preserving
and reusing historic buildings in an appropriate manner. Additional height of
one story (12 feet) may be added to one building on the project site . To be
eligible, the following criteria must be met:
         a.   The development  site must include a Formally Eligible (DOE),
Contributing or Individually Listed structure as documented by the State of
Arizona Historic Preservation Office or the City of Tucson Historic
Preservation Officer; and
         b.   Additionally, all buildings on the development  site may be
granted up to a 20% modification to the Dimensional Standards or Development
Standards with the review and approval of the Design Review Board for
compliance with the purpose and design principles of the CCT per Section
5.11.1.
(Ord. 12152, 3/18/2025)
5.11.8.   LARGE SCALE DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
   A.   Large development  sites over 12 acres, sites with OCR-1 and OCR-
2 zoning that are proposing buildings with eight stories or taller, or any
parcel which is adjacent or part of the Tucson Mall, El Con Mall, or Park Place
Mall are required to submit a Master Plan demonstrating compliance with the
intent of Section
5.11.
   B.   Required Materials.
      1.   A Master Plan shall include an overall Concept Plan that integrates
site , transportation, landscape , and pedestrian features into a cohesive
design. This Concept Plan shall be included as an additional sheet in the
submitted site plan (Development Package).
      2.   A Master Plan shall also include a Project Narrative which
demonstrates how the Master Plan meets the intent of Section
5.11. and the findings below. If project phasing is proposed, the narrative
shall describe how the phases shall continue to meet the intent of Section
5.11 as well as safety and circulation standards regardless of construction
timing.
   C.   Review and Approval Procedures.
      1.   An applicant shall hold a neighborhood meeting in accordance with
Section
3.2.2. and
Table 3.2-1 prior to submitting a Master Plan application.
      2.   Review of a Master Plan is processed in conjunction with a site plan
(Development Package) application in accordance with Section
3.3.3., PDSD Director Approval Procedures.
      3.   The Design Review Board (DRB) shall review the Master Plan for
recommendation to the PDSD Director regarding conformance" with the design
principles in Section
5.11.1.B. Review by the DRB shall be conducted after formal submittal to the
City and after the first complete review by staff has been concluded. When a
Master Plan is reviewed by the DRB, no more than two meetings shall be
required.
   D.   Findings for Approval.
      1.   The PDSD Director may approve a Master Plan as provided by this
section if all the following applicable criteria are met and documented in
findings:
         a.   All Development Standards of Section
5.11.6. are met;
         b.   At least 15% of the overall private land area of the site is
provided as publicly accessible open space . Open spaces shall:
            (1)   Be designed and located for community gathering;
            (2)   Include a variety of sizes and functional purposes (such as
plazas, passages, community gardens, or pocket parks);
            (3)   Integrate climate-responsive design, use of native or
climate-adapted vegetation, and water harvesting; and
            (4)   Allow community members to feel safe and welcome by
maintaining visibility from upper stories and nearby ground level areas.
         c.   The overall site shall include a pedestrian-scaled network of
streets and blocks which will encourage walking, reduce automobile trips, and
conserve energy.
         d.   The overall site shall include a transition in scale and form in
response to nearby residential neighborhoods and developments , with particular
attention to preserving views of mountain ranges and potential shading from
tall buildings . The transition can be addressed by step backs on individual
buildings or through a change in scale of buildings depending on their location
on the site .
(Ord. 12152, 3/18/2025)
5.11.9.   MODIFICATIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS
   A.   Staff of the Planning and Development Services Department are provided
the flexibility to adjust standards of Section
5.11. in the following cases:
      1.   Setback requirements or building orientation standards may be
modified in limited situations where conflicts exist with public or private
utility easements which cannot be relocated.
      2.   Setback requirements may be modified up to 20% to accommodate
existing conditions or a design solution consistent with an enhanced pedestrian
environment.
      3.   Standards in Section
5.11.6.C.2. Building Orientation may be modified to address sites with multiple
street frontages in consideration of the proposed design and use of the
buildings in relation to the street types.
      4.   Existing parking lot  standards in Section
5.11.6.G.3.a.(2)-(3) may be modified when site specific situations require
adjustments to allow for economic feasibility.
   B.   The Zoning Administrator shall interpret the Community Corridors Tool
standards . The Zoning Administrator may allow up to 20% deviation from all
standards , except for height and stepbacks, based on the need for design
flexibility, alternative design solutions, or integration of best practices.
   C.   In all instances in which flexibility or interpretation authority is
provided to City staff or the Zoning Administrator, the applicant shall provide
a narrative or letter with their site plan (Development Package) submittal
which includes the following information for consideration:
      1.   The standard(s) which are requested to be modified;
      2.   The requested modification;
      3.   Explanation of the challenges, conditions, or considerations which
make strict adherence to the standards infeasible or not desirable; and
      4.   Demonstration that the requested modification will not negatively
impact health, life, and safety considerations.
   D.   Decisions on each modification or interpretation request shall be
documented in the Development Package's comment response letter to the
applicant from the City and in the Development Package General Notes.
(Ord. 12152, 3/18/2025)
5.11.10.   VARIANCES
   The Community Corridors Tool Sections
5.11.5 Dimensional Standards and
5.11.6 Development Standards are eligible for variance requests and are
processed in accordance with Sections 3.10.1 and 3.10.3, Board of Adjustment
Variance Procedure. The Design Review Board shall review landscaping and
screening standard variance requests as provided in Section
2.2.6.C.5. and forward its recommendations to the Board of Adjustment.
(Ord. 12152, 3/18/2025)
5.11.11.   ENFORCEMENT
   Standards adopted for the Community Corridors Tool are enforced in the same
manner as provided in Article 10: Enforcement and Penalties.
(Ord. 12152, 3/18/2025)
5.11.12.   DEFINITIONS
   A.   Block-Scaled Building . A building that is individually as large as a
block or individual building collectively arranged along a street to form a
continuous facade as long as most or all of a block.
   B.   House Scaled Building . A building that is the size of a small to large
house and detached from other buildings .
   C.   Pedestrian Orientation. A physical structure or place with design
qualities and elements that contribute to an active, inviting, and pleasant
place for pedestrians that typically includes most of the following elements:
      1.   Building facades that are highly articulated at the street level,
with interesting uses of materials, color and architectural detailing;
      2.   Visibility into building at the street level;
      3.   A continuous sidewalk , with a minimum amount of intrusions into
pedestrian right-of-way ; and
      4.   Signs oriented and scaled to the pedestrian rather than the
motorist.
      5.   Pedestrian orientation may also include, design amenities related to
the street level including but not limited to awnings, arcades, landscaping and
street furniture.
   D.   Story. The portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the next floor above it, or if there is no floor
above, the space between the floor and the ceiling above.
   E.   Story, Ground Floor. The lowest story or the ground story of any
building , the floor of which not more than 12 inches below the average contact
ground level at the exterior wall of the buildings .
   F.   Story, Mezzanine. A story which covers one-third or less of the area of
the story directly underneath it. A mezzanine story shall be deemed a full
story when it covers more than one-third of the area of the story directly
underneath said mezzanine story.
(Ord. 12152, 3/18/2025)
5.12.   DOWNTOWN AREA INFILL INCENTIVE DISTRICT (IID)
5.12.1.   PURPOSE
   The primary purpose of the Downtown Area Infill Incentive District (IID) is
to encourage redevelopment in the following ways:
   A.   Encourage sustainable infill development that supports the creation of
urban neighborhoods that are pedestrian and transit-oriented and benefits the
IID, the major activity centers in the area, and the City as a whole, while
promoting compatibility with existing residential and non-residential
properties and neighborhoods;
   B.   Address barriers to infill development in the Downtown Area Infill
Incentive District (IID), such as incompatible development  standards and
associated development barrier issues;
   C.   Implement the IID purposes by offering development incentives
permitting a modification of development requirements;
   D.   Provide for appropriate transitional design standards where the
development or expansion of a use is adjacent to existing single-family
residential development ;
   E.   Protect historic structures and historic neighborhoods and existing
residential neighborhoods from potential negative impacts of new development ;
and,
   F.   Consolidate the regulations and design standards that apply to downtown
areas into a single ordinance by moving certain provisions of the Rio Nuevo
District (RND) overlay zone , former Section
5.11, into the IID Rio Nuevo Area (RNA) and renumbering them to conform to the
numbering of the IID.
(Am. Ord. 11246, 2/18/2015)
5.12.2.   ESTABLISHMENT
   A.   The IID is comprised of the Sub-Districts listed below. For the
boundaries of the IID and Sub-Districts see Section
5.12.18 (Figure 5.12.18-1). The exact boundaries of the IID overlay and Sub-
Districts are identified on the official zoning map kept on file at the
Planning and Development Services Department (PDSD) and the City Clerk's
Office.
      1.   The Rio Nuevo Area (RNA), Section
5.12.7.
         a.   The RNA Section
5.12.7 includes all properties in the area previously included in the former
RND.
         b.   The RNA encompasses portions of the Downtown Core Sub-District
(DCS), Greater Infill Incentive Sub-District (GIIS), and the Downtown Links
Sub-District (DLS) as shown on the map in Exhibit
5.12.18-1.
      2.   The GIIS, as outlined in Section
5.12.9.
      3.   The DCS, as outlined in Section
5.12.10.
      4.   The DLS, as outlined in Section
5.12.11, which is further subdivided into the following Areas:
         a.   Toole Avenue Area (TAA), Section
5.12.12.
         b.   Warehouse Triangle Area (WTA), Section
5.12.13.
         c.   Fourth Avenue Area (FAA), Section
5.12.14.
         d.   Iron Horse Area (IHA), Section
5.12.15.
         e.   Stone/Sixth Area (SSA), Section
5.12.16.
         Some of the DLS Areas listed above are further subdivided into Sub-
Districts (see Section
5.12.11.A).
   B.   The IID contains both mandatory and optional overlay zone  standards
and requirements. Plans submitted in accordance with the IID shall comply with
the applicable standards of this Section.
      1.   If utilizing the IID Zoning Option for site s proposing exterior or
site modifications within the RNA overlay, the requirements and standards of
the RNA are mandatory.
      2.   The GIIS, the DCS, and DLS, are optional overlay standards and
regulations, which a property owner may chose in lieu of the underlying zoning
(IID zoning option).
   C.   Depending on the development choice of the owner, plans submitted for
development of land in the IID must comply with the applicable IID regulations
and standards as follows:
      1.   Development under existing underlying UDC zoning:
         a.   The regulations and standards of the underlying zone apply; and,
         b.   If the property is located within the boundaries of the RNA, all
of the following regulations, standards , and review procedures apply:
            (1)   The regulations and standards of the underlying zoning;
            (2)   The RNA standards in Section
5.12.7;
            (3)   Section
5.12.6.E.; and,
            (4)   RNA applications for development are reviewed by the Design
Review Board (DRB) pursuant to Section
2.2.6, Design Review Board.
      2.   Development under the IID zoning option:
         a.   The regulations and standards of the applicable IID Sub-District,
Area or Sub-Area in which the development  parcel is located, apply.
         b.   Regardless of the Sub-District, Area or Sub-Area, all development
in the IID must submit a plan and comply with the following:
            (1)   Section
5.12.5, IID Plan Submittal Requirements; and,
            (2)   Section
5.12.6, IID Plan Review and Approval Procedures Under the IID Zoning Option.
         c.   Development  in the GIIS and DCS must comply with the design
standards  and requirements of Section
5.12.8, General IID Zoning Option Design Standards.
         d.   Applications for IID zoning option are reviewed either under the
major or minor design review process for compliance with the applicable
standards  and requirements pursuant to Section
5.12.6.I.
   D.   An IID Plan using the IID zoning option provisions cannot be used in
conjunction with other waiver or modification provisions provided by the
Unified Development Code (UDC). This prohibition does not apply to Section
7.4.5, Individual Parking Plan, IPP, which may be used in conjunction with the
IID zoning option provisions.
   E.   Conflict of Laws.
      1.   The requirements and standards  of the IID provisions should be
interpreted to avoid conflict whenever possible with other UDC provisions.
      2.   Where the standards  of this Section conflict with other Sections of
the UDC, the standards  of this Section shall control.
      3.   Where the standards  of the DLS conflict with the general IID
standards  of Section
5.12.8, standards  of the DLS apply. Flexible alternatives to encourage
innovative design solutions may still be allowed.
   F.   Amendments to or dissolution of the IID are processed in accordance
with Section
3.7, UDC Text Amendment Procedure.
(Am. Ord. 11246, 2/18/2015; Am. Ord. 11640, 4/23/2019)
5.12.3.   DEFINITIONS
   The terms "adjacent " and "group dwelling " as they apply in the IID are
defined in Section
11.4.2 and Section
11.4.8, respectively. When a proposed project is not developed under the IID
zoning option, but under the standards  of the underlying zoning, only the
general, not the IID specific definition of the term "Group Dwelling " applies
(see
Article 11).
(Am. Ord. 11246, 2/18/2015)
5.12.4.   APPLICABILITY
   The requirements and standards  of this section apply to the following
development  types located on property, including public or private rights-of-
way , any portion of which is located within the IID:
   A.   A change of use ;
   B.   An expansion of an existing use or existing structure ; or,
   C.   New development  or a redevelopment project .
   D.   Exceptions
      For development  in the RNA under existing underlying zoning, the
applicability requirements do not apply to the following:
      1.   A change of use that does not alter the exterior of a structure .
      2.   A redevelopment project , or improvements or alterations to an
existing structure , if such alterations are not visible from an adjacent
public right-of-way .
(Am. Ord. 11246, 2/18/2015)
5.12.5.   IID PLAN SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS
   A.   Application Requirements
      Use of the standards  of the IID, as opposed to existing underlying
zoning, requires plan approval by PDSD regardless of IID Subdistrict, Area or
Sub-Area. Plan submittal shall consist of the following:
      1.   IID Plan
         Applicants shall submit an IID Plan, as outlined in Section
5.12.6, demonstrating compliance with applicable IID development  design
standards  and requirements. The Plan must clearly state the applicant's
intention to use the IID zoning option in lieu of the existing underlying
zoning. Additionally, for projects using IID Optional Zoning, applicants are
required to provide contextual elevations demonstrating compliance with the
following design standards :
         a.   Section
5.12.8, Subsection A (Streetscape Design) and Subsection B (Development
Transition Standards) and Subsection C (Alternative Compliance).
         b.   The applicable Sub-District, Area, or Sub-Area.
      2.   Development Package
         A Development  Package is required when development  is proposed under
existing underlying UDC zoning, or if a development package is otherwise
required by the UDC, in which case a separate Plan must be prepared in
compliance with the Development  Package requirements in Section
2-06.0.0 of the
Administrative Manual.
   B.   Modifications or Waivers of IID Plan Submittal Requirements
      An applicant may request modification to or waiver from the plan
submittal requirements, subject to the following:
      1.   The applicant shall specifically identify the submittal requirement
(s) for which a modification or waiver is requested and provide a rationale for
the request; and,
      2.   The PDSD Director shall determine whether to grant the request
within 10 working days of the request. In making this decision, the PDSD
Director shall consider the purpose statements of the IID, and the applicable
General Plan and Area Plan policies. The PDSD Director's approval of a request
under this subsection is not, nor shall it be construed as, an endorsement of a
project by PDSD.
(Am. Ord. 11246, 2/18/2015; Am. Ord. 11640, 4/23/2019)
5.12.6.   IID PLAN REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES UNDER THE IID ZONING OPTION
   PDSD administers the IID Plan review procedure. Except as expressly modified
herein, review by the PDSD is pursuant to Section
3.3.3.
   A.   Pre-application Conference
      A pre-application conference with the PDSD staff as outlined in Section
3.2.1 is required to determine the following:
      1.   Whether the Plan meets the IID Plan submittal requirements and the
development  standards  of the IID and applicable Sub-District, Area or Sub-
Area.
      2.   Whether the application will be reviewed through the Major or the
Minor Design Review Procedure as described below.
      3.   Preliminary identification of potential code modifications or
waivers that may need to be requested through the IID zoning option.
   B.   Major Design Review
      The Major Design Review process is required if a proposal meets any two
or more criteria listed in B.1 and/or B.2:
      1.   The development  proposal contains structures that are higher than:
         a.   four stories or 49 feet, or
         b.   two stories or 25 feet if adjacent  to detached single-family
residential or duplex dwellings.
         c.   In the DCS, the height criteria apply only if the development
site is within 400 feet or less of a detached single-family residential or
duplex dwelling.
      2.   The development  proposal is at any one or more of the following
locations:
         a.   At an intersection of one or more arterial streets .
         b.   Adjacent to or across from:
            (1)   a detached single-family residential or duplex dwelling; or,
            (2)   a Historic or Contributing structure .
         c.   On a vacant Historic Preservation Zone (HPZ) or Neighborhood
Preservation Zone (NPZ) parcel .
         d.   On a multi-zone parcel  subject to Section
5.12.8.F.
         e.   Within, or adjacent  to an HPZ, or NPZ, or a National Historic
Register District , or any combination of the three. The definition of the term
"adjacent ," as it applies in the IID, is defined in Section
11.4.2.
      3.   Notices
         For Major Design Review, the notice process must follow Section
3.2.2, Neighborhood Meetings, except as expressly modified herein.
      4.   Review and Approval Procedures
         a.   A neighborhood meeting;
         b.   Review by City's  Design Professional ;
         c.   Review by IID Design Review Committee (IID DRC) and
recommendation to the PDSD Director;
         d.   Decision by the PDSD Director pursuant to Section
5.12.6.M.
      5.   Minor Development Exemption
         A redevelopment proposal that is 2,500 square feet or less in area
and/or not visible from a street is exempt from the Major Design Review process
and shall proceed through the minor design review. If a historic preservation
review is required, it is still required for this type of proposal.
   C.   Minor Design Review
      1.   Criteria 
         The proposed development  does not meet the criteria for a Major
design review in Section
5.12.6.B above.
      2.   Review and Approval Procedures
         a.   A neighborhood meeting;
         b.   Review by the City's  Design Professional and recommendation to
the PDSD Director; and,
         c.   Decision by the PDSD Director pursuant to Section
5.12.6.M below.
      3.   Notices
         For Minor Design Review, notice of the neighborhood meeting must be
sent to all of the following:
         a.   All owners of property within 100 feet of the development  site;
and,
         b.   The Neighborhood Association for the area in which the
development  is located.
   D.   Provisional Design Review of Affordable Housing Developments
         Projects that qualify as affordable housing per Section
5.12.8.H may request a provisional design review. This review is conducted by
the Design Professional and may be conducted prior to a formal application for
development permits. Upon the Design Professional review, the PDSD Director may
issue a provisional approval that can be used to demonstrate zoning compliance
in requests for funding. At the time of application for development permits,
the project must complete a major or minor design review as described above in
Section 5.12.6 to receive final approval.
   E.   Neighborhood Meeting
      1.   Prior to filing an application for use of the IID zoning option, an
applicant must hold a neighborhood meeting in compliance with the public notice
procedures for neighborhood meetings in Section
3.2.2., except as expressly modified herein.
      2.   The applicant must prepare a written summary of the meeting. A copy
of the written summary of the meeting must be filed with PDSD at the time of
filing the development  application for a project .
      3.   The applicant will also send a copy of the written summary to a
Neighborhood Liaison appointed by the registered neighborhood association for
the area in which the project site is located.
      4.   The Neighborhood Liaison or any property owner within the notice
area may file with the PDSD Director a statement of concurrence or dissent with
the accuracy of the applicant's written summary of the meeting. If a dissent is
filed, it must state the exact reasons for the dissent.
      5.   The applicant will send periodic project updates to the Neighborhood
Liaison in accordance with PDSD Neighborhood Liaison Policy.
   F.   IID Historic Preservation Review
      1.   Projects in an HPZ
         a.   Proposed development projects within the boundaries of an HPZ
must comply with HPZ Sections
5.8.7, Permitted Uses,
5.8.8, Design Review, and
5.8.9, Design Standards, except that within the El Presidio HPZ and the Armory
Park HPZ, the following exceptions apply:
            (1)   building height - project may be allowed heights up to the
equivalent of the tallest contributing structure within that HPZ.
            (2)   building material - project may be allowed an exception for
building material.
            Both exceptions require review from the Tucson-Pima County
Historical Commission Plans Review Subcommittee (TPCHC-PRS) and the appropriate
local HPZ board. Building height is measured by PDSD using HPZ height
measurement methods.
         b.   IID zoning option may be used for new development , or additions
to, or alterations of existing historic structures , provided that the changes
do not cause a historic structure to be de-listed or no longer eligible for
listing.
      2.   Projects not in an HPZ
         a.   The Tucson-Pima County Historical Commission Plans Review
Subcommittee reviews all projects listed below:
            (1)   Projects proposing alterations or additions to an existing
eligible or contributing historic structure using IID zoning option that do not
cause the property to be de-listed or no longer eligible for listing. Additions
to or alterations of historic structures must meet the Secretary of the
Interior's historic preservation standards ;
            (2)   Projects proposing new development  using IID zoning option
that are either adjacent  to the boundaries of an HPZ or adjacent  to a
structure meeting any one or more of the following characteristics:
               (a)   Listed or eligible to be listed in the National or Arizona
Register of Historic Places, individually or as a contributing property.
               (b)   Designated as a Historic Landmark .
               (c)   A Single-family dwelling within the boundaries of the HPZ.
         b.   The TPCHC may continue the hearing on an item only once before
making a decision, unless the applicant for the development project requests a
further continuation.
         c.   It is the responsibility of each applicant for IID zoning option
to verify the current contributing or eligibility status of the property in
question with the City  of Tucson's Historic Preservation Office.
         d.   The TPCHC Plans Review Subcommittee reviews for compliance with
the design requirements of the applicable Sub-District and for design
compatibility of a proposed development project .
            (1)   New development  must be designed to complement and be
compatible with the architecture of adjacent  historic properties .
            (2)   Compatibility with adjacent  historic structures is to be
achieved through architectural elements such as building setbacks , building
step-backs, textures, materials, forms, and landscaping.
            (3)   Exceptions 
               The PDSD Director may waive the compatibility requirement of
this section under the following circumstances:
               (a)   Where the adjacent  lot is vacant; or
               (b)   If the property owner of the adjacent  historic structure
waives the requirement; or
               (c)   If the adjacent  lot is developed with a non-residential
building.
         e.   It is not the intent of the design review process to impose
additional limitations or building preservation requirements on the allowable
building heights in the IID. Unless a building height limitation in a Sub-
District is specifically required herein, the proposed development  may use the
entire building height allowed by the IID.
      3.   Demolition
         a.   Whether a proposed development  is within or outside the
boundaries of a HPZ, IID zoning option may not be used for a development
project that proposes demolition of a historic structure that is any one or
combination of the following:
            (1)   A property listed or eligible to be listed in the National or
Arizona Register of Historic Places, individually or as a contributing
property.
            (2)   Designated as a City  Historic Landmark .
         b.    For purposes of sub-section (a) above, the prohibition against
the use of the IID zoning option applies to any development project where any
demolition of a historic structure occurs on that property on or after the
effective date of Ordinance No. 11640 (May 23, 2019).
            For any development project where a demolition of a historic
structure occurred on the property during the time period from February 18,
2015 and May 23, 2019, the application will be governed under the provisions of
Ordinance No. 11246 (adopted February 18, 2015).
         c.   Exception
            Partial demolition of a historic structure is allowed if the State
Historic Preservation Office (SHPO) determines that the demolition will not
cause the structure to be de-listed or to become ineligible for listing in the
future.
      4.   De-Listing
         In no event may the IID zoning option be used if the development
would, in the opinion of the Historic Preservation Officer, cause a historic
structure in the IID to be de-listed or no longer eligible for listing.
   G.   Development projects in a NPZ
      If a proposed development project is located within a NPZ, the project
must be reviewed by the City  Design Professional pursuant to the design
standards  of the applicable NPZ.
   H.   Composition of the IID Design Review Committee (IID DRC)
      1.   The IID DRC is composed of any combination of the following members
appointed by the City  Manager for a four year term:
         a.   The City's  Design Professional .
         b.   One registered architect.
         c.   One registered landscape architect.
         d.   One registered contractor or member of the development
community.
         e.   One member to represent all neighborhood associations within the
IID.
      2.   A member of the IID DRC may be removed by the City  Manager with or
without cause. A member who misses four consecutive meetings for any reason or
fails to attend for any reason at least 40% of the IID DRC meetings within one
calendar year is automatically and immediately removed as a member of the IID
DRC. The City  Manager shall promptly fill any vacancy on the IID DRC by
appointing a member to fill that vacancy. All members shall be provided notice
of any IID DRC meeting.
      3.   The IID DRC may include one or more ad-hoc members from among the
following, as applicable:
         a.   For projects within the DLS Fourth Avenue Area, one local Fourth
Ave. business owner.
         b.   For projects within the DCS, one person from the Downtown
Partnership Association.
         c.   One member appointed by the neighborhood association for the area
in which the proposed project is located. If the project site is located in an
area that does not have a neighborhood association , the ad-hoc member is
appointment by an association within 300 feet of the project site that is
within the same IID Sub-District.
         d.   For projects within or adjacent  to a HPZ, the neighborhood
association member should be a member of the HPZ advisory board of the affected
HPZ.
      4.   The IID DRC shall adopt rules of procedure necessary to carry out
its functions. The PDSD shall make these rules available to the public.
   I.   IID DRC Quorum, Voting, and Recommendation
      1.   Ad-hoc members are voting members of the IID DRC.
      2.   A quorum of the IID DRC is the Design Professional and at least two
other members.
      3.   Notwithstanding Subsection H.2 above, if for any reason the City
Manager has not appointed the members of the IID DRC, or a quorum is not
obtained for a particular application, the Design Professional shall make a
recommendation directly to the PDSD Director.
      4.   The Design Professional may give a recommendation separate from the
IID DRC recommendation in all cases.
   J.   IID DRC Review
      1.   All development projects submitted using the IID zoning option that
are reviewed by the IID DRC for compliance with applicable IID standards  and
requirements, and the IID DRC may also comment on other aspects of the projects
.
      2.   An applicant may request a pre-application review by the DRC to
receive input on the proposal's features. Afterwards, the IID DRC must review
an item once and may continue the item one time, unless the applicant asks for
further continuances.
   K.   Review by the Design Professional
      1.   Prior to the IID DRC meeting, applicants must meet with the Design
Professional to discuss the project and its compliance with the IID and
applicable Sub-District design standards  and requirements.
      2.   The Design Professional must provide a written report to the
applicant, the IID DRC members and the PDSD Director containing all of the
following:
         a.   A listing and description of the recommendations and any other
issues of concern raised by the IID DRC.
         b.   A statement whether the proposal complies with the applicable
design standards .
         c.   Recommendations on any modifications to the project needed to
bring it into compliance with the design standards .
         d.   The Design Professional may also make separate recommendations to
the PDSD Director on other aspects of the project , such as façade treatment,
building colors, and similar design elements, including all relevant elevations
and pictures describing the recommended design or mitigation features.
   L.   Review by the Mayor and Council of Group Dwellings
      Group dwellings developed under IID Optional Zoning, as defined in
Section
11.4.8 specifically for use in the IID, require the approval of Mayor and
Council pursuant to Section
3.4.4, Mayor and Council Special Exception Procedure.
   M.   PDSD Director Decision
      1.   The IID DRC's and Design Professional's recommendations are advisory
to the PDSD Director, and the Director makes the final decision on a project's
compliance with IID and applicable Subdistrict requirements and standards .
      2.   The IID DRC and the Design Professional may recommend, and the
Director may add special conditions to an approval pursuant to Subsection J
above, to assure compliance with the intent of the IID, to address safety
issues, and to address certain development  commitments to adjacent  neighbors
made by the applicant.
      3.   Special conditions may include mitigation standards  or plans based
on the scale, setting, and intensity of the proposed development  on a case by
case basis. Examples of such plans may include, but are not limited to any one
or more of the following:
         a.   A vehicular reduction plan to ensure residences are most
effectively using alternate modes of transportation. Proposed methods to reduce
vehicular use may be one or more of the following: transit passes, ride share,
bike share or car share programs, shared parking agreements among multiple
uses, and proposals to separate the cost of parking spaces from residential
building spaces or a similar method approved by the PDSD Director.
         b.   A noise mitigation plan to ensure the design of the proposal does
not substantially increase noise above current ambient noise levels.
         c.   A traffic impact analysis that may include a mitigation plan with
traffic calming elements and safety improvements .
         d.   A behavioral management plan and security plan that includes
self-policing and techniques to reduce the impacts of noise, odors, unruly
behavior or other similar adverse effects on adjacent  residential property.
         e.   A shadow plan when adjacent  to detached single-family dwellings.
         f.   A ground vibration monitoring study adjacent  to historic
structures .
         g.   Proposed projects within or adjacent  to an HPZ should reference
the appropriate HPZ guidelines in Section
9-02.7.0 of the
Technical Standards Manual.
   N.   Final Approval
      1.   Within ten days after receiving final recommendations from the IID
DRC and the Design Professional , the PDSD Director must make a final decision
pursuant to Section
5.12.6.L, except as provided below.
      2.   Group Dwellings, as defined in Section
11.4.8 for development  within the IID, require final approval pursuant to
Section
3.4.4, Mayor and Council Special Exception Procedure.
   O.   Design Professional Review of Building Plans
      Prior to the issuance of a building permit for development  under the
Optional IID provisions, the Design Professional will review the development
package and the building plans for compliance with the approved IID Plan.
   P.   Appeals
      A party of record may appeal the PDSD Director's decision on IID
developments on the grounds that the decision is not in conformance with the
criteria established by the UDC. Except for a decision on a proposed group
dwelling , which is approved or denied by the Mayor and Council pursuant to
3.4.4., Mayor and Council Special Exception Procedures, appeals must be filed
and are heard in accordance with the following procedure:
      1.   Appeals of the Director 's decision for developments reviewed
pursuant to a minor review process are heard in accordance with Section
3.10.2, Board of Adjustment Appeal Procedure. The notice of intent to appeal
must be filed with the PDSD no later than five days after the effective date of
the decision. The complete appeal materials must be filed with the Zoning
Administrator within 14 days of the effective date of the decision. The appeal
fees must be paid to the PDSD at the time the complete appeal is filed.
      2.   Appeals of the Director 's decision for developments reviewed
pursuant to a major review process are heard in accordance with Section
3.9.2, Mayor and Council Appeal Procedure. The notice of intent to appeal must
be filed with the City Clerk no later than 14 days after the effective date of
the decision. The complete appeal materials must be filed with the City Clerk
within 30 days of the effective date of the decision. A copy of the complete
appeal materials must be provided to the PDSD Director at the time it is filed.
The appeal fees must be paid to the PDSD at the time the complete appeal is
filed.
   Q.   Timeline for Approval
      Timelines for approval are contained in Section
3.02 or
3.03 of the Administrative Manual depending upon the procedure chosen by the
developer of the IID project .
   R.   Amendments to an IID Plan or Approved Design Package
      1.   An amendment or revision to an approved IID Plan is subject to the
same procedure as the initial approval.
      2.   An amendment or revision to an approved Design Package is subject to
the following approval procedure, unless determined to be a non-substantive
change by the designated Design Professional :
         a.   The applicant or consultant shall provide a written report to the
PDSD Director containing all of the following information: a listing,
description, and exhibit of the design modification(s), modifications may be
site changes, façade treatment, building materials, and a statement whether the
proposal complies with the previously approved applicable design standards.
         b.   The designated Design Professional shall draft a recommendation
outlining the following: if the design modification meets the intent of the
IID, is an unsubstantial, a minor change, or a major change.
         c.   The PDSD Director shall make the final decision on the design
amendment or revision change.
(Am. Ord. 11246, 2/18/2015; Am. Ord. 11639, 4/23/2019; Am. Ord. 11640, 4/23/
2019; Am. Ord. 11732, 2/19/2020; Am. Ord. 11977, 12/20/2022)
5.12.7.   RIO NUEVO AREA (RNA) ZONING DESIGN STANDARDS
   A.   Applicability
      1.   This Section
5.12.7 applies to the developments  types listed in Section
5.12.4 and this Section.
      2.   The provisions of this Section
5.12.7 are mandatory for proposed development  of properties in the RNA under
existing underlying zoning.
   B.   Permitted Uses and Building Heights
      1.   Except as specifically amended or expanded in this Section
5.12.7, the development  regulations and standards of the underlying zoning
apply in the RNA, including the permitted land uses and building heights .
      2.   New drive-in or drive-through facilities are not permitted, except
for businesses located adjacent  to the freeway, or as approved through the
development  review process.
   C.   Building Design Standards
      Development  within the RNA is required to comply with the following
building design standards .
      1.   The proposed buildings shall respect the scale of those buildings
located in the development zone and serve as an orderly transition to a
different scale pursuant to Section
5.12.8.B, Development Transition Standards. Building heights with a vastly
different scale than those on adjacent  properties should have a transition in
scale to reduce and mitigate potential impacts. In areas undergoing change,
long range plans should be consulted for guidance as to appropriate heights;
      2.   All new construction must be consistent with the prevailing setback
existing within its development zone except that the PDSD Director may approve
a different setback than the prevailing setback upon a written finding during
the review process that a different setback is warranted by site conditions or
applicable development  design goals consistent with Section
5.12.1, Purpose, and the proposed setback will not be incompatible with
adjacent  properties, as defined in Section
11.4.2.A;
      3.   All new construction shall provide scale defining architectural
elements or details at the first two floor levels, such as windows, spandrels,
awnings, porticos, cornices, pilasters, columns, and balconies;
      4.    Every commercial building frontage shall provide a greater floor-
to-floor height (14' recommended) than the floors above. It shall have windows,
window displays, or visible activity within and adjacent to the building at the
ground floor level, with a minimum of 50 percent of the building  frontage
providing such features; commercial and/or retail uses are recommended where
economically viable.
      5.   A single plane of a façade at the street level may not be longer
than 50 feet without architectural relief or articulation by features such as
windows, trellises, and arcades;
      6.   Building façade design shall include pedestrian-scaled, down-
shielded, and glare controlled exterior building and window lighting;
      7.   The front doors of all commercial and government buildings shall be
visible from the street and visually highlighted by graphics, lighting,
marquees, or canopies;
      8.   Modifications to the exterior of historic buildings shall complement
the overall historic context of the Downtown and respect the architectural
integrity of the historic façade;
      9.   Buildings shall be designed to shield adjacent  buildings and public
rights-of-way from reflected heat and glare;
      10.   Safe and adequate vehicular parking areas designed to minimize
conflicts with pedestrians and bicycles shall be provided;
      11.   Adequate shade shall be provided for sidewalks and pedestrian
pathways, using shade structure or vegetation, where permitted by the City ;
      12.   Colors may conform to the overall color palette and context of the
Downtown area or may be used expressively to create visual interest, variety,
and street  rhythms . The rationale for an expressive or idiosyncratic use of
color shall be described in the site plan submittal;
      13.   New buildings shall use materials, patterns, and elements that
relate to the traditional context of the Downtown area;
      14.   Twenty-four-hour, street -level activity is encouraged by providing
a mixture of retail, office, and residential uses within each building ; and,
      15.   Primary public entries shall be directly accessed from a sidewalk
along a street rather than from a parking lot. Public access to commercial and
governmental buildings shall be provided at sidewalk grade. The primary floor
of, and access to, residential structures may be elevated. Secondary access may
be provided from off-street parking areas.
   D.   Site Design Standards
      1.   Vehicular Circulation
         a.   All parking area access lanes (PAALs)  adjacent  to buildings
shall have pedestrian circulation paths between the PAAL and the building ,
with a minimum width of six feet.
         b.   The locations of all points of vehicular ingress and egress shall
be perpendicular to the intersecting street . Points of ingress and egress
points shall be designed to minimize vehicular/pedestrian and vehicular/bicycle
conflicts. Adequate storage for vehicular queuing at parking facilities shall
be contained on site. Right turn bays are strongly discouraged. Points of
ingress and egress shall be minimized wherever possible. Additional temporary
ingress and egress locations may be permitted for parking structures when
occasional high peak period traffic flows (i.e., parking facilities for event
venues) are anticipated.
      2.   Parking
         a.   General Parking standards  are listed in Section
7.4. Some properties in the RNA may also be located in the Downtown Parking
District , which allows a reduction in the number of parking spaces as provided
in Section
7.4.5.B.
         b.   Screening of Parking All new parking shall be designed so that
vehicles are not visible from the adjoining  street level, through
incorporation of pedestrian arcades, occupied space, or display space.
         c.   Employee Parking Employee parking for all uses should be provided
at remote locations in order to maximize the availability of space for
development .
      3.   Plazas and Open Space
         The fundamental objective of the design standards  in this Section
5.12.7.D.3 is to encourage public and private investments to enhance the
character and function of Downtown's pedestrian environment.
         a.   Plazas and Pedestrian Nodes
            Five percent of the gross floor area of new construction shall be
provided in public plazas or courtyards. Open space plazas, courtyards, and
patios are landscaped outdoor areas designed to accommodate multiple uses, from
large gatherings of the people for performing arts to smaller gatherings. The
plazas and courtyards will be one of the ways that spaces and uses can be
linked. The requirement of this section may be waived or reduced by the PDSD
Director upon a written finding during the review process that the development
enhances the downtown pedestrian environment even with a smaller percent or
elimination of the requirement.
         b.   Viewshed Corridors
            Views of all historic properties and all natural elements
surrounding the Downtown should be considered during design. Plazas,
courtyards, and open spaces shall be sited to include views to other public
spaces, where feasible.
         c.   Linkages (Physical and Visual)
            Neighborhood linkages shall be maintained throughout Downtown.
      4.   Streetscape
         a.   Streetscapes must be consistent with the Streetscape Design
Policy. In streetscape design, priority is given to pedestrians.
         b.   Shade
            Shade shall be provided for at least 50 percent of all sidewalks
and pedestrian pathways as measured at 12:00 p.m. on June 21 when the sun is
80° above the horizon (based on 32°N Latitude). Shade may be provided by
arcades, canopies, or shade structures , provided they and their location and
design characteristics are compatible with the prevailing and design context of
the street and the architectural integrity of the building . Deciduous trees,
as proposed in the Downtown Comprehensive Street Tree Plan, are encouraged to
supplement existing evergreen trees. The use of plantings and shade structures
in the City  right-of-way are permitted to meet this standard with the approval
of the Department of Transportation. The shade provided by a building may serve
to meet this standard.
   E.   Demolition of Historic Structures in the RNA
      In the RNA, demolition of the following types of structures is reviewed
in accordance with Section
5.8.10, Demolition of Historic Properties, Landmarks, and Structures:
      1.   Structures that are listed in the National Register of Historic
Places or the Arizona Register of Historic Places.
      2.   Structures that are eligible for listing in the National or State
registers.
      3.   Structures designated as City  Historic Landmarks .
   F.   RNA Review
      1.   Pre-Application Conference
         A pre-application conference with the PDSD staff is required to
determine whether the application meets the design standards  and requirements
of the RNA.
      2.   Submittal and Staff Review
         Upon submittal, the PDSD staff reviews the application for compliance
with the RNA standards  and makes recommendations to the PDSD Director whether
to approve or reject the application.
      3.   Review by the Design Review Board (DRB)
         The Design Review Board (DRB) reviews all applications for compliance
with the RNA standards  in conjunction with the underlying zoning, and makes
findings and recommendations to the PDSD Director. Applications are scheduled
with the DRB at the first available meeting.
      4.   Tucson-Pima County Historical Commission (TPCHPC) Review 
         The TPCHC Plans Review Subcommittee reviews applications that propose
exterior changes to buildings on or eligible for inclusion on the National or
Arizona Register of Historic Places. The TPCHC Plans Review Subcommittee makes
findings and recommendations to the PDSD Director.
      5.   Decision
         The PDSD Director makes the decision whether to approve or deny the
application after receiving recommendations from staff, DRB, and, when
applicable, the TPCHC Plans Review Subcommittee.
      6.   Notice of Decision
         Notice of the decision must be provided to the applicant within three
(3) days of the date of the decision and the appropriate HPZ Advisory Board, if
applicable, and the plans review subcommittee.
      7.   Appeals
         If an application is denied, the applicant may appeal the decision to
the Board of Adjustment in accordance with Section
3.10.2. Appeals must be submitted to the PDSD within five days of the notice of
decision.
(Am. Ord. 11246, 2/18/2015 ; Am. Ord. 11977, 12/20/2022 )
5.12.8.   GENERAL IID ZONING OPTION DESIGN STANDARDS
   An IID Plan under the IID zoning option design standards  must demonstrate
compliance with the following:
   A.   IID Land Uses
      Unless specifically stated otherwise elsewhere in Section 5.12, a
proposed development  project using the IID zoning option must meet one of
following two requirements:
      1.   Permitted land uses are limited to those listed in Table 5.12-IID-
1 below:
TABLE 5.12-
IID-1
LAND USE
LAND USE
TYPE
Commercial Services Group Industrial Use Group
TABLE 5.12-
IID-1
LAND USE
LAND USE
TYPE
Commercial Services Group              Industrial Use Group
Administrative and Professional Office Craft work
Alcoholic Beverage Service             Retail Trade Group
Entertainment                          General Merchandise Sales
Food Service                           Food and Beverage Sales
Personal Services                      Residential Group
Travelers’ Accommodation, Lodging    Attached Family Dwelling
Civic Use Group                        Multifamily Dwelling
Civic Assembly                         Group Dwellings, pursuant to Section
                                       5.12.6.K
Cultural Use                           Other Uses
Educational Use: Instructional School  Mixed Uses are limited to a combination
                                       of
Educational Use: Post-secondary        Residential and any other uses listed in
Institution                            this table.
Religious Use
 
         2.   Additional Permitted Uses
            Additional permitted uses include any use permitted in the
underlying zone for the property, provided the PDSD Director finds the proposed
use to be in accordance with Section
5.12.1, Purpose.
         3.   Exceptions
            a.   Permitted land uses for the Downtown Links Subdistrict (DLS)
are listed in Section
5.12.11.C.
            b.   Permitted land uses for property where the underlying zoning
is R-1 are limited to the land uses allowed in the R-1 zone.
            c.   Automotive Service and Repair uses and Personal Storage uses
are prohibited.
            d.   Residential development is permitted where the underlying
zoning of the property is P-I, I-1, or I-2.
   B.   Streetscape Design
      Streetscape design must comply with the street design standards  in the
Technical Manual and the Streetscape Design Policy.
      1.   Pedestrian-orientation
         Projects shall be pedestrian-oriented and comply with all of the
following standards :
         a.   New construction shall have architectural elements/details at the
first two floor levels;
         b.   Buildings shall provide windows, window displays, or visible
activity on the ground floor for at least 50 percent of frontage;
         c.   A single plane of façade shall be no longer than fifty feet
without architectural detail;
         d.   Front doors shall be visible or identifiable from the street and
visually highlighted by graphics, lighting, or similar features;
         e.    Uses that encourage street level pedestrian activity are
preferred on the first floor of a structure of a multistory building . This may
include, but is not limited to, Commercial Services, Retail Trade uses, etc.;
It is encouraged to have a greater floor-to-floor height (14' recommended) for
the first level than the floors above;
         f.   Construction and maintenance of sidewalks must be done in
compliance with the City's Streetscape Design Policy. Existing sidewalk widths
shall be maintained so as to provide effective, accessible, connectivity to
adjoining properties. Sidewalks may be widened to accommodate a project's
design characteristics. Where no sidewalks exist, sidewalks shall be provided.
Outdoor seating and dining areas and landscaping may be located in the sidewalk
area where safe and effective sidewalk width around the design feature can be
provided;
         g.   To the extent practicable, bus pull-outs shall be provided where
bus stops are currently located; and
         h.   If drive-through service is proposed, it shall not interfere with
pedestrian access to the site from the right-of-way .
      2.   Shade
         a.   Except as provided below, shade shall be provided for at least
50% of all sidewalks and pedestrian access paths as measured at 12:00 p.m. on
June 21 when the sun is 80 degrees above the horizon. Shade may be provided by
trees, arcades, canopies, or shade structures provided their location and
design characteristics are compatible with the historic and design context of
the street and the architectural integrity of the building . The use of
plantings and shade structures in the City  right-of-way is permitted to meet
this standard with the approval of the Transportation Department. The shade
provided by a building may serve to meet this standard.
         b.   Exception
            The PDSD Director may approve an IID Plan providing less than 50%
shade where compliance is not feasible due to a project site's location and/or
building orientation and the applicant has made a reasonable attempt to comply
with this standard.
   C.   Development Transition Standards  
      The purpose of the Development Transition Standards is to mitigate
excessive visual, noise, odor, vibration intrusion, and other similar public
health and safety concerns that may be created by the proposed project .
      1.   Applicability
         Developing sites that abut an affected single family or duplex
dwelling shall comply with this section. For purposes of the IID, the following
terms and examples describe elements of applicable transitional areas:
         a.   "Affected residential property" refers to an existing detached
single-family or duplex dwelling that is adjacent  to a developing site;
         b.   "High density residential" refers to residential development
that is neither existing single-family detached nor attached dwellings;
         c.   Examples of applicable transitional areas include a
nonresidential developing site adjacent  to existing single-family detached or
attached dwellings within a subdivision, or a developing high density
residential site adjacent  to existing single-family detached or attached
dwellings within a subdivision; and,
         d.   For projects within the DCS, the Development Transition Standards
apply only to those projects  adjacent  to affected residential properties
outside the DCS boundaries.
      2.   Mitigation of Taller Structures
         Compliance with the following standards  is required where the
developing site has taller buildings than adjacent  affected residential
properties:
         a.   Within the GIIS and DCS, the maximum building height is 25 feet
within 30 feet of the property line adjacent  to an affected residential
property. Proposed buildings may be developed to the maximum height permitted
by the underlying zone  or as permitted by the IID Subdistrict, whichever is
applicable, when the building is 30 feet or more from the property line
adjacent  to an affected residential property;
         b.   Building Bulk Reduction
            If a building façade faces a property line adjacent  to a single-
family detached or duplex residential property, the PDSD Director may require
bulk reduction. The Design Professional shall make a finding and
recommendation, after consulting with the DRC and/or Historic Commission if
applicable, that the proposed design provides an effective way of breaking up
the mass so the building mass of the façade is less imposing.
         c.   Windows at or above the second story of a structure shall be
located or treated to reduce views into adjacent  affected residential
property's buildings and yard areas;
         d.   Balconies shall be oriented away from affected residential
property or use a screening device to reduce views in to the rear or side yards
of the affected residential property.
         e.   The developing site's buildings shall be oriented so as to reduce
views onto an affected residential property; and
         f.   Buffers and/or screening consistent with the purpose of this
section shall be provided between a developing site and affected residential
properties and shall include features such as, but not limited to, landscaping,
walls, and architecturally decorative features.
      3.   Mitigation of Service Areas 
         Potential nuisance or noisy areas shall be oriented away from affected
residential property, such as by placing service areas for loading and garbage
disposal between the developing site's buildings , behind opaque barriers, or
by using architectural or landscaping treatments that effectively reduce
nuisance impacts from service areas. The service area shall be mitigated to
reduce the noise and view of the service features, reduce the emission of
offensive odors to owners or occupants of adjacent  properties or create a
nuisance or hazard beyond the property lines of the project site , and prevent
vibrations that are discernible beyond the property lines of the project site .
      4.   Mitigation of Parking Facilities and Other Areas
         Where the site has parking areas or an area with noise and outdoor
lighting features, the areas shall be screened from affected residential
property by a combination of a wall or opaque non-chain link fence with a
vegetative hedge or a row of trees that shall be dense enough to screen views
onto the development  site. An alternative treatment may be used, such as using
architectural or landscaping treatments that effectively reduce nuisance
impacts from parking facilities and other areas. Where there is a finding that
the vegetative screen will be opaque, the requirement of a masonry wall may be
waived by the PDSD Director.
   D.   Alternative Compliance
      1.   The PDSD Director may approve an urban design best practice option
for compliance with Section
5.12.8.A, Streetscape Design, and Section
5.12.8.B, Development Transition Standards.
      2.   For purposes of this section, urban design best practices may
include urban design studies approved for the City of Tucson, adopted urban
design standards  for a downtown area in an Arizona city of comparable size or
a city in the Southwest of comparable size, books written by urban design
experts or endorsed by a professional organization, such as the American
Institute of Architects, addressing downtown development , or any comparable
report, study, or standards  recommended by the City's  Design Professional and
approved by the PDSD Director.
   E.   Utilities
      Plans shall include information on the layout and demonstrate
availability of utilities such as water, wastewater, natural gas, electric, and
telecommunication utilities.
   F.   Parking
      1.   Parking spaces may be located as follows:
         a.   On site; or
         b.   Off-site within ¼ of a mile of the project site under a shared
parking agreement that is approved by the City .
      2.   Required vehicle and bicycle parking may be reduced pursuant to an
IID Parking Plan in accordance with Section
7.4.5.A, except as modified as follows:
         a.   Section
7.4.5.A.3 in Permitted Uses and Types of Development  does not apply. An IID
Parking Plan may be used to reduce required residential parking.
         b.   Bike parking shall be provided when motor vehicle parking is
provided. The PDSD Director may reduce the required number of bike parking
spaces depending on the use, setting, and intensity of the proposal.
         c.    Section
7.4.5.A.6, Review and Approval Procedures, does not apply. Review and approval
of IID Parking Plan shall be done as part of the IID review process per Section
5.12.6, IID Plan Review and Approval Procedures, under the IID Zoning Option.
         d.   Section
7.4.5.B, Downtown Parking District, does not apply.
      3.   Where Parking is provided, the parking area must comply with the
standards  of Section
7.4.6.C and D.
      4.   Parking must be in a parking structure with the ground floor of the
parking structure screened from view.
         a.   Exception
             Parking may be located on a surface parking lot if it is
recommended by the Design Professional and determined by the PDSD Director to
be impracticable to be located elsewhere and other options are not available.
The Design Professional and the PDSD Director will look more favorably on
surface parking in the Greater IID, where densities are lower.
         b.    Parking may be located on a surface parking lot if it is
recommended by the Design Professional and determined to meet the purpose of
the IID per Section
5.12.1, by the PDSD Director to be impracticable to be located elsewhere and
other options are not available. If located onsite, parking areas must be
located at the rear or side of the building .
         c.   Changes of use and expansion of existing structures may use the
site's current parking configuration.
         d.   Parking structures shall be designed so that parked vehicles are
screened from view through incorporation of design elements including, but not
limited to, landscaping, pedestrian arcades, occupied space, or display space.
         e.   It is recognized that projects may be proposed in phases. In the
event that Phase 1 of a project is unable to provide structured parking,
temporary surface parking may be acceptable, if it is recommended by the Design
Professional and determined to meet the purpose of the IID, per Section
5.12.1, by the PDSD Director. The applicant must demonstrate that there is a
good faith effort to provide the structured parking in future phases. If, after
five years, the temporary parking is still in place, the PDSD Director has the
right to review the surface parking approval and grant an extension if
warranted.
      5.   Special IID Parking Agreement
         Where a developer can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the PDSD that
the parking options provided for in this Section are not feasible, and the City
makes a specific finding that the project will have significant economic
development  value for the IID Sub-District in which it will be located, the
following parking options are allowed as follows:
         a.   A percentage of long-term residential parking may be located in a
City  public parking garage by an agreement with Park Tucson if the project is
of significant economic benefit to the City  to allow this option.
         b.   The agreement must be reviewed by PDSD, the Design Professional ,
Park Tucson and approved by the City  Manager.
   G.   Multi-zone Parcels
      Where a development  parcel  contains more than one zoning district ,
uses and building massing may be distributed across the zoning districts on the
parcel , provided that the development  complies with the design standards  in
Section
5.12.8.B to mitigate the impact of the new development  on existing, less
intensely developed adjacent  parcels .
   H.   Affordable Housing
      1.    Purpose and Applicability
         To encourage the provision of housing for low- to moderate-income,
disabled and elderly residents, incentives are offered in exchange for the
incorporation of Affordable Housing Units into a project . To be eligible for
these incentives, the following criteria must be met:
         a.   Only projects with a minimum of ten (10) dwelling units, or
projects adding at least ten (10) dwelling units to an existing project, shall
be eligible for density relief.
         b.   All of the Affordable Housing Units shall be located within a
single project.
         c.   Affordable Housing Units shall be incorporated throughout the
project and shall not be distinguishable in any manner from market-rate units,
including square footage, access to amenities, location, grouping, or exterior
design.
         d.   At least fifteen (15) percent of the total number of dwelling
units in the project shall be Affordable Housing Units for households earning
80 percent of AMI or less. (Fractions are rounded up or down to the nearest
whole number.)
      2.   Density Relief and Maximum Building Heights
         a.   A project featuring Affordable Housing Units that meets the
criteria in Section 5.12.8.G.1:
            (1)   Are exempt from maximum allowable residential density
restrictions pursuant to applicable IID development standards.
            (2)   Building height may be increased up to:
               (a)   60 feet or the maximum height of what is allowed by the
underlying zoning in the Greater Infill Incentive Subdistrict (GIIS).
               (b)   75 feet or the maximum height of what is allowed by the
underlying zoning in the Downtown Core Subdistrict (DCS).
         b.    Except as otherwise noted, projects featuring Affordable Housing
Units shall comply with all other requirements of Section
5.12.
      3.   Terms of Affordability
         a.    The term of affordability for multi-family residential units for
rent or lease is fifty (50) years from C of O.
         b.   The term of affordability for for-sale condominium units is
thirty (30) years from C of O.
      4.   The Project developer or manager shall provide an annual report to
the HCD Director verifying the units qualify as Affordable Housing Units . The
report shall identify the income of persons residing in the Affordable Housing
Units and the housing costs, including rents, mortgages, utilities and
association fees being charged, and any other relevant information requested by
the HCD Director to verify the Project is being utilized for affordable
housing.
      5.   Compliance measures can be required at the time of approval,
including but not limited to contracts, restrictive covenants, deed
restrictions and stipulated penalties.
(Am. Ord. 11246, 2/18/2015; Am. Ord. 11640, 4/23/2019; Am. Ord. 11977, 12/20/
2022)
5.12.9.   GREATER INFILL INCENTIVE SUBDISTRICT (GIIS)
   A.   GIIS Land Uses
       Permitted land uses in the GIIS are determined by Section
5.12.8.A.
   B.   Modifications of Underlying Development  Standards  
      Except as provided in Subsection C below, the requirements in the
following sections of the UDC may be modified up to 25 percent of the dimension
amount permitted by the underlying zoning:
Article 6, Dimensional Standards and Measurements; Section
7.4, Motor Vehicle & Bicycle Parking; Section
7.5, Off- Street Loading; Section
7.6, Landscaping and Screening. Section
7.7, Native Plant Preservation may not be modified.
   C.   Exceptions
      The following sections of the UDC may be modified in excess of 25 percent
to the extent specified below upon findings by the PDSD Director that the
modification is consistent with Section
5.12.1, Purpose.
      1.   Article 6, Dimensional Standards and Measurements
         a.   Building Height  
            (1)   For all development other than residential uses in the
underlying I-1 and I-2 zones , building height may be increased up to 60 feet
unless the current zoning allows a greater height or where the IID Plan’s
Development Transition Standards as provided in Section
5.12.8.B require less.
            (2)   Building height of residential uses in the underlying I-1 and
I-2 zones , shall follow building height requirements of the R-3 zone district,
and may be modified in accordance with Section 5.12.9.B.
            (3)   Exception: affordable housing projects are governed by the
standards of UDC Section
5.12.8.H.
         b.   Street Perimeter Yard 
            Perimeter yard requirements may be reduced or waived if the PDSD
Director determines that the request is consistent with the Major Streets and
Route Plan . The Director of the Department of Transportation and Mobility, may
modify the Major Streets and Routes setback if there is adequate sight
visibility, no traffic safety issue is created, the reduction complies with the
standards of Section
5.12.8.B, and the setback does not create a future roadway expansion problem.
This provision may apply to Major Streets and Routes setbacks in the DCS and
DLS.
         c.   Residential Density
            (1)   For all development other than residential in the underlying
I-1 and I-2 zones , no residential density  standards apply.
            (2)   Residential density calculations for residential uses in the
underlying I-1 and I-2 zones , shall follow density requirements of the R-
3 zone district.
            (3)   Exception: affordable housing projects are governed by the
standards of UDC Section
5.12.8.H.
      2.   Section
7.4, Motor Vehicle and Bicycle Parking
         a.   Parking
            Parking as required by Section
7.4, Motor Vehicle and Bicycle Parking, may be reduced up to 25 percent.
Parking may be decreased by more than 25 percent per a written agreement with
the Park Tucson, or in accordance with Section
5.12.6.M, IID Parking Plan, if the analysis and findings show the proposed
parking is adequate.
         b.   Accessible Parking and Bicycle Facilities
            (1)   The number and location of accessible parking spaces required
by the City's adopted Building Code shall not be reduced or eliminated and
shall be based on the number of motor vehicle parking spaces required prior to
any modification.
            (2)   Bicycle facilities may not be reduced or eliminated and must
be based on the number of bicycle spaces required by Section
7.4.8 for the use.
         c.   Location
            Parking may be provided by any one of the following options or by a
combination of the following options:
            (1)   On-site;
            (2)   Off-site within one-fourth of a mile of the project site
through a shared parking agreement with the City ;
            (3)   With the approval of the Department of Transportation,
proposals for non-residential uses may provide up to five on-street spaces on a
collector or arterial street where parking is permitted.
      3.   Section
7.5, Off-Street Loading
         Off-street loading zone  standards  may be reduced or waived if PDSD
and the Department of Transportation determine that no traffic safety issue is
created.
      4.   Solid Waste Collection
         On-site refuse collection container standards  governing access, type,
and location may be modified if the Environmental Services Department
determines that no public health or traffic safety issue is created.
      5.   Section
7.6, Landscaping and Screening
         a.   Section
7.7, Native Plant Preservation may not be modified.
         b.   Except as required by Section
5.12.8.B, Development Transition Standards, a complete or partial exception to
Section
7.6, Landscaping and Screening Standards, may be granted if shade is provided
for pedestrians and customers, such as along sidewalks, pedestrian circulation
paths, and outdoor patios, in accordance with Section
5.12.6.A.2. The landscaping requirement may also be waived by the PDSD Director
based on a written finding that the waiver is necessary to preserve the
prevailing setback.
         c.   Any one or more of the following types of landscaping and
improvements may be used to comply with this section:
            (1)   Existing landscaping;
            (2)   Shade trees in the right-of-way ;
            (3)   Green walls or green roofs; and/or
            (4)   Shade structures , such as awnings.
      6.   Pedestrian Access 
         Alternative pedestrian access that creates connectivity between public
entrances to the project and abutting sidewalks may be allowed as long as no
safety hazard is created. All pedestrian access shall conform to the
accessibility standards  of the City's adopted Building Code.
(Am. Ord. 11246, 2/18/2015; Am. Ord. 11977, 12/20/2022)
5.12.10.   DOWNTOWN CORE SUBDISTRICT (DCS)
   A.   Permitted Uses 
      With the exception of detached single-family dwellings, which are not
allowed, permitted uses in the DCS are  listed in Section
5.12.8 .A.
   B.   Standards 
      The following apply to all development  within the DCS:
      1.   Building Height
         a.   Maximum building height may be increased up to 60 feet unless the
current zoning allows a greater height or where the approved IID Plan’s
Development Transition Standards requires less.
         b.   In the underlying I-1 and I-2 Zone , uses permitted in the DCS
under Section
5.12.8.A, other than residential uses, above are limited to a maximum 75 foot
building height .
         c.   Residential uses in the underlying I-1 and I-2 zone , are limited
to a maximum 60 foot building height .
         d.   Exception: affordable housing projects are governed by the
standards of UDC Section
5.12.8.H.
      2.   Residential Density
         a.   Residential uses in the underlying I-1 and I-2 zones shall follow
residential density requirements of the C-3 zone district.
         b.   Residential uses where the underlying zoning is not the I-1 or I-
2 zones , shall follow residential density requirements of the underlying zone
.
         c.   Exception: affordable housing projects are governed by the
standards of UDC Section
5.12.8.H.
      3.   When provided, landscaping shall be in accordance with the City's
drought-tolerant plant list;
      4.   Bicycle parking shall be provided when motor vehicle parking is
provided. The required number of bicycle parking spaces may be reduced pursuant
to an IID Parking Plan, Section
5.12.6.M when bicycle parking is required per this section;
      5.   Where applicable, applicants are strongly encouraged to comply with
Section
7.7, Native Plant Preservation; and,
      6.   All applications shall be in accordance with Section
5.12.7.C.6, .9, .12, .13, and .14, and Section
5.12.7.D.3. Open space is defined in the DCS as stated in Section
5.12.11.B.6, Downtown Links Subdistrict.
   C.   Exemptions
      Except as provided in this section, development  within the DCS is exempt
from the following standards  unless the PDSD Director makes a finding that
public safety and health would be jeopardized:
      1.   Section
5.4, Major Streets and Routes Setback Zone;
      2.   Minimum perimeter yard standard as provided in Section
6.3, except when required by Section
5.12.8.B, Development Transition Standards;
      3.   Maximum lot coverage standard as provided in Section
6.3;
      4.   Minimum lot size standard as provided in Section
6.3,
      5.   Section
7.4, Motor Vehicle and Bicycle Parking, except as provided in Section
5.12. 8.E;
      6.   Section
7.5, Off-Street Loading;
      7.   Section
7.6, Landscaping and Screening Standards, except as required by Section
5.12.8.B, Development Transition Standards; and,
      8.   Section
7.7, Native Plant Preservation, except when the property includes a drainage
corridor where native plants are present or when the property is adjacent  to a
drainage corridor and remnant native plants are present on the project site .
   D.   Other Permitted Modifications
      1.   Pedestrian Access
         Alternative pedestrian access that creates connectivity between public
entrances to the project and abutting sidewalks may be allowed as long as no
safety hazard is created. All pedestrian access shall conform to the City's
adopted Building Code.
      2.   Solid Waste Collection
         On-site refuse collection container standards  governing access, type,
and location may be modified if the Environmental Services Department
determines that no public health or traffic safety issue is created.
(Am. Ord. 11246, 2/18/2015; Am. Ord. 11977, 12/20/2022)
5.12.11.   DOWNTOWN LINKS SUBDISTRICT (DLS)
FIGURE 5.12-DLS-A: MAP OF DOWNTOWN LINKS SUB-DISTRICT
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-14984.png]
 
   A.   DLS Areas and Sub-Areas
      The DLS is divided into the following Areas:
      1.   Toole Avenue Area (TAA)
         a.   Toole Avenue Sub-Area (TAS)
         b.   UA Annex Sub-Area (UAS)
         c.   El Presidio Sub-Area (EPS)
      2.   Warehouse Triangle Area (WTA)
      3.   Fourth Avenue Area (FAA)
         a.   Fourth Avenue Historic Sub-Area (FHS)
         b.   Fourth Avenue Sub-Area (FAS)
      4.   Iron Horse Area (IHA)
         a.   Armory Park and Iron Horse, Mixed Use Sub-Area (AIH-MS)
         b.   Iron Horse, Low Density Residential Sub- Area (IH-RS)
      5.   Stone/Sixth Area (SSA)
         a.   Stone Sub-Area (STS)
         b.   Sixth Street Sub-Area (SSS)
   B.   Required Use and Development  Standards and Notations
      1.   Required use and development  standards  in the DLS Sub-Areas are
set forth in the Tables and Diagrams for each DLS Area. Uses that are similar
in nature and intensity as those listed may be permitted by Special Exception
through the procedures for Special Exceptions in Section
4.3.2, provided the PDSD Director finds the proposed use to be in accordance
with Section
5.12.1, Purpose.
      2.   The numbers in the Tables following a use or a standard correspond
to the specific requirements of that use or standard (see Tables in each Sub-
Area)
      3.   The letters in the Tables correspond to the letters in the Diagrams
in each Sub-Area.
      4.   Illustrations and Figures used in the DLS are not regulatory unless
referred to by a standards  table.
      5.   To encourage innovative design solutions, Section
5.12.8.C may be used for an urban design best practice option.
      6.   Open space refers to public, private, and common area locations.
Balconies are not considered open space. Common areas may include areas used by
tenants or customers and/or the public where practicable. The percentage of
open space in all Area and Sub- Area developments  may be calculated as a
combination of all three types of open space. Open space is encouraged at the
street level. Pedestrian access to open space may be required as determined
practicable by the PDSD Director.
      7.   In the event that a development has ownership of property on both
sides of an alley (named or unnamed), the indicated setbacks and bulk reduction
prescribed below, may be waived. The waiver can be issued if it is warranted by
best practices, it does not significantly impact privacy, and has been
recommended by the Design Professional and approved by the PDSD Director.
   C.   Permitted Uses for all Areas and Sub-Areas in the DLS
      Permitted land uses under the DLS zoning option are shown in Table 5.12-
DLS-1 for each DLS Area; Use Specific Standards for Table 5.12-DLS-1 are listed
below.
      1.   In the UAS all land uses must comply with the standards  as set
forth in the I-1 underlying zoning except that residential uses for C-3 zoning
are allowed. Automotive service uses are not permitted.
      2.   Uses similar in nature and intensity to the uses permitted in the
DLS may be permitted as a Special Exception land use pursuant to the Special
Exception Process under Section
3.4.2.
TABLE 5.12-DLS-1
PERMITTED USES
LAND USE TYPE PERMITTED USES IN THE FOLLOWING DLS AREAS
             TAS UAS EPS WTA FAA AIH- MS IH-RS STS SSS
COMMERCIAL SERVICES GROUP
PERMITTED USES
LAND USE TYPE   PERMITTED USES IN THE FOLLOWING DLS AREAS
               TAS    UAS    EPS    WTA    FAA    AIH-   IH-RS  STS    SSS
                                                   MS
COMMERCIAL SERVICES GROUP
Administrative
and             P      P      P      P      P      P (1)        P      P
Professional
Offices
Alcoholic
Beverage Sale:
Microbrewery as P      P      P      P      P      P (1)        P (1)  P
an accessory
use to this
group
Animal Services P (2)  P (2)  P (2)  P (2)  P (2)  P (2)        P (2)  P (2)
Commercial      P (3)  P (3)  P (3)  P (3)  P (3)              P (3)  P (3)
Recreation
Day Care        P      P      P      P      P      P (1)        P      P
Entertainment   P (3)  P (3,  P (3,  P (3,  P (3,              P (3,  P (3,
                       4)     4)     4)     4)                   4)     4)
Financial       P (5,  P (5,  P (5,  P (5,  P (5,  P (1,        P (1,  P (5,
Services        6)     6)     6)     6)     6)     5, 6)         5, 6)  6)
Food Service    P (7,  P (7,  P (7,  P (7,  P (7,  P (1,        P (1,  P (7,
                8)     8)     8)     8)     8)     7, 8)         7, 8)  8)
Medical
Services -      P (9)  P (9)  P (9)  P (9)  P (9)  P (9)        P (9)  P (9)
Outpatient
Parking         P      P (12) P (12) P (12)                   P      P (12)
Personal        P      P      P      P      P      P (1)        P      P
Services
Research and
Product         P (10) P (10) P (10) P (10) P (10) P            P (10) P (10)
Development
Technical       P      P      P      P      P                  P      P
Services
Trade Service
and Repair-     P      P      P      P      P      P (1)        P      P
Minor
Transportation
Service- Land   P (11) P (11) P (11) P (11) P (11)             P (11) P (11)
Carrier
Travelers                                   P (1,
Accommodations, P (13) P (13) P (13) P (13) 13,    P (13) P (13)        
Lodging                                     14)
RETAIL USE GROUP
Food and        P (5)  P (5)  P (5)  P (5)  P (5)  P (1,        P (5)  P (5)
Beverage Sales                                     5, 18)
General         P (5,  P (5,  P (5,  P (5,  P (5,  P (1,         P (5,  P (5,
Merchandise     15,    15,    15,    15,    15,    5, 15,       15,    15, 16,
Sales           16,    16,    16,    16,    16,    16,           16,    17)
                17)    17)    17)    17)    17)    17)           17)
Vehicle Rental  P (12) P (12) P (12) P (12) P (12)             P (12) P (12)
CIVIC USE GROUP
Civic Assembly  P      P      P      P      P      P            P      P
Cultural Use    P      P      P      P      P      P            P      P
Educational
Uses Post-
secondary       P      P      P      P      P                  P      P
Institution or
Instructional
School
Membership      P      P      P      P      P                  P      P
Organization
Postal Services P      P      P      P      P      P      P      P      P
Religious Use   P      P      P      P      P      P      P      P      P
Protective      P      P      P      P      P      P            P      P
Services
RECREATIONAL USE GROUP
Parks and       P (3)  P (3)        P (3)  P (3)  P (20) P (20) P (3)  P (3)
Recreation
RESIDENTIAL USE GROUP
Family Dwelling P (28) P (28) P (28) P (28) P (28) P (28) P      P (28) P (28)
Group Dwelling  P (29) P (29) P (29) P (29) P (29)             P (29) P (29)
Artist Studio/  P (19) P (19) P (19) P (19) P (19) P (19) P (19) P (19) P (19)
Res.
Residential
Care Services-
Adult Care      P (21, P (21, P (21, P (21, P (21, P (21,        P (21, P (21,
Service or      23)    23)    23)    23)    23)    23)          23)    23)
Physical or
Behavioral
Health
Residential                                        P (1,
Care Services/  P (22) P (22, P (22, P (22, P (22, 22,          P (22, P (22,
Rehabilitation         23)    23)    23)    23)    23)           23)    23)
Services
Home Occupation P (24) P (24) P (24) P (24) P (24) P (24) P (24) P (24) P (24)
INDUSTRIAL GROUP
Craft work      P      P      P      P      P      P      P      P      P
General         P (25) P (25) P (25) P(25)  P (25)             P (25) P (25)
Manufacturing
Perishable                                  P (1)
Goods           P (26) P(26)  P(26)  P(26)  (26)         P(26)  P(26)  P(26)
Manufacturing -
Precision       P (25) P (25) P (25) P (25) P (25)             P (25) P (25)
Manufacturing
Primary         P (25) P (25) P (25) P (25) P (25)             P (25) P (25)
Manufacturing
Salvaging or    P (27) P (27) P (27) P (27) P (27)             P (27) P (27)
Recycling
 
   D.   Use Specific Standards for Table 5.12-DLS-1
      1.   Permitted only on Ninth Street in the AIH-MS. Permitted only in
Stone Avenue in STS.
      2.   The use must be entirely contained in the interior of the building
and is not permitted in any yard or patio.
      3.   Large recreational facilities of more than 25,000 sq. ft. of floor
area (including gross floor area and any outside areas providing service to the
public) are not allowed.
      4.   Circuses, carnivals, or tent shows are not allowed.
      5.   Drive-through services are not allowed.
      6.   Non-chartered financial institution facilities, such as payday loan
facilities are not allowed.
      7.   Drive-in and drive-through restaurants are not allowed.
      8.   Soup kitchens are not allowed.
      9.   Blood donor centers are not allowed.
      10.   Only scientific, non-industrial type of research and development is
allowed.
      11.   The use is limited to public transit stops.
      12.    No surface parking lots . Vehicle parking must be located in a
structure . It is recognized that projects may be proposed in phases. In the
event that Phase 1 of a project is unable to provide structured parking,
temporary surface parking may be acceptable, if it is recommended by the Design
Professional and determined to meet the purpose of the IID, per Section
5.12.1, by the PDSD Director. The applicant must demonstrate that there is a
good faith effort to provide the structured parking in future phases. If, after
five years, the temporary parking is still in place, the PDSD Director has the
right to review the surface parking approval and grant an extension if
warranted.
      13.   Hotels may not provide individual room access from the exterior of
the building .
      14.   Limited to Bed & Breakfast only. Permitted for up to 20 guests for
a maximum of 14 days. No more than 20 sleeping rooms may be used by guests.
Meals may be served only to guests staying at the facility. Separate cooking
facilities in guest rooms are prohibited.
      15.   Display or storage of fertilizer, manure, or other odorous material
is not allowed.
      16.   Gas stations are not allowed.
      17.   Motor vehicle sales are not allowed.
      18.   No alcoholic beverage sales.
      19.   Adequate measures required to assure the health, safety and welfare
of the occupants or adjacent  residents' property in relation to any industrial
process, use or storage. Additionally, appropriate building code occupancy
separation must be ensured. On-site sale of the artists' products, including
occasional shows of the artist' works are permitted secondary uses.
      20.   Limited to Neighborhood Parks Recreation. In addition to City of
Tucson/Pima County Outdoor Lighting Code Chapter 6, Section 601- 603,
Recreational Facilities, any outdoor lighting associated with the use must be
located and directed to eliminate glare toward streets and adjoining
residential areas.
      21.   Care is permitted for a maximum of 20 residents.
      22.   Care is permitted for a maximum of 10 residents.
      23.   If licensing is required by the state of Arizona for the use, proof
of such licensure must be provided.
      24.   Permitted as an accessory use to a Family Dwelling, excluding Day
Care and Traveler's Accommodation Lodging. The use may not create any nuisance,
hazard or other offensive condition, such as that resulting from noise, smoke,
dust, odors or other noxious emissions.
      25.   Permitted as an accessory use to the Commercial Services and Retail
use groups, and limited to 50% of the gross floor area.
      26.   Limited to baked goods, confectionary other food products
manufacturing.
      27.   Permitted as an accessory land use to religious, commercial
services, retail trade use groups and educational use. Salvaging and recycling
is limited to recycling collection bins and to empty household product
containers, such as, but not limited to, aluminum cans, glass and plastic
bottles, and newspaper.
      28.   For Family Dwelling uses, only Multifamily Dwelling and Single-
family Attached  Developments  are allowed.
      29.   Group Dwellings that meet the IID definition for that term in
Section
11.4.8.G require Mayor and Council approval pursuant to Section
3.4.4 Mayor and Council Special Exception Procedure.
   E.   Downtown Links Roadway
      Development  under the Downtown Links Sub-District portion or the UDC is
prohibited within the right-of-way of the future downtown links roadway project
. Preliminary location of future right-of-way is depicted on sub-area maps.
   F.   Historic Preservation
      The maps included in this document attempt to show the "contributing" or
"eligible" properties from information available as of June 2014. It is the
responsibility of each applicant for this zoning option to verify the current
eligibility status of the property in question with the Office of Historic
Preservation.
   G.   Loading, Solid Waste, Landscaping and Screening for all Areas and Sub-
Areas in the DLS
      Loading and solid waste collection and landscaping and screening
requirements in all DLS Areas and Sub-Areas are provided in Table 5.12-DLS-2.
TABLE 5.12-DLS-2
 
LOADING AND SOLID WASTE
Loading requirements must comply with Section
7.4 et seq. for the land use group or class. (1)
Solid waste collection requirements must comply with COT Administrative Manual
Section 8.01 et seq. for solid waste. (2)
LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING
A complete or partial exception to the landscaping and screening requirements in
Section
7.6 may be granted by the PDSD Director, if shade along sidewalks, pedestrian
circulation paths or outdoor patios is provided for pedestrians and customers in
accordance Section
5.12.6.A.2. Alternative pedestrian access that creates connectivity between
public entrances to the project and abutting sidewalk is allowed if no safety
hazard is created. All pedestrian access must conform to the accessibility
standards  of the City's Building Code.
SPECIFIC STANDARDS
1. Off-street loading zone  standards  may be reduced or waived if PDSD and the
Dept. of Transportation determine that no traffic safety issue is created.
2. On-site refuse collection container requirements governing access, type, and
location may be modified if the Environmental Services Dept. determines that no
public health or traffic safety issues are created. Group solutions (multiple
site, multiple owners) to refuse collection are encouraged.
 
   H.   Solar Exposure
      Solar Exposure standards  for all Sub-Districts in the DLS provided in
Table 5.12- DLS-3.
TABLE 5.12-DLS-3
 
SOLAR EXPOSURE
Maximum Glass on East and West           50% of Façade
Minimum shade on East and West glass (1) 50%
Maximum glass on North and South         Unlimited
Minimum shade on North and South glass   0%
SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS
1. Percentage of glass must be shaded between 10 AM and 3 PM between May
through October.
 
   I.   Parking 
      Parking standards  for all DLS Areas and Sub-Areas are shown in Figure
5.12-E and Table 5.12-DLS-5. Additionally the General IID parking standards  in
Section
5.12.6.M apply.
FIGURE 5.12.E 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9992.png]
 
TABLE 5.12-DLS-5
PARKING
Location (Distance from Property Line)
Street Setback (5)          30 Ft.                                            T
Pedestrian Easement Setback 5 Ft.                                             U
Side Setback (8)            0 Ft.                                             V
Required Spaces
Off-street (1, 4)           Non-residential = 0
                            Residential = 1/DU
Accessible (2, 3)           Compliance with the accessible parking
                            requirements in the UDC for the underlying zone .
Bicycle Facilities  (2)    Compliance with the requirements in the UDC for
                            the underlying zone .
Vehicular Access Points (9)
Maximum Allowable Width     24 Ft.                                            W
Maximum Allowable Number    1 Drive/Primary Street (6)                        X
Alley Access (7)            1 Drive per property at FAS and IHA-RS Sub-Areas  Z
                            only
SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS
1. Commercial parking not required. Residential uses are required to provide 1
space per unit. Further reduction in required on-site residential parking can
be achieved through an IID Parking Plan prepared pursuant to Section
5.12.E; leased spaces from an off-site location; or an on-site care-share
program.
2. Required accessible spaces and bicycle facilities may not be reduced or
eliminated. The number of required accessible spaces is governed by the
Building Code. The number of bicycle spaces required for a proposed use is
governed by Section
7.4.8.
3. Accessible spaces may be provided 1) on-site, 2) off site within one quarter
of a mile of the project site through a shared parking agreement, or 3) on
street on the same side of the street up to five spaces.
4. Surface parking is allowed only within a structure at sites developed with
Floor Area Ratios of 3.0 and above.
5.  In the Armory Park, Low Density Residential Infill Sub-Area, parking
setback may be reduced to 10 feet from the front property line.
6. At corner lots, vehicular access points may not be located on a primary
street . At all other lots, vehicular access points are limited to one per
primary street , except in the Fourth Avenue Sub-Area (FAS), where vehicular
access lanes may not be located on Fourth Avenue.
7. Access to parking spaces in the Iron Horse, Low Density Residential Infill
Sub-Area and the Fourth Avenue Historic and Fourth Avenue Sub-Areas may be had
by way of existing alleys  (Z).
8. Zero foot setback is also allowed at Union Pacific frontage.
9. In the El Presidio Sub-Area (ESP) vehicular access to Block 175 (bounded by
Church Avenue, Council Street, Court Avenue, and Franklin Street) Shall be
limited to access from Church Avenue.
 
   J.   Alleyways and Pedestrian Access Lanes 
      Development  in the DLS is intended to encourage and support an active,
secure and comfortable pedestrian environment. Property fronting alleys and
pedestrian lanes should have interesting treatments, such as landscaping and
wall art. Alleys and pedestrian access lanes are opportunities for a great
place to walk and other active uses, such as spillover activities from the
ground level Commercial Services and Retail Trade uses. Special festive
lighting is encouraged in alleyways to complement street lighting and to
illuminate the space for events. At corner sites, building design and
orientation may be organized to have active "frontage" on the alleyway .
Architectural elements such as landscaping should be incorporated into
properties fronting alleys to screen utility service activities.
(Ord. 11246, 2/18/2015; Am. Ord. 11977, 12/20/2022)
5.12.12.   TOOLE AVENUE AREA (TAA)
   Toole Avenue Sub-Area (TAS)
   The intent of this zone  is to allow for and encourage development  of
northern Toole Avenue as per the Historic Warehouse Arts District Master plan.
Incentives offered under the Downtown Core Sub-district of the infill incentive
zone  such as exemptions from MS&R setback, perimeter yards, lot coverage,
parking and landscape screening requirements are included under this zone .
Additionally, multifamily residential development  (not currently allowed in
the underlying I-1 zone ) shall be permitted.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9994.png]
 
   UA Annex Sub-Area (UAS)
   The intent of this zone  is to allow for multifamily residential uses in
areas that are within the underlying I-1 zoning, as well as to allow for
parking incentives.
   El Presidio Sub-Area (EPS)
   El Presidio is one of Tucson's most historically significant neighborhoods
and one of the country's oldest continuously inhabited places. Immediately
adjacent  to downtown, the neighborhood is located in the area of the 1776
Spanish fortress, Presidio San Agustin del Tucson. El Presidio is Tucson's
birthplace, and as such, specific building heights , setbacks , and reductions
in required parking has been mapped out to encourage density within this
historic context. The development  bridging downtown and El Presidio should
protect the historic integrity and honor the distinctive character of this
unique neighborhood.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9996.png]
 
FIGURE 5.12-TAA-A: MAP OF TOOLE AVENUE AREA AND SUB-AREAS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-14986.png]
 
   A.   Toole Avenue Sub-Area (TAS)
      1.   Standards
         Figure 5.12-TAA-A shows the boundaries of the TAA and its Sub-Areas.
Toole Avenue Sub-Area zoning regulations contained herein may be used in lieu
of underlying zoning.
      2.   Building Placement
         Building placement and setback requirements in the TAS are as shown in
Figure 5.12-TAS-A and Table 5.12-TAS-1.
FIGURE 5.12-TAS-A
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10000.png]
 
TABLE 5.12-TAS-1
UA ANNEX SUB-AREA STANDARDS
BUILDING PLACEMENT STANDARDS
Build to Line (Distance from Property Line) (1)
Street Side 0 Ft. A
Setback (Distance from Property Line)
Side Yard   0 Ft. B
Rear Yard   0 Ft. C
SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS
1. Build-to line is defined as the line at which construction of a building
façade is to occur on a lot. A build-to line runs parallel to, and is
measured from, street front property lines and is established to create an
even building façade line on a street . Build-to line applies to street
frontage only (both primary and secondary streets at corner lots) and only
applies when new building footprint exceeds 25% of the site area. Where
applicable 75% of new building frontage must be located at or near the build-
to line.
 
      3.   Building Heights , Floor Uses
         Building height and floor use requirements in the TAS are as shown in
Figure 5.12-TAS-B and Table 5.12-TAS-2.
FIGURE 5.12-TAS-B
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10002.png]
 
TABLE 5.12-TAS-2
TOOLE AVENUE SUB-AREA STANDARDS
BUILDING HEIGHT  STANDARDS
Mid-Rise Building Height  (1)Six stories with a maximum height of 75 feet   D
Low-Rise Building Height     Two stories with a maximum height of 25 feet   E
First Floor Ceiling           12 Ft. Min Clearance                           F
Building Height  Setbacks (distance from property line)
Mid-Rise Side Yard Setback    20 Ft.                                         G
Mid-Rise Street Side Setback  40 Ft.                                         H
FLOOR USES
                              Commercial Services and Retail Trade Uses that
                              encourage street level activity are preferred,
                              but office or residential uses may be used if
Ground Floor (2,3,4,5)        the Commercial Services and Retail Trade Uses  I
                              are not supported by market demand and
                              contingent on new development  meeting all
                              other requirements of this table.
Upper Floors                  Residential or Commercial Services             J
SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS
1. Mid-Rise building height is 6 Stories or 75 Ft. (D) from the mid-rise
setbacks (G, H).
2. All new construction shall have scale-defining architectural elements or
details at first two levels.
3. A single plane of façade at the street level may not be longer than 50 Ft.
without architectural relief or articulation such as windows, trellises and
arcades.
4. Uses that create significant human activity at Street level such as
pedestrian traffic and increases in business activity.
5. First floor level to be differentiated in form from upper levels.
 
      4.   Lot Coverage, Open Space, Pedestrian Access
         Lot coverage, open space and pedestrian access requirements in the TAS
are as shown in Figure 5.12-TAS-C and Table 5.12-TAS-3.
 
FIGURE 5.12-TAS-C
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10004.png]
 
TABLE 5.12-TAS-3
TOOLE AVENUE SUB-AREA STANDARDS
OPEN SPACE STANDARDS
Lot Coverage
Maximum Lot Coverage (1)            100%
Open Space
Open Space at Multi-Unit Dwellings  30 Sq. Ft./DU or 20% of Lot Area (7)
(2,3,4)
Open Space Non-Residential (2,3,4)  Min. of 30% of Lot Area
Minimum Landscape Area              50% of Open Space (8)
Pedestrian Access (5)
Pedestrian Access to Open Space     Required                             K
Main Entrance Location (6)          Primary Street (Toole Ave.)          L
SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS
1. Lot Coverage is defined as the area of a site covered by buildings ,
storage areas and vehicular use areas.
2. Usable open space does not need to be located on the ground - green
roof or terrace is acceptable.
3. Usable open space may be any combination of private and common space.
4. Parking may not be counted as open space.
5. Adequate shade shall be provided for sidewalks and pedestrian pathways,
using shade structures or vegetation.
6. Main entrance locations shall be directly accessed from a sidewalk
along a street rather than from a parking lot.
7. Open space at multi-dwelling units is 30 Sq. Ft. per dwelling unit or
20% of lot area, whichever is greater.
8. Minimum landscape requirement applies only to common area open space.
 
      5.   Building Massing Standards  
         Building Massing Standards in the TAS are as shown in Figure 5.12-TAS-
D and Table 5.12- TAS-4. The Building Massing Standards apply to all Sub-Areas
in the Toole Avenue Area.
 
FIGURE 5.12-TAS-D
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10006.png]
 
TABLE 5.12-TAS-4
TOOLE AVENUE SUB-AREA STANDARDS
BUILDING MASSING STANDARDS
Articulation
Maximum unbroken building mass (1) 50 Ft. Max.                 M
Bulk Reduction (Mid-Rise)
Bulk Reduction Setback (2)         12 Ft. Min.                 N
Bulk Reduction Required Area       50% of Façade              O
Bulk Reduction Zone               Required Above Second Floor P
SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS
1. Any building over 50 Ft. wide must be broken down to read as a series of
buildings no wider than 50 Ft. And should include a variety of façades. (M)
2. A step-back bulk reduction area a minimum of 12 ft. in depth (N) is
required for at least 50% of the façade (O). No bulk reduction is required
below the third floor. See figures above.
 
   B.   UA Annex Sub-Area (UAS)
      1.   Standards 
         Figure 5.12-TAA-A shows the boundaries of the TAA and its sub-areas.
Zoning option standards for the UAS may be used in lieu of underlying zoning.
      2.   Residential Density
         Within the UAS the maximum permitted residential density is 100 DU/AC,
regardless of commercial use.
      3.   Building Placement 
         Building placement requirements in the UAS are as shown in Figure
5.12- UAS-A and Table 5.12-UAS-1.
 
FIGURE 5.12-UAS-A
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10008.png]
 
TABLE 5.12-UAS-1
UA ANNEX SUB-AREA STANDARDS
BUILDING PLACEMENT STANDARDS
Build to Line (Distance from Property Line) (1)
Street Side 0 Ft. A
Setback (Distance from Property Line)
Side Yard   0 Ft. B
Rear Yard   0 Ft. C
SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS
1. Build-to line is defined as the line at which construction of a building
façade is to occur on a lot. A build-to line runs parallel to, and is
measured from, street front property lines and is established to create an
even building façade line on a street . Build-to line applies to street
frontage only (both primary and secondary streets at corner lots) and only
applies when new building footprint exceeds 25% of the site area. Where
applicable 75% of new building frontage must be located at or near the build-
to line.
 
 
      4.   Building Height , Floor Uses
         Building height and floor use requirements in the UAS are as shown in
Figure 5.12-UAS-B and Table 5.12-UAS-2.
 
FIGURE 5.12-UAS-B
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10010.png]
 
TABLE 5.12-UAS-2
UA ANNEX SUB-AREA STANDARDS
BUILDING HEIGHT  STANDARDS  
Mid-Rise Building Height  (1)75 Ft. Maximum or 6 Stories                     D
Low-Rise Building Height     25 Ft. Maximum or 2 Stories                     E
Building Height Setbacks (distance from property line)
Mid-Rise Side Setback         20 Ft.                                          F
FLOOR USES
                              Commercial Services and Retail Trade Uses ready
                              that encourage street level activity are
                              preferred, but office or residential uses may
Ground Floor (2,3,4,5)        be used if Commercial Services and Retail Trade G
                              Uses are not supported by market demand and
                              contingent on new development  meeting all
                              other requirements of this table.
Upper Floors                  Residential or Commercial Services              H
SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS
1. Mid-Rise building height is 6 Stories or 75 Ft. (D) from the mid-rise
setback (F).
2. All new construction shall have scale-defining architectural elements or
details at first two levels.
3. A single plane of façade at the street level may not be longer than 50 Ft.
without architectural relief or articulation such as windows, trellises and
arcades.
4. Uses that create significant human activity at Street level such as
pedestrian traffic and increases in business activity is achieved by providing
a mix of commercial, retail, office and residential uses at the street level.
5. First floor level to be differentiated in form from upper levels.
 
 
      5.   Lot Coverage, Open Space, Pedestrian Access
         Lot Coverage, open space, and pedestrian access requirements in the
UAS are as shown in Figure 5.12-UAS-C and Table 5.12-UAS-3.
 
FIGURE 5.12-UAS-C
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10012.png]
 
TABLE 5.12-UAS-3
UA ANNEX SUB-AREA STANDARDS
OPEN SPACE STANDARDS
Lot Coverage
Maximum Lot Coverage (1)            100%
Open Space
Open Space at Multi-Unit Dwellings  30 Sq. Ft./DU or 30% of Lot Area (5)
(2,3,4)
Open Space Non-Residential (2,3,4)  Min. of 30% of Lot Area
Minimum Landscape Area              50% of Open Space (7)
Pedestrian Access
Pedestrian Access to Open Space     Required                             I
Main Entrance Location (6)          Primary or Secondary Street          J
SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS
1. Covered by impervious surfaces such as, but not limited to buildings ,
drives, or parking.
2. Usable open space does not need to be located on the ground - green
roof or terrace is acceptable
3. Usable open space may be any combination of private and common space.
4. Parking may not be counted as open space.
5. Open space at multi-dwelling units is 30 Sq. Ft. per dwelling unit or
30% of lot area, whichever is greater.
6. Main entrance locations shall be directly accessed from a sidewalk
along a street rather than from a parking lot.
7. Minimum landscape requirement applies only to common area open space.
 
 
      6.   Building Massing
         Building massing requirements in the UAS are as shown in Figure 5.12-
UAS-D and Table 5.12-UAS-4.
 
FIGURE 5.12-UAS-D
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10014.png]
 
TABLE 5.12-UAS-4
UA ANNEX SUB-AREA STANDARDS
BUILDING MASSING STANDARDS
Articulation
Maximum unbroken building mass (1) 50 Ft. Max.                  K
View Corridors
Low-Rise Façade (2)               25% of Façade Min.          L
Mid-Rise Façade (3)               150 Linear Ft. Unbroken Max. M
Low-Rise Height                 25 Ft. Max or 2 Stories      N
SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS
1. Any building over 50 Ft. wide must be broken down to read as a series of
buildings no wider than 50 Ft. and should include a variety of façades.
2. To preserve view corridors, a minimum of 25% of the façade must be set
aside as low-rise, and the low-rise façade may not exceed 2 stories or 25 Ft.
in height. On corner lots this requirement applies to one street only.
3. Mid-rise façades of more than 150 continuous linear feet must be broken by
a mid-rise façade not to exceed 4 stories or 50 Ft. in height as shown in the
Figure above.
 
   C.   El Presidio Sub-Area (EPS)
      1.   Standards  
         Figure 5.12-TAA-A shows the boundaries of the TAA and its sub-areas.
In the El Presidio Sub-Area the zoning regulations contained herein may be used
in lieu of underlying Zoning.
      2.   Residential Density
         Within the El Presidio Sub-Area the maximum permitted residential
density is 100 DU/AC regardless of commercial use.
      3.   Building Placement
         Building placement and setback requirements in the EPS are as shown in
Figure 5.12-EPS-A and Table 5.12-EPS-1.
 
FIGURE 5.12-EPS-A
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10016.png]
 
TABLE 5.12-EPS-1
EL PRESIDIO SUB-AREA STANDARDS
BUILDING PLACEMENT STANDARDS
Build to Line (Distance from Property Line)
Street or Alley  (1,2)0 Ft. A
Setback (Distance from Property Line)
Side Yard              0 Ft. B
Pedestrian Lane        0 Ft. C
SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS
1. Build-to line is defined as the line at which construction of a building
façade is to occur on a lot. A build-to line runs parallel to, and is
measured from, street front property lines and is established to create an
even building façade line on a street . Build-to line applies to street
frontage only (both primary and secondary streets at corner lots) and only
applies when new building footprint exceeds 25% of the site area. Where
applicable 75% of new building frontage must be located at or near the build-
to line.
2. Projects that develop 50% or more of mid-block land shall set aside a
pedestrian lane for pedestrian access.
 
      4.   Building Heights , Floor Uses
         Building heights and floor use requirements in the EPS are as shown in
Figure 5.12-EPS-B and Table 5.12-EPS-2.
 
FIGURE 5.12-EPS-B
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-14988.png]
 
TABLE 5.12-EPS-2
EL PRESIDIO SUB-AREA STANDARDS
BUILDING HEIGHT  STANDARDS
Maximum Building Height  (1)    160 Ft. Max or 14 stories
High-Rise Zone                   90 Ft. -160 Ft.
Mid-Rise Zone                    50 Ft. - 90 Ft.
Low-Rise Zone                    30 Ft. -50 Ft.
Historic Zone Height Setback (2) Consistent with Historic District
Block 175 Building Heights (3)
Floors 6-7                       90 Ft. Max or 7                   C
Floors 3-5                       65 Ft. Max or 5                   D
Floor 2                          30 Ft. Max or 2                   E
Floor 1                          Consistent with ct *              F
Block 175 Building Height  Setbacks (3)
Mid-Rise Setback                 50 Ft.                            G
Low-Rise Setback                 50 Ft.                            H
Historic Zone Height Setback     15 Ft.                            I
FLOOR USES
Ground Floor (4,5)               Commercial Services or Retail
Upper Floors                     Residential Services
SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS
1. Maximum Building Height is 160 Ft. or 14 stories (C). See Figure 5.12-EPS-
B for additional height limits and setbacks.
2. Building heights are limited to one story. Further, heights of principal
structures shall not exceed height of other principal structures within the
development  zone and height of accessory structures shall not exceed the
height of other accessory structures within the development zone . See Figure
5.12- EPS-B for intent. Development Zone shall be as defined by the UDC
within the context of HPZ overlay zone design standards .
3. For Block 175, see Figure 5.12-EPS-B for specific building height and
setback requirements.
4. Ground floor level to be consistent in design with HPZ Standards .
5. Street -level activity is encouraged by *
 
   * Editor's Note: So in Ord. 11246.
 
      5.   Lot Coverage, Open Space, Pedestrian Access
         Lot coverage, open space and pedestrian access requirements in the EPS
are as shown in Figure 5.12-EPS-C and Table 5.12.2-EPS-3.
 
FIGURE 5.12-EPS-C
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10020.png]
 
TABLE 5.12-EPS-3
EL PRESIDIO SUB-AREA STANDARDS
OPEN SPACE STANDARDS
Lot Coverage
Maximum Lot Coverage (1)            100%
Open Space
Open Space at Multi-Unit Dwellings  30 Sq. Ft./DU or 30% of Lot Area (7)
(2,3,4)
Open Space Non-Residential (2,3,4)  Min. of 30% of Lot Area
Minimum Landscape Area              50% of Open Space (9)
Pedestrian Access (5)
Pedestrian Access to Open Space     Required                             L
Main Entrance Location (6)          Primary Street                       M
Pedestrian Lanes (8)
Minimum Width                       30 Ft.                               N
SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS
1. Covered by impervious surfaces such as, but not limited to buildings ,
drives, or parking.
2. Usable open space does not need to be located on the ground - green
roof or terrace is acceptable.
3. Usable open space may be any combination of private and common space.
4. Parking may not be counted as open space.
5. Adequate shade shall be provided for sidewalks and pedestrian pathways,
using shade structures or vegetation.
6. Main entrance locations shall be directly accessed from a sidewalk
along a street rather than from a parking lot.
7. Open space at multi-dwelling units is 30 Sq. Ft. per dwelling unit or
30% of lot area, whichever is greater.
8. For projects that propose to develop the entire block : two pedestrian
lanes are required at ground level only; one running roughly north/south
through the site, and the other running roughly east/west.
9. Minimum landscape requirement applies only to common area open space.
 
      6.   Massing Standards  Building  
         Building massing requirements in the EPS are as shown in Figure 5.12-
EPS-D and Table 5.12-EPS-4.
 
FIGURE 5.12-EPS-D
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10022.png]
 
TABLE 5.12-EPS-4
EL PRESIDIO SUB-AREA STANDARDS
BUILDING MASSING STANDARDS
Articulation
Maximum unbroken building mass (1) 50 Ft. Max.                O
O Bulk Reduction (High Rise)
Bulk Reduction Setback (2)         12 Ft. Min.                P
Bulk Reduction Required Area       50% of Façade             Q
Bulk Reduction Zone               Required Above Fifth Floor R
SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS
1. Any building over 50 Ft. wide must be broken down to read as a series of
buildings no wider than 50 Ft. (O) and should include a variety of façades.
2. A step-back bulk reduction area a minimum of 12 ft. in depth (P) is
required for at least 50% of the façade (Q). No bulk reduction is required
below the sixth floor. See figures above.
 
(Ord. 11246, 2/18/2015; Am. Ord. 11977, 12/20/2022)
5.12.13   WAREHOUSE TRIANGLE AREA (WTA)
   The intent of this zone is to allow for and encourage high density infill of
the warehouse triangle with transit oriented and mixed use development . The
DL-AZ will go further than the infill incentive district in granting
development  flexibility and incentives in many areas. Multifamily residential
uses will be allowed in current I-1 zone , allowable building heights and
densities are increased and developments  will be exempt from non-residential
parking requirements.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10024.png]
 
FIGURE 5.12-WTA-A: MAP OF WAREHOUSE TRIANGLE AREA
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-14990.png]
 
   A.   Warehouse Triangle Area (WTA) Standards
      1.   Standards
         Figure 5.12-WTA-A shows the boundaries of the Warehouse Triangle Area.
Warehouse Triangle Area optional standards apply.
      2.   Building Placement
         Building placement requirements in the WTA are as shown in Figure
5.12-WTA-B and Table 5.12-WTA-1.
 
FIGURE 5.12-WTA-B
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10028.png]
 
TABLE 5.12-WTA-1
WAREHOUSE TRIANGLE AREA STANDARDS
BUILDING PLACEMENT STANDARDS
Build-to-Line (Distance from Property Line) (1)   
Street Side         0 Ft. A
Setback (Distance from Property Line)
Alley Side          0 Ft. B
Pedestrian Easement 0 Ft. B
Side Yard           0 Ft. C
SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS
1. Build-to line is defined as the line at which construction of a building
façade is to occur on a lot. A build-to line runs parallel to, and is measured
from, street front property lines and is established to create an even
building façade line on a street . Build-to line applies to street frontage
only (both primary and secondary streets at corner lots) and only applies when
new building footprint exceeds 25% of the site area. Where applicable 75% of
new building frontage must be located at or near the build-to line.
2. Street side façades must be built to Build-to-Line at a minimum of 75% of
the new building frontage, to help define an urban street frontage, where
build-to requirements apply.
3. Alley and pedestrian easement side façades must be built to Build-to-Line
at a minimum of 50% of new building frontage, to help define an urban edge to
property.
 
      3.   Building Heights , Floor Uses
         Building height and floor use requirements in the WTA are as shown in
Figure 5.12-WTA-C and 5.12-WTA-2.
 
FIGURE 5.12-WTA-C
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10030.png]
 
TABLE 5.12-WTA-2
WAREHOUSE TRIANGLE AREA STANDARDS
BUILDING HEIGHT  STANDARDS
Maximum Building Height  (1)         160 Ft. Max or 14 Stories               D
First Floor Ceiling                   12 Ft. Min Clearance                    E
Minimum Building Height at Build-to-  25 Ft.                                  F
Line   
Building Height Setback (Distance from Property Line)
High-Rise Building  Street Frontage  20 Ft.                                  G
(2)
FLOOR USES
                                      Commercial Services and Retail Trade
                                      Uses ready that encourage street level
                                      activity are preferred, but office or
                                      residential uses may be used if
Ground Floor (2, 3, 4, 5)             Commercial Services and Retail Trade    H
                                      Uses are not supported by market demand
                                      and contingent on new development
                                      meeting all other requirements of this
                                      table.
Upper Floors                          Residential or Commercial Services      I
SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS
1. No more than 14 stories and no more than 160 Ft.
2. The High-Rise Setback is 20 Ft. (G) at the Street Frontage above two
stories.
 
      4.   Lot Coverage, Open Space, Pedestrian Access
         Lot coverage, open space and pedestrian access requirements in the WTA
are as shown in Figure 5.12-WTA-D and Table 5.12-WTA-3.
 
FIGURE 5.12-WTA-D
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10032.png]
 
TABLE 5.12-WTA-3
WAREHOUSE TRIANGLE AREA STANDARDS
LOT COVERAGE, OPEN SPACE AND PEDESTRIAN STANDARDS
Lot Coverage
Maximum Lot Coverage (1)               100%
Open Space
Open Space at Multi-Unit Dwellings (2, 30 Sq. Ft./DU or 30% of Lot Area (7)
3, 4)
Open Space Non-Residential (2, 3, 4)   Min. of 30% of Lot Area
Minimum Landscape Area                 50% of Open Space (9)
Pedestrian Easement (8)
Maximum Distance from Street           125 Ft.                              J
Minimum Width                          30 Ft.                               K
Pedestrian Access (5)
Pedestrian Access to Public Open Space Required                             L
Main Entrance Location (6)             Primary Street                       M
SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS
1. Covered by impervious surfaces such as, but not limited to buildings ,
drives, or parking.
2. Usable open space does not need to be located on the ground - green roof
or terrace is acceptable.
3. Usable open space may be any combination of private and common space.
4. Parking may not be counted as open space.
5. Adequate shade shall be provided for sidewalks and pedestrian pathways,
using shade structures or vegetation.
6. Main entrance locations shall be directly accessed from a sidewalk along a
street rather than from a parking lot.
7. Open space at multi-dwelling units is 30 Sq. Ft. per dwelling unit or 30%
of lot area, whichever is greater.
8. Projects that develop 50% or more of the land area within the Mid-block
Pedestrian Easement Zone (see map/plan above) shall set aside and develop a
mid-block pedestrian passage and easement.
9. Minimum landscape requirement applies only to common area open space.
 
      5.   Building Massing Standards
         Building Massing Standards in the WTA are as shown in Figure 5.12-
WTA-E and Table 5.12- WTA-4.
 
FIGURE 5.12-WTA-E
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10034.png]
 
TABLE 5.12-WTA-4
WAREHOUSE TRIANGLE AREA STANDARDS
BUILDING MASSING STANDARDS
Articulation
Maximum unbroken building mass (1) 50 Ft. Max.                  N
View Corridors
Mid-Rise Façade (2)               25% of Façade Min.          O
High-Rise Façade (3)              150 Linear Ft. Unbroken Max. P
Mid-Rise Height                    50 Ft. Max or 4 Stories      Q
Build Reduction (High Rise)
Bulk Reduction Setback (4)         12 Ft. Min.                  S
Bulk Reduction Required Area       50% of Façade Min.          R
Bulk Reduction Zone                Required above 4th Floor     T
SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS
1. Any building over 50 Ft. wide must be broken down to read as a series of
buildings no wider than 50 Ft. (N) and should include a variety of façades.
2. To preserve view corridors, a minimum of 25% of the façade must be set
aside as mid-rise (O), and the mid-rise façade may not exceed 4 stories or 50
Ft. (Q) in height. On corner lots this requirement applies to one street only.
3. High-rise façades of more than 150 continuous linear feet (P) must be
broken by a mid-rise façade (O) not to exceed 4 stories or 50 Ft. (Q) in
height as shown in Figure above.
4. A step-back bulk reduction area a minimum of 12 ft. in depth (S) is
required for at least 50% of the façade (R). Bulk reduction is required above
the fifth floor (T). See figures above.
 
(Ord. 11246, 2/18/2015; Am. Ord. 11977, 12/20/2022)
5.12.14    FOURTH AVENUE AREA (FAA)
   The intent of this zone is to take advantage of the Modern Street Car
projects and promote medium-density infill transit-oriented development .
Development incentives for this zone include greater allowable density and zero
parking requirements for commercial uses.
   Fourth Avenue Historic Sub-Area (FHS)
   The intent of this zone is to provide parking relief for developments
within the HPZ neighborhood portion of Fourth Avenue, but to otherwise preserve
and maintain the historic character of the area.
   Fourth Avenue Sub-Area (FAS)
   The intent of this zone is to take advantage of the Modern Street Car
project and promote medium-density infill transit-oriented developments .
Development incentives for this zone include greater allowable density and zero
parking requirements for commercial uses.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10036.png]
 
FIGURE 5.12-FAA-A: MAP OF FOURTH AVENUE AREA AND SUB-AREAS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-14992.png]
 
   A.   Fourth Avenue Historic Sub-Area (FHS)
      1.   Standards
         The Fourth Avenue Historic Sub-Area includes portions of the West
University Historic Preservation Zone that overlap with the Downtown Links Sub-
District. Properties within these areas may be developed using the optional
parking standards contained herein, but remain subject to all other underlying
zone requirements including, but not limited to, historic preservation zone
design standards and design review.
   B.   Fourth Avenue Sub-Area (FAS)
      1.   Standards
         Figure 5.12.FAA-A depicts the boundaries of the Fourth Avenue Sub-
Areas in which the Fourth Avenue Sub-Area optional zoning standards apply.
      2.   Building Placement
         Building placement and setback requirements in the FAS are shown in
Figure 5.12-FAS-A and Table 5.12-FAS-1.
 
FIGURE 5.12-FAS-A
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10040.png]
 
TABLE 5.12-FAS-1
 
FOURTH AVENUE AREA STANDARDS
BUILDING PLACEMENT STANDARDS
Setback (Distance from Property Line)
Street Side (1) 0 Ft. or Prevailing A
Alley Side      0 Ft.               B
Side Yard       0 Ft.               C
SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS
1. Street side setbacks to be 0 Ft. or consistent with prevailing historic
setback.
 
      3.   Building Heights , Floor Uses
         Building height and floor use requirements in the FAS are as shown in
Figure 5.12-FAS-B and Table 5.12-FAS-2.
 
FIGURE 5.12-FAS-B
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10042.png]
 
TABLE 5.12-FAS-2
FOURTH AVENUE AREA STANDARDS
BUILDING HEIGHT STANDARDS
Street Frontage Building Height  (1)30 Ft. Max or 2 Stories
Building Height at Intersection (2)  40 Ft. Max or 3 Stories
Mid-rise Building Height  (3)       60 Ft. Max or 5 Stories
Building Height  Setbacks (distance from property line)
Mid-Rise Side Setback                50 Ft.                                  D
FLOOR USES
                                     Commercial Services and Retail Trade
                                     Uses ready that encourage street level
                                     activity are preferred, but office or
                                     residential uses may be used if
Ground Floor (4, 5, 6, 7)            Commercial Services and Retail Trade
                                     Uses are not supported by market demand
                                     and contingent on new development
                                     meeting all other requirements of this
                                     table.
Upper Floors                         Residential or Commercial Services
SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS
1. Building heights along the street frontage are restricted to two stories or
30 Ft. to respect the scale of established or historic structures , or both.
2. Building heights at intersection may extend three stories or 40 Ft. within
a 50 Ft. x 50 Ft. area at an intersection.
3. Building heights may extend to five stories or 60 Ft. at the rear of
properties beginning at 50 Ft. (E) from the property
line.
4. All new construction shall have scale-defining architectural elements or
details at first two levels.
5. A single plane of façade at the street level may not be longer than 50 Ft.
without architectural relief or articulation such as windows, trellises and
arcades.
6. Street -level activity is achieved by providing a mix of commercial,
retail, office and residential uses at street level.
7. First floor level to be differentiated in form from upper levels.
 
      4.   Lot coverage, Open Space, Pedestrian Access
         Lot coverage, open space and pedestrian access requirements in the FAS
are as shown in Table 5.12-FAS-3.
 
TABLE 5.12-FAS-3
FOURTH AVENUE AREA STANDARDS
OPEN SPACE STANDARDS
Lot Coverage
Maximum Lot Coverage (1)                  100%
Open Space
Open Space at Multi-Unit Dwellings (2, 3, 30 Sq. Ft./DU or 30% of Lot Area (5)
4)
Open Space Non-Residential (2, 3, 4)      Min. of 30% of Lot Area
Minimum Landscape Area                    50% of Open Space (6)
SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS
1. Covered by impervious surfaces such as, but not limited to buildings ,
drives, or parking.
2. Usable open space does not need to be located on the ground - green roof or
terrace is acceptable.
3. Usable open space may be any combination of private and common space.
4. Parking may not be counted as open space.
5. Open space at multi-dwelling units is 30 Sq. Ft. per dwelling unit or 30% of
lot area, whichever is greater.
6. Minimum landscape requirement applies only to common area open space.
 
      5.   Building Massing Standards
         Building massing standards in the FAS are as shown in Figure 5.12-FAS-
D and Table 5.12- FAS-4.                  
 
FIGURE 5.12-FAS-D
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10044.png]
 
TABLE 5.12-FAS-4
FOURTH AVENUE AREA STANDARDS
BUILDING MASSING STANDARDS
Articulation
Maximum unbroken building mass (1) 50 Ft. Max.                  G
View Corridors
Mid-Rise Façade (2)               25% of Façade Min.          H
High-Rise Façade (3)              150 Linear Ft. Unbroken Max. I
Mid-Rise Height                    50 Ft. Max or 4 Stories      J
SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS
1. Any building over 50 Ft. wide (G) must be broken down to read as a series
of buildings no wider than 50 Ft. and should include a variety of façades.
2. To preserve view corridors, a minimum of 25% of the façade must be set
aside as mid-rise (H), and the mid-rise façade may not exceed 4 stories or 50
Ft. in height (J). On corner lots this requirement applies to one street only.
3. High-rise façades of more than 150 continuous linear feet (I) must be
broken by a mid-rise façade not to exceed 4 stories or 50 Ft. (J) in height as
shown in the Figure above.
 
(Ord. 11246, 2/18/2015; Am. Ord. 11977, 12/20/2022)
5.12.15   IRON HORSE AREA (IHA)
   Armory Park and Iron Horse, Mixed Use Sub-Area (AIHMS)
   The intent of this zone is to promote transit oriented development  that is
compatible with the historic scale of Iron Horse Neighborhood, especially along
Ninth Street. The most significant development  incentive is an exemption from
parking requirements.
   Iron Horse, Low Density Residential Sub-Area (IH-RS)
   The intent of this zone is to promote single-family infill development  at
somewhat higher density while protecting the historic character and privacy of
existing properties. Key development  incentives include reduction in minimum
lot size and reduction in parking.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10046.png]
 
FIGURE 5.12-IHA-A: MAP OF IRON HORSE AREA AND SUB-AREAS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-14994.png]
 
   A.   Armory Park and Iron Horse, Mixed Use Sub-Area (AIH-MS)
      1.   Standards
         Armory Park and Iron Horse Mixed Use Sub- Area zoning option standards
apply.
      2.   Building Placement
         Building placement and setback requirements in the AIH-MS are as shown
in Figure 5.12- AIH-MS-A and Table 5.12-AIH-MS-1.
 
FIGURE 5.12-AIH-MS-A
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10050.png]
 
TABLE 5.12-AIH-MS-1
 
ARMORY PARK AND IRON HORSE MIXED USE SUB-AREA STANDARDS
BUILDING PLACEMENT STANDARDS
Setback (Distance from Property Line)   
Street Side (1) Consistent with Prevailing A
Alley Side      0 Ft.                      B
Side Yard       0 Ft.                      C
SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS
1. Street side setbacks to be consistent with prevailing setback at other
than multi-unit residential.
 
      3.   Building Heights , Floor Uses
         Building height and floor use requirements in the AIH-MS are as shown
in Figure 5.12-AIH-MS- B and Table 5.12-AIH-MS-2.
 
FIGURE 5.12-AIH-MS-B
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10052.png]
 
TABLE 5.12-AIH-MS-2
ARMORY PARK AND IRON HORSE MIXED USE SUB-AREA STANDARDS
BUILDING HEIGHT  STANDARDS
Street Frontage building height (1)    25 Ft. Max or 2 Stories               D
Mid-rise building height  (2)         40 Ft. Max or 3 Stories               E
Building Height  Setbacks (distance from property line)
Mid-Rise Setback (2)                   12 Ft.                                F
Setback from Adjacent Residential Use  25 Ft.                                G
(3)
FLOOR USES
                                       Commercial Services and Retail Trade
                                       Uses that encourage street level
                                       activity are preferred, but office or
                                       residential uses may be used if
Ground Floor (4, 5, 6, 7)              Commercial Services and Retail Trade
                                       Uses are not supported by market
                                       demand and contingent on new
                                       development  meeting all other
                                       requirements of this table.
Upper Floors                           Residential or Commercial Services
SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS
1. Building heights along the street frontage are restricted to two stories or
25 Ft. or 2 stories (D) to respect the scale of established or historic
structures , or both.
2. Mid-rise building height may extend to 40 Ft. or 3 stories (D) and the mid-
rise setback is 12 Ft. (F) from the street frontage façade of the building .
3. At adjacent  residential building frontage, building must setback 25 ft.
(G) at the mid-rise building height .
4. All new construction shall have scale-defining architectural elements or
details at first two levels.
5. A single plane of façade at the street level may not be longer than 50 Ft.
without architectural relief or articulation such as windows, trellises and
arcades.
6. Uses that create significant human activity at Street level such as
pedestrian traffic and increases in business activity is achieved by providing
a mix of commercial, retail, office and residential uses at street level.
7. First floor level to be differentiated in form from upper levels.
 
      4.   Lot Coverage, Open Space, Pedestrian Access
         Lot coverage, open space and pedestrian access standard in the AIH-MS
are as shown in Figure 5.12-AIH-MS-C and Table 5.12-AIHMS-3.
 
FIGURE 5.12-AIH-MS-C
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10054.png]
 
TABLE 5.12-AIH-MS-3
 
ARMORY PARK AND IRON HORSE MIXED USE SUB-AREA STANDARDS
OPEN SPACE STANDARDS
Lot Coverage
Maximum Lot Coverage (1)               100%
Open Space
Open Space at Multi-Unit Dwellings (2, 30 Sq. Ft./DU or 20% of Lot Area (7)
3, 4)
Open Space Non-Residential (2, 3, 4)   Min. of 30% of Lot Area
Minimum Landscape Area                 50% of Open Space (8)
Pedestrian Access (5)
Pedestrian Access to Open Space        Required                             H
Main Entrance Location (6)             Primary or Secondary Street          I
SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS
1. Covered by impervious surfaces such as, but not limited to buildings ,
drives, or parking.
2. Usable open space does not need to be located on the ground - green roof
or terrace is acceptable.
3. Usable open space may be any combination of private and common space.
4. Parking may not be counted as open space.
5. Adequate shade shall be provided for sidewalks and pedestrian pathways,
using shade structures or vegetation.
6. Main entrance locations shall be directly accessed from a sidewalk along a
street rather than from a parking lot.
7. Open space at multi-dwelling units is 30 Sq. Ft. per dwelling unit or 20%
of lot area, whichever is greater.
8. Minimum landscape requirement applies only to common area open space.
 
   B.   Iron Horse, Low Density Residential Sub-Area (IHRS)
      1.   Standards 
         Iron Horse, Low Density Residential Infill Sub-Area zoning option
standards apply.
      2.   Building Placement
         Building placement and setback requirements in the IH-RS are as shown
in Figure 5.12-IHRS- A and Table 5.12-IH-RS-1.
 
FIGURE 5.12-IH-RS-A
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10056.png]
 
TABLE 5.12-IH-RS-1
IRON HORSE, LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL SUB-AREA STANDARDS
BUILDING PLACEMENT STANDARDS
Setback (Distance from Property Line)
Primary Street (1) Match Prevailing      A
Secondary Street   10' or Prevailing (2) B
Side Yard          0 Ft.                 C
Rear Yard          0 Ft.                 D
SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS
1. Primary street is the street frontage to which dwellings face or are
oriented.
2. Match prevailing setbacks of structures  adjacent  to parcel  on same side
of street of same block . If no prevailing setbacks are established required
setback is 10 feet.
 
      3.   Building Heights and Massing Standards  
         Building height and floor use requirements in the IH-RS are as shown
in Figure 5.12-IH-RSB and Table 5.12-IH-RS-2.
 
FIGURE 5.12-IH-RS-B
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10058.png]
 
TABLE 5.12-IH-RS-2
IRON HORSE, LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL SUB-AREA STANDARDS
BUILDING HEIGHT  STANDARDS
Maximum Building Height            32 Ft. E
Street Frontage Max                20 Ft. F
Building Height  Setbacks (distance from property line)
Second Story Setback               20 Ft. G
BUILDING MASSING
Maximum Unbroken Building Mass (1) 30 Ft. H
SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS
1. Any building over 30' wide must be broken down to read as a series of
buildings no wider than 30 Ft., and should include a variety of building
heights and roof forms.
 
      4.   Lot Coverage and Lot Size
         Lot coverage and lot size requirements in the IH-RS are as shown in
Table 5.12-IH-RS-3.
 
TABLE 5.12-IH-RS-3
 
IRON HORSE, LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL SUB-AREA STANDARDS
LOT COVERAGE
Maximum Lot Coverage (1)  
LOT SIZE
Minimum Lot Size         2,500 Sq. Ft.
SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS
1. Covered by impervious surfaces such as, but not limited to buildings ,
drives, or parking.
 
      5.   Privacy Standards  
         Required privacy standards in the IH low density residential sub-area
are as shown in Figure 5.12-IH-RS-C and Table 5.12-IH-RS-4.
 
FIGURE 5.12-IH-RS-C
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10060.png]
 
TABLE 5.12-IH-RS-4
IRON HORSE, LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL SUB-AREA STANDARDS
PRIVACY STANDARDS
Clerestory Height       9 Ft. Min. above 2nd Floor I
Site Wall Height        9 Ft. Max. (1)             J
Site Wall Setback       0 Ft. Min. (1)             K
Privacy Zone            6 Ft. (2)                  L
ALTERNATIVE MEANS OF DAYLIGHT
Clerestory above 9 Ft.                            I
Skylights                                         M
Translucent Fixed Glass                           N
SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS
1. Brick or stuccoed concrete masonry site walls may extend above Unified
Development Code requirements to 9 Ft. but may require structural engineering
and building permits.
2. Privacy shall be afforded to existing developed adjacent  rear or side
yards by limiting second story fenestration. The lower 6' of adjacent  yards
shall not be visible from new second floor windows.
 
(Ord. 11246, 2/18/2015; Am. Ord. 11977, 12/20/2022)
5.12.16   STONE/SIXTH AREA (SSA)
   Stone Sub-Area (STS)
   The intent of the Stone Sub-Area is to promote higher density mixed use
development  along the Stone corridors. Benefits of this development  include
reduction in parking, zero lot lines and increases in allowable building
heights .
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10062.png]
 
   Sixth Street Sub-Area (SSS)
   The intent of the Sixth Street Sub-Area is to promote higher density mixed
use development  along the 6th Avenue, 6th Street and 7th Avenue corridors.
Benefits of this development  include reduction in parking, zero lot lines and
increases in allowable building density.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10064.png]
 
FIGURE 5.12-SSA-A: MAP OF STONE/SIXTH AREA
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-14996.png]
 
   A.   Stone Sub-Area (STS)
      1.   Standards 
         Figure 5.12-SSA-A captures the boundaries of the SSA and the
boundaries of the Stone Avenue Sub-Area. Stone Sub-Area zoning option standards
apply.
      2.   Building Placement
         Building placement and setback requirements in the STS are as shown in
Figure 5.12-STS-A and Table 5.12-STS-1.
 
FIGURE 5.12-STS-A
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10068.png]
 
TABLE 5.12-STS-1
STONE AVENUE SUB-AREA STANDARDS
BUILDING PLACEMENT STANDARDS
Build to Line (Distance from Property Line) (1)
Primary Street (Stone Ave.) (2) 0-20 Ft.                   A
Setback (Distance from Property Line)
Secondary Street                Consistent with Prevailing B
Alley Side                      0 Ft.                      C
Side Yard                       0 Ft.                      D
SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS
1. Build-to requirements apply to: 1) Stone Ave. frontage when building
footprint exceeds 25% of lot area.
2. Street side façades must be built to Build to Line at a minimum of 75% of
the new building frontage, to help define an urban street frontage, where
build-to requirements apply. Build to Line can range from 0-20' to be
consistent with prevailing.
 
      3.   Building Heights and Floor
         Use Building height and floor use requirements in the STS are as shown
in Figure 5.12-STS-B, Figure 5.12-STS-C and Table 5.12-STS-2. Note:  Figure
5.12-STS-B applies to the west side of Stone Avenue and Figure 5.12- STS-
C applies to the east side of Stone Avenue.
 
FIGURE 5.12-STS-B
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-14998.png]
 
FIGURE 5.12-STS-C
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-15000.png]
 
TABLE 5.12-STS-2
STONE AVENUE SUB-AREA STANDARDS
BUILDING HEIGHT  STANDARDS
High-Rise Building Height  (1)6 Stories with a Max of 75 Ft.                 J
Mid-Rise Building Height (2)   4 stories with a Max. of 50 Ft.                H
Low-Rise Building Height  (3) 25 Ft. Max or 2 Stories                        I
FLOOR USES
                               Commercial Services or Retail Trade Uses that
                               encourage street level activity are preferred,
                               but office or residential uses may be used if
Ground Floor (4, 5, 6, 7)      Commercial Services and Retail Trade Uses are
                               not supported by market demand and contingent
                               on new development  meeting all other
                               requirements of this table.
Upper Floors                   Residential or Services are preferred
SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS
1. High-rise building height is 6 stories or a maximum of 75 ft. (H).
2. Mid-rise building height is 4 stories with a maximum of 50 Ft. (I).
3. Low-rise building height is 25 Ft. or 2 stories (J).
4. All new construction shall have scale-defining architectural elements or
details at first two levels.
5. A single plane of façade at the street level may not be longer than 50 Ft.
without architectural relief or articulation such as windows, trellises and
arcades.
6. Street -Level Activity is achieved by providing a mix of commercial, retail,
office and residential uses at street level.
 
      4.   Lot Coverage, Open Space, Pedestrian Access
         Lot coverage, open space and pedestrian access requirements in the STS
are as shown in Figure 5.12-STS-D and Table 5.12-STS-3.
 
FIGURE 5.12-STS-D
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10074.png]
 
TABLE 5.12-STS-3
STONE AVENUE SUB-AREA STANDARDS
LOT COVERAGE STANDARDS
Maximum Lot Coverage (1)                  100%
OPEN SPACE
Open Space at Multi-Unit Dwellings (2, 3, 30 Sq. Ft/DU or 20% of Lot Area (7)
4)
Open Space Non-Residential (2, 3, 4)      Min. of 20% of Lot Area
PEDESTRIAN ACCESS (5)
Pedestrian Access to Open Space           Required                            K
Main Entrance Location (6)                Primary Street (Stone Ave.)         L
SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS
1. Covered by impervious surfaces such as, but not limited to buildings ,
drives, or parking.
2. Usable open space does not need to be located on the ground - green roof or
terrace is acceptable.
3. Usable open space may be any combination of private and common space.
4. Parking may not be counted as open space.
5. Adequate shade shall be provided for sidewalks and pedestrian pathways,
using shade structures or vegetation.
6. Main entrance locations shall be directly accessed from a sidewalk along a
street rather than from a parking lot.
7. Open space at multi-dwelling units is 30 Sq. Ft. per dwelling unit or 20% of
lot area, whichever is greater.
 
      5.   Building Massing Standards
         Building massing standards in the STS are as shown in Figure 5.12-STS-
E and Table 5.12- STS-4.
 
FIGURE 5.12-STS-E
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10076.png]
 
TABLE 5.12-STS-4
STONE AVENUE SUB-AREA STANDARDS
BUILDING MASSING STANDARDS
Articulation
Maximum unbroken building mass (1) 50 Ft. Max.                  M
View Corridors
Mid-Rise Façade (2)               25% of Façade Min.          N
High-Rise Façade (3)              150 Linear Ft. Unbroken Max. O
Mid-Rise Height                    50 Ft. Max or 4 Stories      P
Build Reduction (High Rise)
Bulk Reduction Setback (4)         12 Ft. Min.                  R
Bulk Reduction Required Area       50% of Façade Min.          Q
Bulk Reduction Zone                Required above 4th Floor     S
SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS
1. Any building over 50 Ft. wide must be broken down to read as a series of
buildings no wider than 50 Ft. (M) and should include a variety of façades.
2. To preserve view corridors, a minimum of 25% of the façade must be set
aside as mid-rise (N), and the mid-rise façade may not exceed 4 stories or 50
Ft. (P) in height. On corner lots this requirement applies to one street only.
3. High-rise façades of more than 150 continuous linear feet (O) must be
broken by a mid-rise façade (N) not to exceed 4 stories or 50 Ft. (P) in
height as shown in Figure above.
4. A step-back bulk reduction area a minimum of 12 ft. in depth (R) is
required for at least 50% of the façade (Q). Bulk reduction is required above
the fourth floor (S). See figures above.
 
   B.   Sixth Street Sub-Area (SSS)
      1.   Standards  
         Figure 5.12-SSA-A captures the boundaries of the SSA and the
boundaries of the Sixth Street Sub-Area. Sixth Street Sub-Area zoning option
standards apply.
      2.   Building Placement
         Building placement and setback requirements in the SSS are as shown in
Figure 5.12-SSS-A and Table 5.12-SSS-1.
 
FIGURE 5.12-SSS-A
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10078.png]
 
TABLE 5.12-SSS-1
6TH STREET SUB-AREA STANDARDS
BUILDING PLACEMENT STANDARDS
Build to Line (Distance from Property Line)
6th Street (1, 2)                  0 Ft.                      A
Setback (Distance from Property Line)
Secondary Street (6th or 7th Ave.) 0 Ft.                      B
5th Street                         Consistent with Prevailing C
Alley Side                         0 Ft.                      D
Side Yard                          0 Ft.                      E
SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS
1. Build-to line is defined as the line at which construction of a building
façade is to occur on a lot. A build-to line runs parallel to, and is measured
from, street front property lines and is established to create an even
building façade line on a street . Build-to line applies to street frontage
only (both primary and secondary streets at corner lots) and only applies when
new building footprint exceeds 25% of the site area. Where applicable 75% of
new building frontage must be located at or near the build-to line. Build-to
requirements apply to: 1) 6th Street frontage when building footprint exceeds
25% of lot area.
2. Street side façades must be built to Build to Line at a minimum of 75% of
the new building frontage, to help define an urban street frontage, where
build-to requirements apply.
 
      3.   Building Heights , Floor Uses
         Building height and floor use requirements in the SSS are as shown in
Figure 5.12-SSS-B, Figure 5.12-SSS-C and Table 5.12-SSS-2. Note: Figure 5.12-
SSS-B applies typically throughout the Sixth Avenue Sub-Area except at specific
blocks shown on Figure 5.12- SSS-C.
 
FIGURE 5.12-SSS-B
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10080.png]
 
FIGURE 5.12-SSS-C
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10082.png]
 
TABLE 5.12-SSS-2
6TH STREET SUB-AREA STANDARDS
BUILDING HEIGHT  STANDARDS
High-Rise Building Height  (1)75 Ft. Max or 6 Stories                     H
Mid-Rise Building Height (2)   50 Ft. Max or 4 stories                     I, G
Low-Rise Building Height  (3) 25 Ft. Max or 2 Stories                     J, F
FLOOR USES
                               Commercial Services and Retail Trade Uses
                               that encourage street level activity are
                               preferred, but office or residential uses
Ground Floor (4, 5, 6, 7)      may be used if Commercial Services and
                               Retail Trade Uses are not supported by
                               market demand and contingent on new
                               development  meeting all other requirements
                               of this table.
Upper Floors                   Residential or Services                      
SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS
1. High-rise building height is 75 ft. max., or 6 stories (H) for the remainder
of the block .
2. Low-rise building height is 25 Ft. or 2 stories (J) for the first 50 Ft. (F)
from the setback (B). and 6th or 7th Ave. (G).
3. Mid-rise building height is 50 Ft. max., or 4 stories (I) for the first 50'
(G) from 6th Street
4. All new construction shall have scale-defining architectural elements or
details at first two levels.
5. A single plane of façade at the street level may not be longer than 50 Ft.
without architectural relief or articulation such as windows, trellises and
arcades.
6. Street -level activity is achieved by providing a mix of commercial, retail,
office and residential uses at street level.
7. First floor level to be differentiated in form from upper levels.
 
      4.   Lot Coverage, Open Space, Pedestrian Access
         Lot coverage, open space and pedestrian access requirements in the SSS
are as shown in Figure 5.12-SSS-D and Table 5.12-SSS-3.
 
FIGURE 5.12-SSS-D
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10084.png]
 
TABLE 5.12-SSS-3
6TH STREET SUB-AREA STANDARDS
LOT COVERAGE STANDARDS
Maximum Lot Coverage (1)                  100%
OPEN SPACE                                                                     
Open Space at Multi-Unit Dwellings (2, 3, 30 Sq. Ft/DU or 20% of Lot Area (7)
4)
Open Space Non-Residential (2, 3, 4)      Min. of 20% of Lot Area
PEDESTRIAN ACCESS (5)                                                          
Pedestrian Access to Open Space           Required                            K
Main Entrance Location (6)                Primary Street (Stone Ave.)         L
SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS
1. Covered by impervious surfaces such as, but not limited to buildings ,
drives, or parking.
2. Usable open space does not need to be located on the ground - green roof or
terrace is acceptable.
3. Usable open space may be any combination of private and common space.
4. Parking may not be counted as open space.
5. Adequate shade shall be provided for sidewalks and pedestrian pathways,
using shade structures or vegetation.
6. Main entrance locations shall be directly accessed from a sidewalk along a
street rather than from a parking lot.
7. Open space at multi-dwelling units is 30 Sq. Ft. per dwelling unit or 20% of
lot area, whichever is greater.
 
      5.   Building Massing Standards
         Building massing standards in the SSS are as shown in Figure 5.12-SSS-
E and Table 5.12-SSS- 4.
 
FIGURE 5.12-SSS-E
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10086.png]
 
TABLE 5.12-SSS-4
6TH STREET SUB-AREA STANDARDS
BUILDING MASSING STANDARDS
Articulation
Maximum unbroken building mass (1) 50 Ft. Max.                  M
View Corridors
Mid-Rise Façade (2)               25% of Façade Min.          N
High-Rise Façade (3)              150 Linear Ft. Unbroken Max. O
Mid-Rise Height                    50 Ft. Max or 4 Stories      P
Build Reduction (High Rise)
Bulk Reduction Setback (4)         12 Ft. Min.                  R
Bulk Reduction Required Area       50% of Façade Min.          Q
Bulk Reduction Zone                Required above 4th Floor     S
SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS
1. Any building over 50 Ft. wide must be broken down to read as a series of
buildings no wider than 50 Ft. (M) and should include a variety of façades.
2. To preserve view corridors, a minimum of 25% of the façade must be set
aside as mid-rise (N), and the mid-rise façade may not exceed 4 stories or 50
Ft. (P) in height. On corner lots this requirement applies to one street only.
3. High-rise façades of more than 150 continuous linear feet (O) must be
broken by a mid-rise façade (N) not to exceed 4 stories or 50 Ft. (P) in
height as shown in Figure above.
4. A step-back bulk reduction area a minimum of 12 ft. in depth (R) is
required for at least 50% of the façade (Q). Bulk reduction is required above
the fourth floor (S). See figures above.
 
(Ord. 11246, 2/18/2015; Am. Ord. 11977, 12/20/2022)
5.12.17.   [RESERVED]
5.12.18.   ILLUSTRATIVE MAP FIGURE 5.12.18-1: ILLUSTRATIVE MAP OF INFILL
INCENTIVE DISTRICT (IID)
 
FIGURE 5.12.18-1: ILLUSTRATIVE MAP OF INFILL INCENTIVE DISTRICT (IID)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-15002.png]
 
(Ord. 11246, 2/18/2015; Am. Ord. 11977, 12/20/2022
5.13.   URBAN OVERLAY DISTRICT (UOD)
5.13.1. PURPOSE
   The purpose of the Urban Overlay District (UOD) is to encourage:
   A.   Comprehensively planned, pedestrian and transit-oriented, urban infill,
and mixed use areas;
   B.   Site planning and architectural solutions consistent with the ambience
of Tucson;
   C.   Safe urban neighborhoods;
   D.   Urban design features that include sustainable solutions and can
accommodate both historical and contemporary design;
   E.   Transitions that are beneficial to new and existing developments ; and,
   F.   Responsive development review processes that address flexible solutions
for obsolete standards and accommodate desired urban trends.
5.13.2.    INITIATION
   A.   An Urban Overlay District is initiated by the Mayor and Council.
   B.   The Planning and Development Services Department (PDSD) processes the
application. The UOD boundaries may include rights-of-way within and adjacent
to the proposed UOD.
5.13.3.    ESTABLISHMENT
   A.   The overlay is established in accordance with Section
3.5, Rezoning (Change of Zoning) Procedure. Subsequent rezoning shall require
Mayor and Council approval and adoption of a rezoning ordinance for an affected
area.
   B.   Each UOD shall be in compliance with the adopted General Plan and
applicable sub-regional, area, and neighborhood plans.
   C.   Upon establishment, the UOD shall be identified on the City Zoning Map
as a shaded area. When the UOD is effectuated on a specific property(ies), the
prefix “U” followed by a sequential number and the assigned zoning designation,
e.g., C-3 becomes U1C-3, shall be identified on the City Zoning Map . The UOD
may also be given a descriptive name associated with the subject area, e.g.,
Downtown District.
5.13.4. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
   A.   The UOD may have land use standards and procedures different from the
zoning standards applicable in another UOD or in the Unified Development Code
(UDC).
   B.   Adoption of a UOD shall not restrict or eliminate the uses or
development standards of any underlying zone but provides a development option
that encourages well-designed infill projects subject to the standards and
guidelines provided in the UOD’s development document.
   C.   The UOD development document shall be adopted as part of the rezoning
and govern development using the UOD development options instead of the
standards of the underlying zone .
(Am. Ord. 11171, 5/20/2014)
5.13.5.    APPLICATION
   The applicant shall provide a development document that includes proposed
standards, modifications, maps, guidelines, and background materials sufficient
to implement the proposed UOD. In addition, the Mayor and Council may require
the development document to include a site analysis as provided in Section
2-04.4.2, Site Analysis (Planned Area Developmen t), of the Administrative
Manual where necessary or desirable to review UOD proposals such as form-based
code districts or similar concepts.
5.13.6. DEVELOPMENT REVIEW
   A.   Unless a specific waiver procedure is approved as part of the rezoning,
no development using the UOD standards shall occur within a UOD unless or until
a site plan or if applicable a subdivision  plat is approved by the City .
   B.   The City may require financial and other assurances to assure the
installation of required streets , sewer, electric, and water utilities ,
drainage, flood control and other improvements of a property owner using the
UOD standards.
5.13.7.    ENFORCEMENT
   Standards adopted for each UOD are enforced in the same manner as provided
in Art. 10: Enforcement and Penalties.
5.13.8.    INTERPRETATION
   The Zoning Administrator shall interpret a UOD.
5.13.9.    AMENDMENT PROCEDURES
   A.   The PDSD shall determine if the amendment would result in a substantial
change in the UOD. An amendment shall be determined to be a substantial change
in accordance with the standards set forth in Section
3.5.5, Amendment to a an Adopted PAD Zone, or may be determined to be a special
procedure contained in the UOD’s development  or urban design documents.
(Am. Ord. 11409, 11/9/2016)
5.13.10. WAIVER
   Execution of a waiver is required for any property owner using the urban
design option of a UOD, in conformance with A.R.S. §12-1134(1). The owner of
property requesting to exercise the UOD design option shall be required to
waive any and all claims for diminution of value that may be based upon action
by the City in response to such a request by the owner.
ARTICLE 6: DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS AND MEASUREMENTS
Section
6.1.   PURPOSE
6.2.   APPLICABILITY
6.3.   DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
   
6.3.1.   Organization
   
6.3.2.   Determining a Use’s Dimensional Standards
   
6.3.3.   Explanation and Applicability of Terms Used in the Dimensional
Standard Tables
   
6.3.4.   Dimensional Standard and Exceptions Tables
6.4.   RULES OF MEASUREMENT AND EXCEPTIONS TO DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
   
6.4.1.   Purpose
   
6.4.2.   Lot Size
   
6.4.3.   Lot Coverage and Site Coverage
   
6.4.4.   Height
   
6.4.5.   Perimeter Yards
   
6.4.6.   Floor Area Ratio
   
6.4.7.   Residential Density
6.5.   PRINCIPAL LAND USE
   
6.5.1.   One or More Principal Uses , Separate Projects
   
6.5.2.   Two or More Principal Uses , Same Project
6.6.   ACCESSORY USES , BUILDINGS , AND STRUCTURES
   
6.6.1.   Accessory Uses
   
6.6.2.   Accessory Buildings And Structures
   
6.6.3.   Residential Uses
   
6.6.4.   Nonresidential Uses
   
6.6.5   Urban Agriculture Uses and Activities
6.1.   PURPOSE
   This article provides the general dimensional standards that apply to
principal and accessory structures for each zoning district in the City . The
standards are intended to protect open space , solar access , and the privacy
of all properties and to minimize negative impacts between developments . This
article also provides the method for measuring the dimensional standards to
ensure consistent application of the standards.
6.2.   APPLICABILITY
   The standards in this article apply to all principal and accessory
structures and uses established in the City of Tucson.
6.3.   DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
6.3.1.   ORGANIZATION
   The dimensional standards for each zone are organized into the following
tables:
Table Number Tables
Table Number Tables
6.3-1 A      Dimensional Standards for the RH, SR, SH, RX-1, & RX-2 Zones
      B      Exceptions to the RH, SR, SH, RX-1, & RX-2 Dimensional Standards
      A      Dimensional Standards for the R-1, R-2, R-3, MH-1, & MH-2 Zones
6.3-2 B      Exceptions to the R-1, R-2, R-3, MH-1, & MH-2 Dimensional
             Standards
6.3-3 A      Dimensional Standards for the O-1, O-2, & O-3 Zones
      B      Exceptions to the O-1, O-2, & O-3 Dimensional Standards
      A      Dimensional Standards for the C-1, C-2, C-3, OCR-1, & OCR-2 Zones
6.3-4 B      Exceptions to the C-1, C-2, C-3, OCR-1, & OCR-2 Dimensional
             Standards
6.3-5 A      Dimensional Standards for the  P-I , I-2, & I-2 Zones
      B      Exceptions to the  P-I , I-1, & I-2 Dimensional Standards
6.3-6 A      Dimensional Standards for the OS, IR, P, & RV Zones
      B      Exceptions to the OS, IR, P, & RV Dimensional Standards
6.3-7 A      Dimensional Standards for the NC, RVC, & MU Zones
      B      Exceptions to the NC, RVC, & MU Dimensional Standards
 
6.3.2.   DETERMINING A USE’S DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
   A.   To determine all of a proposed use’s required dimensional standards,
refer to the following:
      1.   The applicable dimensional standard table provided in this article;
      2.   The applicable exceptions to the dimensional standard provided in
this article;
      3.   The applicable use-specific standards provided in Section
4.9, Use-Specific Standards; and,
      4.   When applicable, the overlay requirements provided in Article 5,
Overlay Zones.
   B.   When the standards of this Article conflict with other sections of the
Unified Development Code (UDC) , the most restrictive applies except as
follows. Exception: when the standards of this article conflict with the use-
specific standards provided in Article 4, the use-specific standards shall
control.
   C.   Dimensional standards for accessory uses , buildings , and structures
are provided in Section
6.6.
6.3.3.   EXPLANATION AND APPLICABILITY OF TERMS USED IN THE DIMENSIONAL
STANDARD TABLES
   The following is an explanation and applicability of frequently used terms
in the dimensional standard tables:
   A.   Mobile Home Dwelling
   For the purposes of determining the applicable dimensional standards, a
mobile home is considered a residential use. See Section
11.3.7.C for the definition of mobile home dwelling.
   B.   Mobile Home Park
   For the purposes of determining the applicable dimensional standards, a
mobile home park is considered a nonresidential use. See Section
11.3.7.C.1 for the definition of mobile home park.
   C.   Multifamily Development
   For the purposes of determining the applicable dimensional standards,
multifamily development is considered a nonresidential use. See Section
11.3.7.A.3 for the definition of multifamily development .
   D.   Nonresidential Use
   For the purposes of determining the applicable dimensional standards, the
following uses as defined in Section
11.3 are considered nonresidential uses:
      1.   A use from the Agricultural, Civic, Commercial, Industrial,
Restricted Adult Activities, Retail, Storage, Storage, or Wholesaling Use
Groups;
      2.   Group Dwelling, except as provided in Section
6.3.3.H.7;
      3.   Multifamily Development ;
      4.   Mobile Home Park; and,
      5.   Residential Care Service Uses, except as provided in Section
6.3.3.H.4.
   E.   Nonresidential Zone
   For the purposes of determining the applicable perimeter yard standard, the
following are considered nonresidential zones : O-1, O-2, O-3, P, RV, NC, RVC,
C-1, C-2, C-3, OCR-1, OCR-2, P-I, I-1, and I-2.
   F.   Perimeter Yard
   The perimeter yard standard is based on whether the proposed use is
nonresidential or residential (Sections
6.3.3.D or .H, respectively) and the use’s adjacency to a nonresidential or
residential zone (Sections
6.3.3.E or .I, respectively).
   G.   Residential Density
   The maximum permitted number of residential dwelling units per lot or size.
For example:
      1/7,000 sf means that no more than one dwelling unit per 7,000 square
feet is permitted.
      36/acre means that no more than 36 dwelling units per acre are permitted.
   H.   Residential Use
   For the purposes of determining the applicable dimensional standards, the
following uses as defined in Section
11.3.7 are considered residential uses:
      1.   Duplex;
      2.   Manufactured Housing;
      3.   Mobile Home Dwelling;
      4.   Residential Care Service uses located or locating in an existing
residential use as defined by this section;
      5.   Single-Family Dwelling, Attached;
      6.   Single-Family Dwelling, Detached; and,
      7.   Single-Family Dwellings that meet the nonconforming group dwelling
criteria in accordance with Section
4.9.7.B.9.
   I.   Residential Zone
   For the purposes of determining the applicable perimeter yard standard, the
following are considered residential zones : OS, IR, RH, SR, SH, RX-1, RX-2, R-
1, R-2, R-3, MH-1, MH-2, MU, PAD, and PCD.
   J.   Single-family (SF) Use
   The same uses as provided in Section
6.3.3.H, Residential Use.
6.3.4.   DIMENSIONAL STANDARD AND EXCEPTIONS TABLES
TABLE 6.3-1.A: DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS FOR THE RH, SR, SH, RX-1, & RX-2 ZONES
TABLE 6.3-1.B: EXCEPTIONS TO THE RH, SR, SH, RX-1, & RX-2 DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
TABLE 6.3-2.A: DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS FOR THE R-1, R-2, R-3, MH-1, & MH-2 ZONES
TABLE 6.3-2.B: EXCEPTIONS TO THE R-1, R-2, R-3, MH-1, & MH-2 DIMENSIONAL
STANDARDS
TABLE 6.3-3.A: DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS FOR THE O-1, O-2, & O-3 ZONES
TABLE 6.3-3.B: EXCEPTIONS TO THE O-1, O-2, & O-3 DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
TABLE 6.3-4.A: DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS FOR THE C-1, C-2, C-3, OCR-1, & OCR-
2 ZONES
TABLE 6.3-4.B: EXCEPTIONS TO THE C-1, C-2, C-3, OCR-1, & OCR-2 DIMENSIONAL
STANDARDS
TABLE 6.3-5.A: DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS FOR THE P-I, I-2, & I-2 ZONES
TABLE 6.3-5.B: EXCEPTIONS TO THE P-I, I-1, & I-2 DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
TABLE 6.3-6.A: DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS FOR THE OS, IR, P, & RV ZONES
TABLE 6.3-6.B: EXCEPTIONS TO THE OS, IR, P, & RV DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
TABLE 6.3-7.A: DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS FOR THE NC, RVC, & MU ZONES
TABLE 6.3-7.B: EXCEPTIONS TO THE NC, RVC, & MU DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
TABLE 6.3-1.A: DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS FOR THE RH, SR, SH, RX-1, & RX-2 ZONES
Note: Several variables factor into determining a use’s required dimensional
standards. See Section
6.3.2, Determining a Use’s Dimensional Standards, for further details.
Dimensional Standard Zone
                     RH SR SH RX-1 RX-2
Dimensional Standard                      Zone
                                          RH      SR      SH      RX-1    RX-2
                                          1/      1/      2/      1/      1/
Residential Density (maximum)             180,000 144,000 36,000  36,000  16,000
                                          sf      sf      sf      sf      sf
Lot Size /Site Area (minimum)             180,000 144,000 36,000  36,000  16,000
                                          sf      sf      sf      sf      sf
                                          Res: N/ Res: N/ Res: N/ Res: N/ Res: N/
Lot Coverage (maximum)                    A       A       A       A       A
                                          Nonres: Nonres: Nonres: Nonres: Nonres:
                                          20%     15%     15%     15%     15%
Height (maximum)                          30'     30'     30'     30'     25'
Perimeter Yard [Standard based on the proposed use’s adjacency to a residential
or nonresidential zone  or street ]
Street                                    Section Section Section Section Section
                                          6.4.5.C 6.4.5.C 6.4.5.C 6.4.5.C 6.4.5.C
Res Use [https://export.amlegal.com/
media/                                    25'     25'     20'     20'     20'
296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5277.gif] Res Zone
Res Use [https://export.amlegal.com/
media/                                    (H)     (H)     (H)     (H)     (H)
296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5277.gif] Nonres Zone
Nonres Use [https://export.amlegal.com/
media/                                    4(H)    4(H)    20'     20'     20'
296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5277.gif] Res Zone
Nonres Use [https://export.amlegal.com/
media/                                    0'      0'      0'      0'      0'
296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5277.gif] Nonres Zone
 
Key:
(H) = Height of the proposed exterior building wall
MF = Multifamily Development (Section
6.3.3.C)
MH = Mobile Home Dwelling (Section
6.3.3.A)
MH Park = Mobile Home Park (Section
6.3.3.B)
N/A = Not Applicable
Nonres = Nonresidential (Section
6.3.3.D or .E, whichever is applicable)
Res = Residential (Section
6.3.3.H or .I, whichever is applicable)
SF = Single-family Use (Section
6.3.3.J)
sf = square feet
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5277.gif] = adjacent to
TABLE 6.3-1.B: EXCEPTIONS TO THE RH, SR, SH, RX-1, & RX-2 DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
Zone Use Exceptions to the Zone ’s Dimensional Standard
Zone Use                                                                           Exceptions to the Zone ’s Dimensional
                                                                                   Standard
     •   Animal Production, limited to stable or riding school (P)            Lot Size (min.) = 10 acres
     •   Travelers’ Accommodations, Lodging (S)                             Lot Coverage (max.) = 10%
      
RH                                                                                 Site Area (min.) = 0
                                                                                   Lot Coverage (max.) = N/A
     Renewable Energy Production (S)                                               Height (max.) = 16'
                                                                                   Nonres Use adjacent to Nonres Zone
                                                                                   (min.) = (H)
     Golf Course (P)                                                               Lot Size (min.) = 30 acres  
     •   Animal Production, limited to commercial stables (P)                 Site Area (min.) = 10 acres
     •   Travelers’ Accommodation, Lodging (P)                               
     •   Communications, limited to wireless communication towers and antennas (S)
     •   Day care: Child Care (P and S)
     •   Distribution system (S)                                              Lot Coverage (max.) = 50%
     •   Parks and Recreation (P)
SR   •   Religious Use (P)
                                                                                   Site Area (min.) = 0
                                                                                   Lot Coverage (max.) = N/A
     Renewable Energy Generation (S)                                               Height (max.) = 16'
                                                                                   Nonres Use adjacent to Nonres Zone
                                                                                   (min.) = (H)
     Protective Service (P - government owned and operated only)                   Lot Coverage (max.) = 50%
                                                                                   Height (max.) = 25'
 
Zone Use Exceptions to the Zone ’s Dimensional Standard
Zone Use                                                      Exceptions to the Zone ’s Dimensional
                                                              Standard
                                                              Lot Size (min.) = 30 acres
     Golf Course (P)                                          Nonres Use adjacent to Res Zone (min.)
                                                              = 4(H)
     •   Animal Production, limited to commercial stablesLot Size (min.) = 10 acres
     •   Travelers’ Accommodation, Lodging (P)         Nonres Use adjacent to Res Zone (min.)
                                                              = 4(H)
                                                              Lot Size (min.) = 144,000 sf
     Animal Service (P)                                       Nonres Use adjacent to Res Zone (min.)
                                                              = 4(H)
                                                              Lot Size (min.) = 1 acre
     Cemetery (S)                                             Lot Coverage (max.) = 20%
                                                              Nonres Use adjacent to Res Zone (min.)
SH                                                            = 4(H)
     •   Communications (P)
     •   Parks and Recreation (P)                        Lot Coverage (max.) = 50% 7
     •   Religious Use (P)
                                                              Lot Size  (min.) = 36 acres
     Motion Picture Industry (S)                              Nonres Use adjacent  to Res Zone
                                                              (min.) = 4(H)
                                                              Site Area  (min.) = 0
                                                              Lot Coverage  (max.) = N/A
     Renewable Energy Generation (S)                          Height (max.) = 16'
                                                              Nonres Use adjacent  to Nonres Zone
                                                              (min.) = (H)
     Protective Service (P - government owned and operated    Lot Coverage  (max.) = 50%
     only)                                                    Height (max.) = 25'
 
Zone Use Exceptions to the Zone ’s Dimensional Standard
Zone Use                                  Exceptions to the Zone ’s Dimensional
                                          Standard
                                          Lot Size  (min.) = 30 acre
     Golf Course (P)                      Nonres Use adjacent  to Res Zone
                                          (min.) = 4(H)
     Travelers’ Accommodation, Lodging  Lot Size  (min.) = 10 acre
     (P)                                  Nonres Use adjacent  to Res Zone
RX-1                                      (min.) = 4(H)
                                          Site Area  (min.) = 0
                                          Lot Coverage  (max.) = N/A
     Renewable Energy Generation (S)      Height (max.) = 16'
                                          Nonres Use adjacent  to Nonres Zone
                                          (min.) = (H)
                                          Lot Size  (min.) = 30 acre
     Golf Course (P)                      Nonres Use adjacent  to Res Zone
                                          (min.) = 4(H)
     Educational Use: Elementary and      Nonres Use adjacent  to Nonres Zone
     Secondary School (P and S)           (min.) = (H)
RX-2 Crop Production (P)                  Lot Coverage  (max.) = 50%
                                          Site Area  (min.) = 0
                                          Lot Coverage  (max.) = N/A
     Renewable Energy Generation (S)      Height (max.) = 16'
                                          Nonres Use adjacent  to Nonres Zone
                                          (min.) = (H)
 
Key:
Max. = Maximum permitted
Min. = Minimum requirement
P = Permitted Use
S = Special Exception Use
Uses without a “P” or “S” indicates that the use is permitted in the zone
(Am. Ord. 11070, 5/14/2013)
TABLE 6.3-2.A: DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS FOR THE R-1, R-2, R-3, MH-1, & MH-2 ZONES
Note: Several variables factor into determining a use’s required dimensional
standards. See Section
6.3.2, Determining a Use’s Dimensional Standards, for further details.
Dimensional Standard Zone
                     R-1 R-2 R-3 MH-1 MH-2
Dimensional Standard                         Zone
                                             R-1        R-2        R-3       MH-1      MH-2
                                             SF:1/7,000 SF: 1/     SF: 1/    SF/MH: 1/ SF/MH: 1/
                                             sf         5,000 sf   5,000 sf  7,000 sf  5,000 sf
Residential Density (maximum)                SF (2      MF: 15/    MF: 36/   MF/MH     MF & MH
                                             units): 2/ acre       acre      Park: 8/  Park: 15/
                                             10,000 sf                       acre      acre
                                             SF (1
                                             unit):
                                             7,000 sf              SF: 5,000
                                             SF (2                 sf
Lot Size /Site Area  (minimum)               units):    5,000 sf   MF/       7,000 sf  5,000 sf
                                             10,000 sf             Nonres: 0
                                             Nonres:
                                             see
                                             Exceptions
                                                                                       SF, MH,
                                                                                       Res. Care
                                                        SF: 70%                        Services:
                                                        MF: 75%                        70%
Lot Coverage  (maximum)                      70%        Nonres:    70%       70%       MF & MH
                                                        see                            Park: 75%
                                                        Exceptions                     Nonres:
                                                                                       see
                                                                                       Exceptions
                                                                   SF, Civic
                                                                   Uses, &
                                                                   Admin/
                                                                   Prof
Height (maximum)                             25'        25'        Offices:  25'       25'
                                                                   25'
                                                                   MF/
                                                                   Nonres:
                                                                   40'
Perimeter Yard [Standard based on the proposed use’s adjacency to a residential or nonresidential
zone or street ]
Street                                       Section    Section    Section   Section   Section
                                             6.4.5.C    6.4.5.C    6.4.5.C   6.4.5.C   6.4.5.C
Res Use [https://export.amlegal.com/media/   6' or 2/3  6' or 2/3  6' or 2/3 6' or 2/3 6' or 2/3
296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/    (H)*       (H)*       (H)*      (H)*      (H)*
IMAGES/0-0-0-5277.gif] Res. Zone
Res Use [https://export.amlegal.com/media/   10' or ¾  10' or ¾  10' or ¾ 10' or ¾ 10' or ¾
296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/    (H)*       (H)*       (H)*      (H)*      (H)*
IMAGES/0-0-0-5277.gif] Nonres Zone  
Nonres Use [https://export.amlegal.com/
media/                                       10' or ¾  10' or ¾  10' or ¾ 10' or ¾ 10' or ¾
296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/    (H)*       (H)*       (H)*      (H)*      (H)*
IMAGES/0-0-0-5277.gif] Res or Nonres Zone  
 
* The greater of the two dimensions applies
Key:
(H) = Height of the proposed exterior building wall
MF = Multifamily Development (Section
6.3.3.C)
MH = Mobile Home Dwelling (Section
6.3.3.A)
MH Park = Mobile Home Park (Section
6.3.3.B)
N/A = Not Applicable
Nonres = Nonresidential (Section
6.3.3.D or .E, whichever is applicable)
Res = Residential (Section
6.3.3.H or .I, whichever is applicable)
SF = Single-family Use (Section
6.3.3.J)
sf = square feet
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5277.gif] = adjacent to
(Am. Ord. 11070, 5/14/2013)
TABLE 6.3-2.B: EXCEPTIONS TO THE R-1, R-2, R-3, MH-1, & MH-2 DIMENSIONAL
STANDARDS
 
Zone Use                                Exceptions to the Zone ’s Dimensional
                                        Standard
                                        Lot Size  (min.) = 20,000 sf
     Educational Use: Elementary and    Lot Coverage  (max.) = 15%
     Secondary School (P & S)           Nonres Use adjacent  to Nonres Zone
                                        (min.) = (H)
     •   Cultural use (S)          Lot Size (min.) = 20,000 sf
     •   Parks and Recreation (P)  Lot Coverage (max.) = 60%
     •   Religious use (P)          
     Cultural Use (P - government owned Lot Size (min.) = 20,000 sf
R-1  and operated only)                 Lot Coverage (max.) = 60%
     Day Care, Adult and Child (P & S)  Lot Size (min.) = 7,000
                                        Site Area (min.) = 0
                                        Lot Coverage (max.) = N/A
     Renewable Energy Generation (S)    Height (max.) = 16'
                                        Nonres Use adjacent to Nonres Zone
                                        (min.) = (H)
     Protective Service (P - government Lot Size (min.) = 20,000 sf
     owned and operated only)           Lot Coverage (max.) = 60%
 
Zone Use Exceptions to the Zone ’s Dimensional Standard
Zone Use                                                                                  Exceptions to the Zone ’s Dimensional Standard
     Educational Use: Elementary and Secondary School (P & S)                             Lot Size (min.) = 20,000 sf
                                                                                          Lot Coverage (max.) = 15%
     •   Cultural Use (S)                                                            Lot Size (min.) = 20,000 sf
     •   Parks and Recreation (P)                                                    Lot Coverage (max.) = 60%
     •   Religious Use (P)
     Cultural Use (P - government owned and operated only)                                Lot Size (min.) = 20,000 sf
                                                                                          Lot Coverage (max.) = 60%
     Day Care, Adult (P)                                                                  Lot Coverage (max.) = N/A
     Day Care, Child – max. 30 children (P)                                             Lot Size (min.) = 14,000 sf
                                                                                          Perimeter Yard (min.) = see Sec. 4.9.4.H.4
     Day Care, Child – unlimited # of children (S)                                      Lot Size (min.) = see Sec. 4.9.4.H.7
                                                                                          Perimeter Yard (min.) = see Sec. 4.9.4.H.4
     Day Care, Child with extended hours (S)                                              Lot Size (min.) & Perimeter Yard (min.) = see Sec. 4.9.4.H.9
                                                                                          Lot Coverage (max.) = N/A
     Distribution System (S)                                                              Perimeter Yard (min.) (facility, walls and equipment) = 20' from any adjacent
                                                                                          residential zone
     Medical Services (S)                                                                 Lot Size (min.) = 1.5 acres
                                                                                          Lot Coverage (max.) = 70%
     Single-family, Attached (P)                                                          Lot Size  (min.) = Equivalent to multi-family density (2,904 sf)
     Residential Care Services, Adult Care Service or Physical and Behavioral Health      Lot Coverage (max.) = 70%
     Services – Max 10 residents
     •   Residential Care Services, Adult Care Service or Physical and Behavioral HeaLot Coverage (max.) = N/A
     Services – Max 15 residents                                                        Res. Use adjacent to Res. Zone (min.) = 10' or 3/4 (H)
     •   Residential Care Services: Rehabilitation Service – children's facilities (P)
                                                                                          Lot Size (min.) = 3 acres
R-2  Residential Care Services, Adult Care Service or Physical and Behavioral Health      Lot Coverage (max.) = 50%
     Services – unlimited number of residents                                           Perimeter Yard (min.) = 25' from all interior lot lines  abutting residential
                                                                                          zones
     •   Residential Care Services: Rehabilitation Service or Shelter Care - Max. 15
     residents (S)                                                                        Lot Size (min.) = 20,000 sf
     •   Residential Care Services: Shelter Care – victims of domestic violence (P)
                                                                                          Lot Size (min.) = 1.5 acres
     Residential Care Services: Rehabilitation Service or Shelter Care – unlimited numbeLot Coverage (max.) = 60%
     of residents (S)                                                                     Perimeter Yard (min.) = 20' from all interior lot lines  abutting residential
                                                                                          zones
     •   Cemetery (P)
     •   Communications (P)                                                          Lot Coverage (max.) = N/A
     •   Communications, limited to wireless communication towers and antennas (S)
     •   Crop production (P)
                                                                                          Site Area (min.) = 0
     Renewable Energy Generation (S)                                                      Lot Coverage (max.) = N/A
                                                                                          Height (max.) = 16'
                                                                                          Nonres Use adjacent to Nonres Zone (min.) = (H)
                                                                                          Lot Size (min.) = 43,560 sf
     Administrative and Professional Office                                               Lot Coverage (max.) = 20%
     (P - government owned and operated only)                                             Nonres. Use adjacent to Res. Zone (min.) = 2(H)
                                                                                          Nonres. Use adjacent to Nonres. Zone (min.) = 0
     Postal Service                                                                       Lot Size (min.) = 20,000 sf
     (P - Government owned and operated only)                                             Lot Coverage (max.) = 60%
     Protective Service                                                                   Lot Size (min.) = 20,000 sf
     (P - government owned and operated only)                                             Lot Coverage (max.) = 60%
 
Zone Use Exceptions to the Zone ’s Dimensional Standard
Zone Use                                                                                Exceptions to the Zone ’s Dimensional Standard
     Educational Use: Elementary and Secondary School                                   Lot Size (min.) = 20,000 sf
     (P & S)                                                                            Lot Coverage (max.) = 15%
     Cultural Use (S)                                                                   Lot Size (min.) = 20,000 sf; Lot Coverage (max.) = 60%
     Day Care: Child – max 100 children (P)                                           Lot Size (min.) = 10,000 sf
                                                                                        Perimeter Yard (min.) = See Sec. 4.9.4.H.4
                                                                                        Lot Size (min.) = 200 sf per child multiplied by the
     Day Care: Child – unlimited number of children (S)                               maximum enrollment for which the center is licensed,
                                                                                        plus 4,000 sf
                                                                                        Perimeter Yard (min.) = See Sec. 4.9.4.H.4
     Day Care: Child – extended hours for any number of children (S)                  Lot Size (min.) and Perimeter Yard (min.) = See Sec.
                                                                                        4.9.4.H.9
                                                                                        Lot Size (min.) = N/A
     Distribution System (S)                                                            Perimeter Yard (min.) = setback of the facility,
                                                                                        including walls or equipment, is 20' from any adjacent
                                                                                        residential zone
     Single-family, Attached (P)                                                        Lot Size  (min.) = Equivalent to multi-family density
                                                                                        (1,210 sf)
                                                                                        Lot Size (min.) = 0
     Residential Care Services: Rehabilitation Service – children's facilities (P)    Res. Use adjacent to Res. or Nonres. Zone (min.) = 10'
                                                                                        or 3/4 (H)
                                                                                        Lot Size (min.) = 0
     Residential Care Services: Shelter Care – victims of domestic violence (P)       Building Height (max.) = 40'
                                                                                        Res. Use adjacent to Res. or Nonres. Zone (min.) = 10'
                                                                                        or 3/4 (H)
     Residential Care Services: Rehabilitation Service or Shelter Care – max 20       Lot Size (min.) = 20,000 sf
R-3  residents (S)
                                                                                        Lot Size (min.) = 1.5 acres
     Residential Care Services: Rehabilitation Service or Shelter Care – unlimited    Building Height (max.) = 40'
     number of residents (S)                                                            Lot Coverage (max.) = 60%
                                                                                        Res. Use adjacent to Res. or Nonres. Zone (min.) = 20'
                                                                                        from all interior lot lines  abutting residential zones
     •   Civic Assembly (P - Government owned and operated only)
     •   Cultural Use (S)                                                          Lot Size (min.) = N/A
     •   Parks and Recreation (P)
     •   Religious Use (P)
     •   Cemetery (P)
     •   Communications (P)
     •   Communications, limited to wireless communication towers and antennas (S)
     •   Crop Production (P)                                                       Lot Size (min.) = N/A
     •   Day Care: Adult Day Care (P)                                              Nonres Use adjacent to Res Zone (min.) = 1½(H)
     •   Group Dwelling (P)                                                        Nonres Use adjacent to Nonres Zone (min.) = 0
     •   Medical Service (S)
     •   Residential Care Services: Adult Care Service or Physical and Behavioral
     Health Service (P)
                                                                                        Site Area (min.) = 0
     Renewable Energy Generation (S)                                                    Lot Coverage (max.) = N/A
                                                                                        Height (max.) = 16'
                                                                                        Nonres Use adjacent to Nonres Zone (min.) = (H)
                                                                                        Lot Size (min.) = 72,000 sf
     Administrative and Professional Office                                             Lot Coverage (max.) = 60%
     (P - government owned and operated only)                                           Nonres. Use adjacent to Res. Zone (min.) = 2(H)
                                                                                        Nonres. Use adjacent to Nonres. Zone (min.) = 0
 
Zone Use Exceptions to the Zone ’s Dimensional Standard
Zone Use                                Exceptions to the Zone ’s Dimensional
                                        Standard
     Educational Use: Elementary and    Lot Size (min.) = 20,000 sf
MH-1 Secondary School                   Lot Coverage (max.) = 15%
     (P & S)
    •   Parks and Recreation (P)  Lot Size (min.) = 20,000 sf
     •   Religious Use (P)
    Single-family, Attached (P)        Lot Size  (min.) = Equivalent to multi-
                                        family density (5,445 sf)
                                        Site Area (min.) = 0
                                        Lot Coverage (max.) = N/A; Height
    Renewable Energy Generation (S)    (max.) = 16'
                                        Nonres Use adjacent to Nonres Zone
                                        (min.) = (H)
     Communications, limited to
    wireless communication towers and  Lot Size (min.) = 5,000 sf
     antennas (S)
    Cultural Use (P - government owned Lot Size (min.) = 20,000 sf
     and operated only)                 Lot Coverage (max.) = 60%
     Protective Service                 Lot Size (min.) = 20,000 sf
    (P - government owned and operated Lot Coverage (max.) = 60%
     only)
 
Zone Use Exceptions to the Zone ’s Dimensional Standard
Zone Use                                                                           Exceptions to the Zone ’s Dimensional
                                                                                   Standard
MH-2 •   Mobile Home Park (P)                                                 Lot Coverage (max.) = 75%
     •   Multifamily Development (P)
    Educational Use: Elementary and Secondary School                              Lot Size (min.) = 20,000 sf
     (P & S)                                                                       Lot Coverage (max.) = 15%
    •   Parks and Recreation (P)                                             Lot Size (min.) = 20,000 sf
     •   Religious Use (P)                                                    Lot Coverage (max.) = 60%
    Single-family, Attached (P)                                                   Lot Size  (min.) = Equivalent to multi-
                                                                                   family density (2,904 sf)
                                                                                   Site Area (min.) = 0
                                                                                   Lot Coverage (max.) = N/A
    Renewable Energy Generation (S)                                               Height (max.) = 16'
                                                                                   Nonres Use adjacent to Nonres Zone
                                                                                   (min.) = (H)
     •   Communications (P)
    •   Communications, limited to wireless communication towers and antennasLot Coverage (max.) = N/A
     •   Crop Production (P)
     •   Distribution System (S)
                                                                                   Lot Size (min.) = 43,560 sf
                                                                                   Lot Coverage (max.) = 20%
    Administrative and Professional Office                                        Nonres. Use adjacent to Res. Zone
     (P - government owned and operated only)                                      (min.) = 2(H)
                                                                                   Nonres. Use adjacent to Nonres. Zone
                                                                                   (min.) = 0
    Cultural Use (P - government owned and operated only)                         Lot Size (min.) = 20,000 sf
                                                                                   Lot Coverage (max.) = 60%
    Protective Service                                                            Lot Size (min.) = 20,000 sf
     (P - government owned and operated only)                                      Lot Coverage (max.) = 60%
 
Key:
Max. = Maximum permitted
Min. = Minimum requirement
P = Permitted Use
S = Special Exception Use
Uses without a “P” or “S” indicate the use is permitted within the zone
(Am. Ord. 11070, 5/14/2013; Am. Ord. 11127, 11/6/2013; Am. Ord. 11996, 3/21/
2023)
TABLE 6.3-3.A: DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS FOR THE O-1, O-2, & O-3 ZONES
Note: Several variables factor into determining a use’s required dimensional
standards. See Section
6.3.2, Determining a Use’s Dimensional Standards, for further details.
Dimensional Standard Zone
                     0-1 0-2 0-3
Dimensional Standard                        Zone
                                            0-1         0-2         0-3
Residential Density (maximum)               8/acre      8/acre      22/acre
                                            Res: 7,000  Res: 5,000  Res: 5,000
Lot Size /Site Area  (minimum)              sf          sf          sf
                                            Nonres:     Nonres: 0   Nonres: 0
                                            10,000 sf   sf          sf
Lot Coverage  (maximum)                     Res: 70%    Res: 70%    Res: 75%
                                            Nonres: N/A Nonres: N/A Nonres: N/A
                                            Res,                    Res: 25'
Height (maximum)                            Office: 16' 26'         Nonres: 40'
                                            Other: 25'
Perimeter Yard [Standard based on the proposed use’s adjacency to a residential
or nonresidential zone or street ]
Street                                      Section     Section     Section
                                            6.4.5.C     6.4.5.C     6.4.5.C
Res Use [https://export.amlegal.com/media/  10' or ¾   10' or ¾   10' or ¾
296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/   (H)*        (H)*        (H)*
IMAGES/0-0-0-5277.gif] Res or Nonres Zone 
Nonres Use [https://export.amlegal.com/
media/                                      10' or ¾   10' or ¾   10' or ¾
296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/   (H)*        (H)*        (H)*
IMAGES/0-0-0-5277.gif] Res or Nonres Zone 
 
* The greater of the two dimensions applies
Key:
(H) = Height of the proposed exterior building wall
MF = Multifamily Development (Section
6.3.3.C)
MH = Mobile Home Dwelling (Section
6.3.3.A)
MH Park = Mobile Home Park (Section
6.3.3.B)
N/A = Not Applicable
Nonres = Nonresidential (Section
6.3.3.D or .E, whichever is applicable)
Res = Residential (Section
6.3.3.H or .I, whichever is applicable)
SF = Single-family Use (Section
6.3.3.J)
sf = square feet
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5277.gif] = adjacent to
(Am. Ord. 11070, 5/14/2013)
TABLE 6.3-3.B: EXCEPTIONS TO THE O-1, O-2, & O-3 DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
Zone Use Exceptions to the Zone ’s Dimensional Standards
Zone Use                                                                               Exceptions to the Zone ’s Dimensional Standards
     • Communications, limited to wireless communication towers and antennas (S)     Lot Size (min.) = 72,000 sf
     • Residential Care Services: Adult Care Service or Physical and Behavioral HealtLot Coverage (max.) = 15%
     Service (S)                                                                       Nonres Use adjacent to Res Zone (min.) = 1½(H)
                                                                                       Nonres Use adjacent to Nonres Zone (min.) = 0'
     • Cultural Use [S]
     • Distribution System [S]                                                       Lot Size (min.) = 20,000 sf
O-1  • Residential Care Services: Adult Care Service or Physical and Behavioral HealtLot Coverage (max.) = 60%
     Service (S)
     Single-family, Attached (P)                                                       Lot Size  (min.) = Equivalent to multi-family
                                                                                       density (5,445 sf)
                                                                                       Site Area (min.) = 0
     Renewable Energy Production (S)                                                   Height (max.) = 16'
                                                                                       Nonres Use adjacent to Nonres Zone (min.) = (H)
                                                                                       Lot Size (min.) = 72,000 sf
     Residential Care Services: Rehabilitation Service or Shelter Care (S)             Lot Coverage (max.) = 15%
                                                                                       Nonres Use adjacent to Res Zone (min.) = 1½(H)
                                                                                       Nonres Use adjacent to Nonres Zone (min.) = 0
     • Civic Assembly (P)
     • Communications, limited to wireless communication towers and antennas (S)
     • Cultural Use (P)                                                              Lot Size (min.) = 20,000 sf
     • Educational Use: Elementary and Secondary School (P & S)                      Lot Coverage (max.) = 15%
     • Educational Use: Postsecondary Inst. (P)
O-2  • Religious Use (P)
     • Cultural Use (S)                                                              Lot Size (min.) = 20,000 sf
     • Residential Care Services: Rehabilitation Service or Shelter Care (S)         Lot Coverage (max.) = 60%
     Day Care: Child Care (P & S)                                                      Lot Size (min.) = 14,000 sf
                                                                                       Lot Coverage (max.) = 80%
     Day Care: Child Care (S)                                                          Lot Size (min.) = 2.5 acres
                                                                                       Lot Coverage (max.) = 60%
     Renewable Energy Production (S)                                                   Height (max.) = 16'
                                                                                       Nonres Use adjacent to Nonres Zone (min.) = (H)
     Cultural Use (P - government owned and operated only)                             Lot size (min.) = 20,000 sf
                                                                                       Lot Coverage (max.) = 15%
                                                                                       Residential Density = 17/acres
                                                                                       Lot Size (min.) = 2,500 sf
     Family Dwelling in the Rio Nuevo District (P)                                     Lot Coverage (max.) = 90%
                                                                                       Res Use adjacent to Res Zone (min.) = 1½(H)
                                                                                       Res Use adjacent to Nonres Zone (min.) = 0
                                                                                       Lot Size (min.) = 10 acres
     Cemetery (P)                                                                      Lot Coverage (max.) = 15%
                                                                                       Nonres Use adjacent to Res Zone (min.) = 1½(H)
                                                                                       Nonres Use adjacent to Nonres Zone (min.) = 0
                                                                                       Lot Size (min.) = 72,000 sf
                                                                                       Lot Coverage (max.) = 15%
     Communications, limited to wireless communication towers and antennas (S)         Height (max.) = 25'
                                                                                       Nonres Use adjacent to Res Zone (min.) = 1½(H)
                                                                                       Nonres Use adjacent to Nonres Zone (min.) = 0
     • Cultural Use (S)                                                              Lot Size (min.) = 20,000 sf
     • Distribution System (S)                                                       Lot Coverage (max.) = 60%
                                                                                       Height (max.) = 25'
                                                                                       Lot Size (min.) = 10,000 sf
O-3  Day Care: Child care (2 uses with different use-specific standards)               Lot Coverage (max.) = 50%
                                                                                       Height (max.) = 25'
     • Civic Assembly (P)
     • Educational Use: Elementary and Secondary School (P & S)
     • Educational Use: Postsecondary Inst. (P)                                      Lot Coverage (max.) = 70%
     • Parks and Recreation (P)
     • Religious Use (P)
     Day Care: Child Care (S)                                                          Lot Coverage (max.) = 60%
                                                                                       Height (max.) = 25'
     • Administrative and Professional Office (P)
     • Communications (P)
     • Day Care: Adult Day Care (P)
     • Residential Care Services: Adult Care Service or Physical and Behavioral HealtNonres Use adjacent to Res Zone (min.) = 1½(H)
     Service (P - 2 uses with different use-specific standards)                        Nonres Use adjacent to Nonres Zone (min.) = 0
     • Medical Service - Extended Health Care, Major, or Outpatient (P)
     • Residential Care Services: Rehabilitation Service - children’s facility (P)
     • Residential Care Services: Rehabilitation Service or Shelter Care (P & S)
     Single-family, Attached (P)                                                       Lot Size  (min.) = Equivalent to permitted
                                                                                       density (1,980 sf)
 
Key:
Max. = Maximum permitted
Min. = Minimum requirement
P = Permitted Use
S = Special Exception Use
Uses without a “P” or “S” indicate the use is permitted within the zone
(Am. Ord. 11070, 5/14/2013; Am. Ord. 11996, 3/21/2023)
TABLE 6.3-4.A: DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS FOR THE C-1, C-2, C-3, OCR-1, & OCR-
2 ZONES
Note: Several variables factor into determining a use’s required dimensional
standards. See Section
6.3.2, Determining a Use’s Dimensional Standards, for further details.
Dimensional Standard Zone
                     C-1 C-2 C-3 OCR-1 OCR-2
Dimensional Standard                      Zone
                                          C-1       C-2       C-3     OCR-1   OCR-2
Residential Density  (maximum)            36/acre   44/acre   87/acre N/A     N/A
Lot Size /Site Area  (minimum)            0         0         0       0       0
                                          Res: 75%  Res: 70%  Res:    Res:    Res:
                                                            80%     80%     80%
Lot Coverage  (maximum)                   Nonres:   Nonres:                  
                                          N/A       N/A       Nonres: Nonres: Nonres:
                                                              N/A     N/A     N/A
                                          Res: 25'
Height (maximum)                                   40'       75'     140'    300'
                                          Nonres:
                                          30'
Perimeter Yard [Standard based on the proposed use’s adjacency to a residential or
nonresidential zone or street ]
Street                                    Section   Section   Section Section Section
                                          6.4.5.C   6.4.5.C   6.4.5.C 6.4.5.C 6.4.5.C
Res Use [https://export.amlegal.com/
media/                                    10' or ¾ 10' or ¾ 1½(H)  1½(H)  1½(H)
296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/ (H)*      (H)*
IMAGES/0-0-0-5277.gif] Res Zone
Res Use [https://export.amlegal.com/
media/                                    10' or ¾ 10' or ¾ 0       0       0
296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/ (H)*      (H)*
IMAGES/0-0-0-5277.gif] Nonres Zone
Nonres Use [https://export.amlegal.com/
media/                                    1½(H)    1½(H)    1½(H)  2(H)    2(H)
296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5277.gif] Res Zone
Nonres Use [https://export.amlegal.com/
media/                                    0         0         0       0       0
296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5277.gif] Nonres Zone
 
* The greater of the two dimensions applies
Key:
(H) = Height of the proposed exterior building wall
MF = Multifamily Development (Section
6.3.3.C)
MH = Mobile Home Dwelling (Section
6.3.3.A)
MH Park = Mobile Home Park (Section
6.3.3.B)
N/A = Not Applicable
Nonres = Nonresidential (Section
6.3.3.D or .E, whichever is applicable)
Res = Residential (Section
6.3.3.H or .I, whichever is applicable)
SF = Single-family Use (Section
6.3.3.J)
sf = square feet
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5277.gif] = adjacent to
(Am. Ord. 11070, 5/14/2013)
TABLE 6.3-4.B: EXCEPTIONS TO THE C-1, C-2, C-3, OCR-1, & OCR-2 DIMENSIONAL
STANDARDS
Zone Use Exceptions to the Zone ’s Dimensional Standards
Zone Use                                                                                  Exceptions to the Zone ’s Dimensional Standards
     Golf Course (P)                                                                      Lot Size  (min.) = 30 acres
                                                                                          Lot Coverage  (max.) = 10%
     Cemetery (P)                                                                         Lot Size  (min.) = 10 acres
                                                                                          Lot Coverage  (max.) = 15%
     Communications, limited to wireless communication towers  and antennas (S)           Lot Size  (min.) = 1 acre
                                                                                          Lot Coverage  (max.) = 20%
                                                                                          Lot Size  (min.) = 20,000 sf
     Distribution System (S)                                                              Lot Coverage  (max.) = 60%
                                                                                          Nonres Use adjacent  to Res Zone (min.) = 10' or ¾(H)
                                                                                          Nonres Use adjacent  to Nonres Zone (min.) = (H)
C-1                                                                                       Lot Size  (min.) = 10,000 sf
     Research and Product Development  (P)                                                Lot Coverage  (max.) = 50%
                                                                                          Nonres Use adjacent  to Res Zone (min.) = 10' or ¾(H)
                                                                                          Nonres Use adjacent  to Nonres Zone (min.) = (H)
                                                                                          Lot Size  (min.) = 7,000 sf
     Group Dwelling (P)                                                                   Lot Coverage  (max.) = 70%
                                                                                          Nonres Use adjacent  to Res Zone (min.) = 10' or ¾(H)
                                                                                          Nonres Use adjacent  to Nonres Zone (min.) = (H)
     •   Personal Storage (P)                                                        Height (max.) = 16'
     •   Renewable Energy Generation (P)                                             Nonres Use adjacent to Res Zone (min.) = 10' or ¾(H)
                                                                                          Nonres Use adjacent to Nonres Zone (min.) = (H)
                                                                                          Lot Size (min.) = 30 acres
     Golf Course (P)                                                                      Lot Coverage (max.) = 10%
                                                                                          Height (max.) = 25'
                                                                                          Nonres Use adjacent to Res Zone (min.) = 2(H)
                                                                                          Lot Size (min.) = 1 acre
     Correctional Use: Supervision Facility (P)                                           Lot Coverage (max.) = 20%
C-2                                                                                       Height (max.) = 25'
                                                                                          Nonres Use adjacent to Res Zone (min.) = 2(H)
                                                                                          Lot Size (min.) = 1,500 sf
     Billboard (P)                                                                        Height (max.) = In accordance with Chapter 3, Sign
                                                                                          Code, of the Tucson Code
     Artisan Residence (P)                                                                Height (max.) = 50'
     Renewable Energy Generation (P)                                                      Height (max.) = 16'
                                                                                          Lot Size (min.) = 30 acres
     Golf Course (P)                                                                      Lot Coverage (max.) = 10%
                                                                                          Height (max.) = 25'
                                                                                          Nonres Use adjacent to Res Zone (min.) = 2(H)
                                                                                          Lot Size (min.) = 1 acre
     Correctional Use: Supervision Facility (P)                                           Lot Coverage (max.) = 20%
                                                                                          Height (max.) = 25'
                                                                                          Nonres Use adjacent to Res Zone (min.) = 2(H)
     Residential Care Services: Rehabilitation Service or Shelter Care (S)                Height (max.) = 40'
C-3                                                                                       Lot Size (min.) = 1,500
     Billboard (P)                                                                        Height (max.) = In accordance with Chapter 3, Sign
                                                                                          Code, of the Tucson Code
     Group Dwelling (P)                                                                   Height (max.) = 50'
                                                                                          Nonres Use adjacent to Res Zone (min.) = 1½(H)
     •   Residential Care Services: Adult Care Service or Physical and Behavioral Health
     Service (P)                                                                          Height (max.) = 40'
     •   Residential Care Services: Rehabilitation Service - children’s facilities Nonres Use adjacent to Res Zone (min.) = 1½(H)
     •   Residential Care Services: Rehabilitation Service or Shelter Care (P & S)
     •   Residential Care Services: Shelter Care - victims of domestic violence (P)
     Renewable Energy Generation (P & S)                                                  Height (max.) = 16'
                                                                                          Lot Size (min.) = 1 acre
OCR- Correctional Use: Supervision Facility (P)                                           Lot Coverage (max.) = 20%
1                                                                                         Height (max.) = 25'
     Renewable Energy Generation (P & S)                                                  Height (max.) = 16'
                                                                                          Lot Size (min.) = 1 acre
     Correctional Use: Custodial Facility (S) Correctional Use: Supervision Facility (P)  Lot Coverage (max.) = 20%
OCR-                                                                                      Height (max.) = 25'
2                                                                                         Nonres Use adjacent to Res Zone (min.) = 1½(H)
     Residential Care Services: Rehabilitation Service or Shelter Care (P)                Height (max.) = 40'
                                                                                          Nonres Use adjacent to Res Zone (min.) = 1½(H)
     Renewable Energy Generation (P & S)                                                  Height (max.) = 16'
 
Key:
Max. = Maximum permitted
Min. = Minimum requirement
P = Permitted Use
S = Special Exception Use
Uses without a “P” or “S” indicate the use is permitted within the zone
(Am. Ord. 11070, 5/14/2013; Am. Ord. 11408, 11/9/2016)
TABLE 6.3-5.A: DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS FOR THE P-I, I-1, & I-2 ZONES
Note: Several variables factor into determining a use’s required dimensional
standards. See Section
6.3.2, Determining a Use’s Dimensional Standards, for further details.
Dimensional Standard Zone
                     P-I I-1 I-2
Dimensional Standard                      Zone
                                          P-I      I-1      I-2
Residential Density  (maximum)            N/A      N/A      1 unit for a
                                                            caretaker
Lot Size /Site Area  (minimum)            0        0        0
Lot Coverage  (maximum)                   N/A      N/A      N/A
Height (maximum)                          50'      75'      140'
 Perimeter Yard [Standard based on the proposed use’s adjacency to a
residential or nonresidential zone or street ]
Street                                    Section  Section  Section
                                          6.4.5.C  6.4.5.C  6.4.5.C
Res Use [https://export.amlegal.com/
media/                                    1½(H)   2(H)     2(H)
296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5277.gif] Res Zone
Res Use [https://export.amlegal.com/
media/                                    0        0        0
296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5277.gif] Nonres Zone
Nonres Use [https://export.amlegal.com/
media/                                    1½(H)   1½(H)   2(H)
296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5277.gif] Res Zone
Nonres Use [https://export.amlegal.com/
media/                                    0        0        0
296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5277.gif] Nonres Zone
 
Key:
(H) = Height of the proposed exterior building wall
MF = Multifamily Development (Section
6.3.3.C)
MH = Mobile Home Dwelling (Section
6.3.3.A)
MH Park = Mobile Home Park (Section
6.3.3.B)
N/A = Not Applicable
Nonres = Nonresidential (Section
6.3.3.D or .E, whichever is applicable)
Res = Residential (Section
6.3.3.H or .I, whichever is applicable)
SF = Single-family Use (Section
6.3.3.J)
sf = square feet
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5277.gif] = adjacent to
TABLE 6.3-5.B: EXCEPTIONS TO THE P-I, I-1, & I-2 DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
Zone Use Exceptions to the Zone ’s Dimensional Standards
Zone Use                                                                             Exceptions to the Zone ’s Dimensional Standards
     Educational Use: Elementary and Secondary Schools (S)                           Height (max.) = 75'
     Renewable Energy Generation (P)                                                 Height (max.) = 16'
     •   Civic Assembly (P)
     •   Cultural Use (P)
     •   Educational Use, Instructional or Postsecondary Institution (P)
     •   Membership Organization (P)
     •   Postal Service (P)
     •   Religious Use (P)
     •   Alcoholic Beverage Service:
        •   Excluding Large Bar (P)
        •   Large Bar (S)
        •   With a Microbrewery as an accessory Use (P)
     •   Animal Service (P)
     •   Entertainment:
P-I     •   Excluding Dance Halls (P)
        •   Dance Hall (S)                                                   Height (max.) = 40'
     •   Food Service: Soup Kitchen (S)
     •   Funeral Service (P)
     •   Medical Service:
        •   Extended Healthcare (P)
        •   Major (P)
        •   Outpatient, Limited to blood donor centers (S)
     •   Trade Service and Repair, Minor (P)
     •   Food and Beverage Sales:
        •   Excluding Large Retail Establishments (P)
        •   Large Retail Establishments (S)
     •   General Merchandise Sales:
        •   Excluding Large Retail Establishments (P)
        •   Large Retail Establishments (S)
                                                                                     Lot Size  (min.) = 30 acres
     Golf Course (P)                                                                 Lot Coverage  (max.) = 10%
                                                                                     Height (max.) = 25'
                                                                                     Nonres Use adjacent  to Res Zone (min.) = 2(H)
                                                                                     Lot Size  (min.) = 1,500 sf
     Billboard (P)                                                                   Height (max.) = In accordance with Chapter 3,
I-1                                                                                  Sign Code, of the Tucson Code
     Perishable Goods Manufacturing (P)                                              Height (max.) = 50'
     •   Residential Care Services: Rehabilitation Services or Shelter Care (P) Height (max.) = 140'
     •   Residential Care Services: Shelter Care - victims of domestic violence Nonres Use adjacent to Res Zone (min.) = 2(H)
     •   Alcoholic Beverage Service - Large Bar (S)                             Height (max.) = 300'
     •   Communications (P & S)                                                 Nonres Use adjacent to Res Zone (min.) = 2(H)
     •   Entertainment - Dance Hall (S)
     Renewable Energy Generation                                                     Height (max.) = 16'
     Any use from the following use groups not allowed as a permitted or special
     exception use in any other zone or as a special exception use in the I-2 zone
     are permitted in the I-2 zone :                                                 Height (max.) = 40'
     •   Agricultural Use Group                                                 Nonres Use adjacent to Res Zone (min.) = 1½(H)
     •   Commercial Use group
     •   Restricted Adult Act Use Group
     •   Retail Trade Use Group
                                                                                     Lot Size (min.) = 1,500 sf
     Billboard (P)                                                                   Height (max.) = In accordance with Chapter 3,
                                                                                     Sign Code, of the Tucson Code
                                                                                     Nonres Use adjacent to Res Zone (min.) = 1½(H)
I-2  •   Automotive - Service and Repair (P)
     •   Medical Marijuana Designated Caregiver Cultivation Location (P)
     •   Medical Marijuana Dispensary Off-Site Cultivation Location (P)
     •   Medical Services - Outpatient, limited to blood donor center (S)       Height (max.) = 75'
     •   Medical Marijuana Qualifying Patient Cultivation Location (P)          Nonres Use adjacent to Res Zone (min.) = 1½(H)
     •   Any use from the Civic Use Group not allowed as a permitted or special
     exception use in any other zone or as a special exception use in the I-2 zone
     is permitted in the I-2 zone (P)
     •   Alcoholic Beverage Service - Large Bar (S)
     •   Communications (P & S)                                                 Height (max.) = 300'
     •   Entertainment - Dance Hall (S)
     Renewable Energy Distribution (P)                                               Height (max.) = 16'
 
Key:
Max. = Maximum permitted
Min. = Minimum requirement
P = Permitted Use
S = Special Exception Use
Uses without a “P” or “S” indicate the use is permitted within the zone
(Am. Ord. 11201, 9/23/2014; Am. Ord. 11996, 3/21/2023)
TABLE 6.3-6.A: DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS FOR THE OS, IR, P, & RV ZONES
Note: Several variables factor into determining a use’s required dimensional
standards. See Section
6.3.2, Determining a Use’s Dimensional Standards, for further details.
Dimensional Standard Zone
                     OS IR P RV
Dimensional Standard                      Zone
                                          OS      IR      P        RV
Residential Density  (maximum)            N/A     1/36    N/A      8/acre
                                                  acres
Lot Size /Site Area  (minimum)            4,000   36      5,000 sf 7,000 sf
                                          sf      acres
                                                  SF, MH:
                                                  N/A
Lot Coverage  (maximum)                   10%            N/A      70%
                                                  Nonres:
                                                  10%
Height (maximum)                          12'     30'     16'      16'
Perimeter Yard [Standard based on the proposed use’s adjacency to a residential
or nonresidential zone or street ]
Street                                    Section Section Section  Section
                                          6.4.5.C 6.4.5.C 6.4.5.C  6.4.5.C
Res Use [https://export.amlegal.com/
media/                                    4(H)    25'     6' or 2/ 10' or ¾(H)*
296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/                 3(H)*
IMAGES/0-0-0-5277.gif] Res. Zone
Res Use [https://export.amlegal.com/
media/                                    0       (H)     6' or 2/ 10' or ¾(H)*
296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/                 3(H)*
IMAGES/0-0-0-5277.gif] Nonres. Zone
Nonres Use [https://export.amlegal.com/
media/                                    4(H)    4(H)    6' or 2/ 10' or ¾(H)*
296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/                 3(H)*
IMAGES/0-0-0-5277.gif] Res Zone
Nonres Use [https://export.amlegal.com/
media/                                    0       0       6' or 2/ 10' or ¾(H)
296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/                 3(H)*    *
IMAGES/0-0-0-5277.gif] Nonres Zone
 
* The greater of the two dimensions applies
Key:
(H) = Height of the proposed exterior building wall
MF = Multifamily Development (Section
6.3.3.C)
MH = Mobile Home Dwelling (Section
6.3.3.A)
MH Park = Mobile Home Park (Section
6.3.3.B)
N/A = Not Applicable
Nonres = Nonresidential (Section
6.3.3.D or .E, whichever is applicable)
Res = Residential (Section
6.3.3.H or .I, whichever is applicable)
SF = Single-family Use (Section
6.3.3.J)
sf = square feet
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5277.gif] = adjacent to
(Am. Ord. 11070, 5/14/2013)
TABLE 6.3-6.B: EXCEPTIONS TO THE OS, IR, P, & RV DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
 
Zone Use                               Exceptions to the Zone ’s Dimensional
                                       Standards
                                       Site Area  (min.) = 0
IR   Renewable Energy Distribution (P) Lot Coverage  (max.) = N/A
                                       Height (max.) = 16'
 
Key:
Max. = Maximum permitted
Min. = Minimum requirement
TABLE 6.3-7.A: DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS FOR THE NC, RVC, & MU ZONES
Note: Several variables factor into determining a use’s required dimensional
standards. See Section
6.3.2, Determining a Use’s Dimensional Standards, for further details.
Dimensional Standard Zones
                     NC RVC MU
Dimensional Standard                      Zones
                                          NC            RVC      MU
Residential Density  (maximum)            8/acre        N/A      SF: 1/7,000 sf
                                                                 MF: 15/acre
                                          Res: 7,000 sf          SF: 7,000 sf
Lot Size /Site Area  (minimum)            Nonres:       N/A      MF: 5,000 sf
                                          10,000 sf              Nonres: N/A
                                          Res: 70%               SF: 70%
Lot Coverage  (maximum)                   Nonres: N/A   N/A      MF: 75%
                                                                 Nonres: N/A
Height (maximum)                          16'           30'      Res: 25'
                                                                 Nonres: 30'
Perimeter Yard [Standard based on the proposed use’s adjacency to a residential
or nonresidential zone or street ]
Street                                    Section       Section  Section
                                          6.4.5.C       6.4.5.C  6.4.5.C
Res Use [https://export.amlegal.com/
media/                                    10' or ¾(H)* 1½(H)   10' or ¾(H)*
296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5277.gif] Res. Zone
Res Use [https://export.amlegal.com/
media/                                    10' or ¾(H)* 0        10' or ¾(H)*
296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5277.gif] Nonres Zone
Nonres Use [https://export.amlegal.com/
media/                                    10' or ¾(H)* 1½(H)   1½(H)
296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5277.gif] Res Zone
Nonres Use [https://export.amlegal.com/
media/                                    10' or ¾(H)* 0        0
296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5277.gif] Nonres Zone
 
* The greater of the two dimensions applies
Key:
(H) = Height of the proposed exterior building wall
MF = Multifamily Development (Section
6.3.3.C)
MH = Mobile Home Dwelling (Section
6.3.3.A)
MH Park = Mobile Home Park (Section
6.3.3.B)
N/A = Not Applicable
Nonres = Nonresidential (Section
6.3.3.D or .E, whichever is applicable)
Res = Residential (Section
6.3.3.H or .I, whichever is applicable)
SF = Single-family Use (Section
6.3.3.J)
sf = square feet
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5277.gif] = adjacent to
(Am. Ord. 11070, 5/14/2013)
TABLE 6.3-7.B: EXCEPTIONS TO THE NC, RVC, & MU DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
Zone Use Exceptions to the Zone ’s Dimensional Standards
Zone Use                                                            Exceptions to the Zone ’s Dimensional Standards
                                                                    Lot Size  (min.) = 72,000 sf
     Communications, limited to wireless to communication towers    Lot Coverage  (max.) = 15%
     and antennas (S)                                               Height (max.) = 25'
                                                                    Nonres Use adjacent  to Res Zone (min.) = 2(H)
                                                                    Nonres Use adjacent  to Nonres Zone (min.) = 0
                                                                    Lot Size (min.) = 20,000 sf
                                                                    Lot Coverage (max.) = 15%
NC   •   Distribution system (S)                               Height (max.) = 25'
     •   Educational Uses: Elementary and Secondary Schools (P Nonres Use adjacent to Res Zone (min.) = 10' or 3/4
                                                                    (H)
                                                                    Nonres Use adjacent to Nonres Zone (min.) = (H)
                                                                    Lot Size (min.) = 0
     Artisan Residence (P)                                          Height (max.) = 50'
                                                                    Nonres Use adjacent to Res Zone (min.) = 1½(H)
                                                                    Nonres Use adjacent to Nonres Zone (min.) = 0
                                                                    Lot Size (min.) = 1 acre
     Communications, limited to wireless to communication towers    Lot Coverage (max.) = 20%
     and antennas (S)                                               Height (max.) = 25'
                                                                    Res Use adjacent to Res Zone (min.) = 2(H)
                                                                    Nonres Use adjacent to Res Zone (min.) = 2(H)
RVC                                                                 Lot Size (min.) = 20,000 sf
                                                                    Lot Coverage (max.) = 60%
                                                                    Height (max.) = 25'
     Distribution System (S)                                        Res Use adjacent to Res Zone (min.) = 10' or ¾(H)
                                                                    Res Use adjacent to Nonres Zone (min.) = (H)
                                                                    Nonres Use adjacent to Res Zone (min.) = 10' or ¾(H)
                                                                    Nonres Use adjacent to Nonres Zone (min.) = (H)
                                                                    Lot Size (min.) = 10 acres
     Animal Production, limited to commercial stables (P)           Lot Coverage (max.) = 10%
                                                                    Nonres Use adjacent to Res Zone (min.) = 1½(H)
                                                                    Lot Size (min.) = 10 acres
     •   Medical Service - Extended Health Care (P)            Lot Coverage (max.) = 10%
     •   Medical Service - Major (P)                           Height (max.) = 25'
                                                                    Nonres Use adjacent to Res Zone (min.) = 1½(H)
                                                                    Lot Size (min.) = 1 acre
     •   Correctional Use - Custodial Facility (S)             Lot Coverage (max.) = 20%
     •   Correctional Use - Supervision Facility (P)           Height (max.) = 25'
                                                                    Nonres Use adjacent to Res Zone (min.) = 1½(H)
                                                                    Lot Size (min.) = 36,000 sf
MU   Animal Production (P)                                          Lot Coverage (max.) = 15%
                                                                    Nonres Use adjacent to Res Zone (min.) = 2(H)
                                                                    Lot Size (min.) = 7,000 sf
                                                                    Lot Coverage (max.) = 70%
     Group Dwelling (P)                                             Height (max.) = 25'
                                                                    Nonres Use adjacent to Res Zone (min.) = 10' or ¾(H)
                                                                    Nonres Use adjacent to Nonres Zone (min.) = (H)
                                                                    Lot Size (min.) = 180,000 sf
     Medical Services, Outpatient (P)                               Lot Coverage (max.) = 20%
                                                                    Nonres Use adjacent to Res Zone (min.) = 1½(H)
     Billboard (S)                                                  Lot Size (min.) = 1,500 sf
     •   Parking (S)                                           Height (max.) = 16'
     •   Renewable Energy Generation (P & S)                   Nonres Use adjacent to Res Zone (min.) = 10' or ¾(H)
                                                                    Nonres Use adjacent to Nonres Zone (min.) = (H)
 
Key:
Max. = Maximum permitted
Min. = Minimum requirement
P = Permitted Use
S = Special Exception Use
Uses without a “P” or “S” indicate the use is permitted within the zone
6.4.   RULES OF MEASUREMENT AND EXCEPTIONS TO DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
6.4.1.   PURPOSE
   This section is intended to provide uniform and consistent methods to
measure and apply the dimensional standards in
Tables 6.3-1 through
6.3-7 and to provide exceptions to these standards.
6.4.2.   LOT SIZE
   A.   Standards
      1.   MS&R Street  Frontage
      A lot with frontage on a street designated on the MS&R Plan shall be
designed with sufficient width and depth so that motor vehicles can enter or
leave the lot without backing out onto the MS&R street .
      2.   Lot Width at Street  Frontage
      If a lot has street  frontage , the lot width at the street  frontage
shall be of a size sufficient for the purposes of locating motor vehicle and
pedestrian access improvements as required by the UDC or Technical Standards
Manual.
      3.   Uncombining Lots that Result in Nonconforming Lot Size Prohibited
      Lots that have been combined in the past, either through the Pima County
Assessors Office or by development , may not be split back into the original
platted lots if the original lots do not meet current UDC requirements for
minimum lot size . Any rights to a nonconforming lot size were given up at the
time the lots were combined. Plats by themselves do not establish the right to
construct.
   B.   Exceptions
   The following are exempt from the minimum lot size standards of this
article:
      1.   Parcels that are:
         a.   Exclusively and permanently restricted by plat , deed, or
covenant for private use, such as, but not limited to, common areas for
parking, recreation, open space , drainage, or detention or retention of
stormwater; or,
         b.   Dedicated to the public for parks, open space , or other similar
public purposes, such as placement of well sites, electrical substations, or
other utilities .
      2.   An existing lot that is less than the minimum lot area required by
the applicable zone because of a governmental act or condemnation or voluntary
transfer of property in lieu of condemnation may be developed if the proposed
development on the lot conforms to all other requirements of the UDC ; or,
      3.   A lot which is less than the minimum lot area required by the
applicable zone may be developed with a single-family dwelling when all of the
following apply:
         a.   The lot was existing and of record on September 20, 1948, or was
legally created under Pima County jurisdiction and of record at the time of
annexation;
         b.   The lot is zoned for residential development ; and,
         c.   The proposed development on the lot conforms to all other
standards of this article.
6.4.3.    LOT COVERAGE AND SITE COVERAGE
   A.   Purpose
   This section provides a uniform and consistent method of determining and
applying the lot or site coverage standards, whichever is applicable.
   B.   Application
      1.   Site coverage is the area of an overall project site , inclusive of
individual lots , covered by the improvements provided below. Site coverage ,
instead of lot coverage , is used when calculating coverage limits for the
following: 1) Flexible Lot Developments; and, 2) a nonresidential development
that is subdivided into individual lots , but functions as a site , such as is
the case with some shopping centers. This type of nonresidential development
typically has a cross access agreement.
      2.   Lot coverage applies to all other types of development in accordance
with the underlying zone .
      3.   The following improvements are included in the lot or site coverage
, whichever applies: (See
Figure 6.4.3-A: Lot and Site Coverage.)
         a.   Any area of a building within the outside edges of the exterior
walls at ground level (design grade ). Any raised extensions of the ground
floor, such as bay windows and stairs that are less than six feet above the
ground, are considered part of the building ’s lot coverage ;
         b.   Vehicular use areas , measured within the outside edges of any
area allocated to vehicle use, whether improved or unimproved. To determine the
size of an unimproved vehicular use area , the minimum dimensions for parking
spaces, access lanes , and pedestrian facilities, as required by the
appropriate Development Standard, are used to determine lot coverage ; and,
         c.   Storage areas, measured from outside edge to outside edge of any
area allocated to storage use. Storage areas include enclosed or open areas
used for storage or display of materials, equipment, refuse, or vehicles.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3048.jpg]
Figure 6.4.3-A: Lot and Site Coverage
   C.   Exceptions
   The following are excluded from the lot coverage and site coverage
calculations to encourage design flexibility and provide for additional
amenities.
      1.   Buildings
      The following are not included in the lot or site coverage calculations,
provided the areas are located on the ground floor.
         a.   Roofed areas, open on at least one side, which provide shelter to
exterior areas, such as balconies, entrances, stoops, and terraces , provided
they are not used for utilities , maintenance, laundry, storage, or motor
vehicle parking.
         b.   Any part of a building used for recreational purposes provided
the recreation area:
            (1)   Is separated by a wall from nonrecreational areas such as
laundry rooms;
            (2)   Is designated for common use by tenants;
            (3)   Is not used by the general public; and,
            (4)   Is not within a dwelling unit .
         c.   Any outdoor area over an underground building which is either
landscaped, used for recreation purposes, or both. The roof of the building can
be a maximum of three feet above design grade measured to its highest point.
         d.   Roofed interior space which provides a physical connection to the
outdoors and natural lighting, either directly or indirectly. In addition, the
space:
            (1)   Shall not, in whole or in part, be designated as tenant area;
            (2)   Shall not have more than 15% of the total area allocated
toward corridor space;
            (3)   Shall be at least 30 feet wide in any horizontal direction;
            (4)   Shall have a minimum floor-to-ceiling height of 20 feet; and,
            (5)   Shall not be within a dwelling unit .
         e.   Solar Collectors. Solar collectors, whether part of the principal
structure or an accessory structure , are not included in lot coverage
calculations.
      2.   Vehicular Use Areas
      Within a vehicular use area , any landscaped area greater than 25 square
feet is excluded, provided the landscaped area is:
         a.   Larger than three feet in width; and,
         b.   Is curbed to protect it from vehicular traffic.
   D.   Lot Coverage and Site Coverage Calculation
      1.   The amount of lot coverage per site is not to exceed the maximum lot
coverage percentage permitted by the project ’s underlying zone .
      2.   The lot coverage percentage is determined by dividing the total area
of improvements in accordance with Section
6.4.3.B, Application, and 6.4.3.C, Exceptions, by the total land area of the
site .
      3.   The amount of site coverage per overall project site , inclusive of
individual lots , vehicle use area, etc. is not to exceed the maximum site
coverage percentage permitted by the project ’s underlying zone in accordance
with Section
8.7.3.D, Regulations for FLD Projects.
      4.   The site coverage percentage is determined by dividing the total
area of improvements in accordance with Section
6.4.3.B.2 and
6.4.3.C, Exceptions, by the total land area of the site  included in the
project ’s subdivision  plat  or site plan , whichever is applicable, inclusive
of individual residential lots , functional open space , vehicle use areas,
etc. Compliance with the site coverage  standard is not measured on an
individual residential lot  basis, but on an overall project  basis.
6.4.4.   HEIGHT
   A.   Measurement of Building Height
   Building height is the vertical distance measured from the design grade
elevation to the highest point of a flat roof; to the deck line of a mansard
roof; or to the middle (between the eave and ridge ) of the highest gable of a
pitched or hipped roof, except as follows: (See
Figure 6.4.4-A, Measurement of Building Height .)
      1.   Historic Preservation Zone (HPZ)
      Building height is the vertical distance measured between the highest
part of a structure and the finished grade at the midpoint of the front facade
of the principal structure, excluding chimneys, mechanical equipment, and other
miscellaneous additions.
      2.   Airport Environs Zone (AEZ)
      Building height within the AEZ is measured in accordance with Section
6.4.4. When there is a conflict between the maximum heights permitted by the
project ’s zone and the standards in Section
5.6.11, Airport Hazard Districts for TIA and DMAFB Environs, the more
restrictive applies.
      3.   Scenic Corridor Zone (SCZ)
      The vertical distance of a building is measured from design grade , at
all points within the building footprint , to the highest point on a roof. Any
wall extending above the roof, such as a parapet wall or a fire wall, is
considered part of the roof for purposes of measuring height .
      4.   Hillside Development Zone (HDZ)
      See height measurement standards in Section
5.2.7.A, Building Height.
   B.   Measurement of All Other Structures
      1.   General
      The height of all structures , other than buildings , is the vertical
distance measured from design grade at the base of the structure at all points
along that structure to the top of the structure. For structures within six
feet of a property line , the design grade used for measuring height is the
lower of the two grades on each side of that property line . Perimeter walls
are measured from the base of the wall that faces an adjacent property.
      2.   Airport Environs Zone (AEZ)
      Structure and tree height is measured in accordance with Section
6.4.4. When there is a conflict between the maximum heights permitted by the
project ’s zone and the standards in Section
5.6.11, Airport Hazard Districts for TIA and DMAFB Environs, the more
restrictive applies.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3050.jpg]
Figure 6.4.4-A: Measurement of Building
   C.   Height Exceptions
   The following structural elements may extend above the maximum allowed
height, subject to any limitations listed: (See
Figure 6.4.4-B, Exceptions to Building Height.)
      1.   Ornamental Elements
      Ornamental elements of the buildings and structures , such as spires,
cupolas, belfries, clock towers, and domes, provided that such elements:
         a.   Are not for human occupancy; and,
         b.   Do not exceed ten feet above the allowed structure height ,
except as follows:
            (1)   Ornamental elements of buildings and structures proposed to
exceed ten feet above the allowed structure height are processed in accordance
with Section
3.4.3, Zoning Examiner Special Exception Procedure. Additionally, the Design
Review Board shall review and forward a recommendation to the Zoning Examiner
on the proposal. Ornamental elements proposed to exceed ten feet above the
permitted height must comply with the following:
               (a)   The ornamental element is an integral part of thebuilding
’s architecture, and is not for human occupancy;
               (b)   The ornamental elements proposed to exceed ten feet above
the allowed structure height shall not be used for signage;
               (c)   The applicant shall demonstrate how the proposal minimizes
impacts to existing land uses by including a view shed analysis and an analysis
of the project site grades and adjacent property grades as part of their
submittal; or,
               (d)   Setbacks required for the architectural element will be
one foot for each additional foot in height that it exceeds the base allowance
of ten feet.
      2.   Functional Elements
      Chimneys, mechanical penthouses, and bulkheads for stairwells, elevator
shafts, or skylights, provided that such elements:
         a.   Are not for human occupancy;
         b.   Do not exceed ten feet above the allowed structure height ; and,
         c.   Do not exceed 25% of the total roof area of the building on which
they are located.
      3.   Mechanical and Accessory Equipment
      Mechanical equipment, except solar energy equipment, and accessories
necessary to the operation or maintenance of the building , provided that such
elements:
         a.   Do not exceed six feet above the allowed structure height ;
         b.   Do not exceed 25% of the total roof area of the building on which
they are located;
         c.   Are concealed by an opaque  screen ; and,
         d.   Are located away from the edge of the building a distance
equivalent to the height of the elements.
      4.   Solar Energy Equipment
   Solar energy equipment, provided that such elements do not exceed the
allowable height limits by more than ten feet.
      5.   Parapet Walls and Safety Railings
      Parapet walls and safety railings, provided they do not exceed the
allowable height by more than four feet.
      6.   Communications Antennas (Excluding Communications Facilities)
      Communications antennas not in conjunction with a communications
facility, excluding dish antennas greater than three feet in diameter, provided
such elements do not exceed the allowable height limits by more than five feet.
      7.   Dish Antennas
      Dish antennas , greater than three feet in diameter, provided that such
elements:
         a.   Do not exceed the allowable height limits by more than ten feet;
         b.   Are located as close to the center of the roof structure as
possible;
         c.   Are screened from view, to the maximum extent possible without
interfering with reception, from the street  frontage of the property at
pedestrian level by an opaque  screen , such as a parapet wall at the roof’s
edge; and,
         d.   Are located on a building with a structure height greater than 40
feet.
      8.   Communications Antennas (Associated with Communications Facilities)
      Communications antennas , other than those associated with wireless
communications, in conjunction with a communications facility do not have a
maximum height limitation, provided the antennas are located at least one foot
distance for every foot in height measured from all property lines of
residentially zoned property.
      9.   Change of Zoning
      If the Mayor and Council authorize a rezoning of a property and a
building (s) exists on the property that exceeds the maximum required height
for the proposed land use, the existing buildings shall be considered
conforming. This exception applies only to buildings existing at the time of
authorization, except as provided by Section
6.4.5.B.10, Historic Preservation Zone (HPZ).
      10.   Historic Preservation Zone (HPZ)
      New construction in a Historic Preservation Zone (HPZ) may exceed the
height standards of the zone if additional height is needed to be compatible
with the height of other buildings within the development zone as determined by
the Planning and Development Services Department Director .
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3052.jpg]
Figure 6.4.4-B: Exceptions to Height Limit
(Am. Ord. 11070, 5/14/2013)
6.4.5.   PERIMETER YARDS
   A.   Application
   A perimeter yard is required in accordance with the applicable zone as
provided in
Tables 6.3-1 through
6.3-7. The minimum required width of the perimeter yard for each development is
based on the zoning classification of the adjacent  parcel (s) along each
individual lot line .
   B.   Measurement
      1.   The width of the perimeter yard is the distance measured
horizontally from a specified point to the face of each exterior building wall
at the wall’s highest point. The specified point is the property line when it
is an interior property line . Along a street  property line , the specified
point is described in Section
6.4.5.C, Street  Perimeter Yard. (See
Figure 6.4.5-B & -
C.)
      2.   A vertical structural member(s) (i.e., post, column, dormer wall)
supporting a roof extension from the principal structure is considered a wall
for applying perimeter yard requirements.
      3.   The perimeter yard may have different widths at various points along
the same property line , because the perimeter yard width is measured to the
face of each vertical exterior surface of the building .
      4.   On cul-de-sac and eyebrow front lots , the minimum street yard depth
may be measured from a straight line drawn between the front lot corners,
rather than measured directly from the curved front property line , except as
provided in Section
6.4.5.C.2.b, Carports and Garages in Single-Family and Duplex Development. In
no case, however, shall the minimum street yard  be reduced in excess of 50% by
this alternative measurement. (See
Figure 6.4.5-A.)
      5.   Where an unbroken section of a wall or a building is not parallel
with the lot line , the required perimeter yard may be applied to the average
width; however, such perimeter yard shall not be narrower at any point than
half the required width, nor narrower at any point than three feet. (See
Figure 6.4.5-A.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3054.jpg]
 
Figure 6.4.5-A: Perimeter Yard Measurement
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5425.jpg]
 
See Sec.
6.4.5.C
Figure 6.4.5-B: Example of Perimeter Yard (Wall Height = 20')
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5427.jpg]
 
See Sec.
6.4.5.C
Figure 6.4.5-C: Example of Perimeter Yard (Wall Height = 32')
   C.   Street  Perimeter Yard
   The street  perimeter yard width is determined as provided below or unless
special zoning requirements dictate a greater distance or different point of
measurement.
      1.   Residential Development
         a.   For single-family and duplex development , the minimum required
front street  perimeter yard is 20 feet measured from the street  property line
.
         b.   Where a lot abuts more than one street, the owner chooses which
street  lot line is the front lot line . From other than the front lot line ,
the street  perimeter yard is ten feet, as measured from the street  property
line . For carports and garages which face the street , the minimum required
street  perimeter yard is 20 feet regardless of the street .
         c.   For carports and garages in single-family and duplex development
, the structural setback may be modified in accordance with Section
3.11.1, Design Development Option as follows:
            (1)   For garages , a minimum of 18 feet (the length of a standard
parking space) must be provided in front of the garage door so that a full 18-
foot parking space is available for parking on site.
            (2)   For carports , if the distance between the back of street
curb and the carport is eight feet or less, a minimum of one-foot must be
provided.
         d.   For residential development occurring as part of a unified
subdivision, reduced setbacks are permitted as designated on the approved
tentative plat . The minimum required front street  perimeter yard is five
feet. Carports and garages are permitted as follows:
            (1)   If accessed from the side perimeter yard or perpendicular to
the street , the minimum distance from street  property line is five feet, or
            (2)   If accessed from the front or parallel to the street , the
minimum distance from street  property line is 18 feet, or
            (3)   If accessed from the front or parallel to a street with an
ADT of 140 or less, the distance from the back of curb to the garage or carport
may be eight feet or less. The garage or carport must be setback a minimum of
one foot from the property line .
      2.   Nonresidential Development
         a.   For nonresidential and multifamily development  abutting an
Arterial or Collector Street the minimum required street  perimeter yard is ten
feet, as measured from the existing or future property line as determined by
the adopted Major Streets and Routes Plan , whichever is greater.
         b.   For nonresidential and multifamily development  abutting a Local
Street : the minimum required street  perimeter yard is 20 feet, as measured
from the street  property line .
   D.   Exceptions
   Encroachment into the required perimeter yard is allowed as follows.
      1.   Interior Property Lines
      Along interior property lines , the following may extend two feet into
the perimeter yard , provided the side or rear yard is not reduced to less than
three feet:
         a.   Chimney;
         b.   Roof overhang; or,
         c.   Bay window.
      2.   Street  Property Lines
      Along street  property lines , the following may extend into the required
width as provided below.
         a.   Within established areas , the following may extend two feet into
the required street yard :
            (1)   Chimney;
            (2)   Roof overhang;
            (3)   Stairs;
            (4)   Bay window; or,
            (5)   Open structures .
         b.   On any corner lot , no fence, structure, object, or planting
shall be erected or maintained to interfere with the sight visibility triangle
provisions set forth in the Technical Manual.
      3.   Structures within Front Yards
         a.   Shade structures or carports may project up to ten feet into
required perimeter yards . Such architectural features include, but are not
limited to, overhangs, moveable insulating walls and roofs, detached solar
collectors, reflectors, and piping.
         b.   A wall or fence not over six feet high may be erected within the
limits of a perimeter yard .
      4.   Adjacency to Certain Nonresidential Uses in Residential Zones
      For projects in a nonresidential zone  adjacent to a residential zone ,
the perimeter yard may be modified to equal the nonresidential use adjacent to
nonresidential zone  perimeter yard standard for the project ’s zone based upon
a finding by the Zoning Administrator that one of the following applies:
         a.   The adjacent residential zone is a:
            (1)   Governmental use;
            (2)   Right-of-way ; or,
            (3)   Easement dedicated for floodplain, drainage, or utility
easement.
         b.   For annexed properties only, the adjacent residential zone is
used for commercial, industrial, storage, utility, or warehousing purposes at
the time of annexation.
(Am. Ord. 11070, 5/14/2013; Am. Ord. 11171, 5/20/2014; Am. Ord. 11996, 3/21/
2023)
6.4.6.   FLOOR AREA RATIO
   A.   Purpose
   This Section provides a uniform method for calculating the floor area ratio.
   Floor Area (FA), as defined, does not include any interior motor vehicle
parking or off-street loading that is accessory to the principal use .
   B.   Applicability  
   The FAR dimensional standard applies to residential and nonresidential
development in the Airport Environs Zone. The maximum permitted FARs are
identified in Section
5.6. The calculations are as follows:
   C.   Measurement
      1.   General
         a.   FARs are used in conjunction with lot coverage , perimeter yard
requirements, and height limitations to determine and define the building bulk
that may occur on a given site .
         b.   The FAR provides the maximum amount of floor area that can be
developed on a site . However, the maximum permitted FAR is based on the most
favorable situation and may not be achievable due to other development and
dimensional standards .
         c.   The floor area may be divided into any number of dwelling units ,
principal buildings , and accessory buildings provided the combined square
footage does not exceed the permitted floor area of the site .
      2.   Calculation
         a.   Multiply the area of the site , expressed in square feet, by the
applicable FAR. The result is the maximum amount of floor area permitted on the
site . See Figure 6.4.6-A for an example of the FAR calculation.
         b.   See the definition of "Gross Floor Area " (Section
11.4.8) and exception provided below for the types of improvements and site
area that are and are not included in the FAR calculation.
         c.   Exception. Any site area  dedicated or sold at nominal cost to
the City for public purposes is included as part of the site area for
calculation of density , provided:
            (1)   The additional density is less than ten percent of the
density permissible for the rest of the site area ;
            (2)   Such dedication was not a condition of approval for
applications, such as, but not limited to, rezonings or variance requests;
            (3)   Such dedication does not include right-of-way  dedicated as
part of a subdivision  plat ; and
            (4)   A deed for the area or a legally binding agreement to
dedicate or sell at nominal cost to the City is submitted as part of the
application.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5429.jpg]
 
Example: Nonresidential Project
FAR: 0.50
Site Area : 25,000 sq ft
Calculation
Site Area x FAR = Floor Area
25,000 sq ft x 0.50 = Floor Area
12,500 sq ft = Floor Area
Figure 6.4.6-B Floor Area Ratio (FAR) Calculation
(Ord. 11070, 5/14/2013; Am. Ord. 11171, 5/20/2014)
6.4.7 RESIDENTIAL DENSITY
   A.   Purpose
      This Section provides uniform methods for determining residential
densities on individual sites .
   B.   Applicability
      Residential density for all residential projects is calculated as
follows.
      1.   Residential density in residential projects is based on one dwelling
unit per minimum size parcel by area, exclusive of any street and drainageway
dedications or exclusive use easements. Because the acreage of a parcel used
for street and drainageway purposes differs for each development  project , it
is difficult to provide a simple calculation that would give an exact density
figure.
         The following provide two methods of calculating approximate density
for a project . The number of units obtained through these calculations is an
estimate and can only be verified by the actual design of the project . Should
there be a need to express a density ratio per acre , for comparison purposes
only, such ratio will be calculated using the second method assuming 30 percent
of the site would be used for streets , drainageways, or other uses whose
acreage is not included to calculate allowable density .
         a.   The first method of calculation gives the highest possible
density that can be achieved on a parcel . However, to achieve this density ,
the following two design criteria must be present. (See Figure 6.4.7-
A Residential Density , Method 1)
            i.   The property can be developed without additional dedications
for streets , drainageways, or exclusive use easements.
            ii.   Each lot is the minimum size permitted by the underlying zone
.
            The site area , expressed in square feet, is divided by the minimum
lot size permitted by the underlying zone .
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5433.jpg]
 
            Site Area : 71,400 square feet (sf) or 1.64 acres
            Minimum lot size : 7,000 sf
            Approximate No. of Units   = Site Area ÷ Minimum Lot Size
                        = 71,400 sf ÷ 7,000 sf
                        = 10.2 units
                        = 10 units + .2 remainder
               Approximate Density   = Units ÷ Site Area
                        = 10.2 units ÷ 1.64 acres
                        = 6.22 dwelling units/acres
Figure 6.4.7-A Residential Density , Method 1
         b.   The second method assumes that the project design requires
dedication of either streets , drainageways, or exclusive use easements or will
have other site conditions that do not allow every square foot of the property
to be included in an individual lot . Also, due to varying widths of street and
drainageway rights-of-way and lot configurations, it is impossible to project
an exact number of units or lots that can be achieved. Since the amount of site
area used for streets , drainageways, etc., varies from project to project , it
is necessary to approximate the amount of site area by percentage that will be
needed for those purposes. It will be assumed, to illustrate the calculations,
that 30 percent of the site area will be utilized for such purposes. (See
Figure 6.4.7-B Residential Density , Method 2)
            The calculation is the site area , expressed in square feet, minus
30 percent of the site area , divided by the minimum lot size permitted by the
underlying zone .
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5435.jpg]
 
Site Area : 87,120 square feet (sf) or 2 acres
Minimum lot size : 7,000 sf
Site area for streets, etc.: 26,136 sf (approximately 30%)
Approx. No. of Units   = (Site Area - 30% of Site Area ) ÷ Minimum Lot Size
         = (87,120 sf - 26,136 sf) ÷ 7,000 sf
         = 8.71 units
         = 8 units + .71 remainder
Approx. Density   = Units ÷ Site Area
         = 8 units ÷ 2 acres
         = 4 dwelling units/acres
Figure 6.4.7-B Residential Density , Method 2
      2.   Residential density in multifamily projects developed is calculated
in the following manner.
         a.   Multiply the area of the site , in acreage, by the density (units
per acre ratio) permitted by the underlying zoning.
               Example:
               Units Per Acre Ratio: 15.0
               Project  Site Area : 6 acres
               Calculation:
               Units per acre x site area = no. of units
               15 x 6 = 90 units
         b.   Exception. Any site area  dedicated or sold at nominal cost to
the City for public purposes is included as part of the site area for
calculation of density , provided:
            i.   The additional density is less than 10 percent of the density
permissible for the rest of the site area ;
            ii.   Such dedication was not a condition of approval for
applications, such as, but not limited to, rezonings or variance requests;
            iii.   Such dedication does not include right-of-way  dedicated as
part of a subdivision  plat ; and
            iv.   A legally binding agreement to dedicate or sell at nominal
cost to the City is submitted as part of the application.
      3.   Residential density in Flexible Lot  Development  projects is based
on the developable area (as defined in Section
11.4.5 Definitions - D) of the site .
(Ord. 11171, 5/20/2014)
6.5.   PRINCIPAL LAND USE
6.5.1.   ONE OR MORE PRINCIPAL USES , SEPARATE PROJECTS
   One or more principal uses conducted as separate projects on a parcel is
considered individually in determining the respective Land Use Classes and
dimensional standards
6.5.2.   TWO OR MORE PRINCIPAL USES , SAME PROJECT
   Two or more principal uses conducted as a single project , which integrates
elements of the various uses, such as, but not limited to, vehicular parking,
vehicular and pedestrian access, refuse collection, and loading services, as
common use among the various uses in the project , shall have dimensional
standards applied as follows:
   A.   Two or More Uses, Same Dimensional Standards
   On projects with two or more uses that have the same dimensional standards,
the dimensional standard requirements shall be applied on the site as if there
were only one use.
   B.   Two or More Uses, Different Dimensional Standards
   Projects without a residential component shall calculate the residential
density (RAC), setbacks and the minimum lot size standards separately for the
residential use. All other uses shall use the dimensional standards of the
principal use having the least restrictive dimensional standards.
6.6.   ACCESSORY USES , BUILDINGS , AND STRUCTURES
   Accessory uses and buildings are permitted in all zoning districts . Those
land uses and buildings associated with and incidental to a principal building
are accessory and subject to the provisions described below.
6.6.1.   ACCESSORY USES
   In all zones , an accessory use shall comply with the following:
   A.   The use shall be incidental or secondary to the principal use and is
located on the same parcel as the principal use ;
   B.   The use shall be intended for the occupants, residents, customers,
employees, lessees, or guests of the principal use ;
   C.   The use shall not substantially alter the exterior appearance or
character of the principal use or building to which it is incidental ; and,
   D.   Animals may be kept for personal use in all zones subject to Tucson
Code, Chapter 4, and any applicable health regulations.
   E.   Medical Marijuana Designated Caregiver Cultivation Location
      1.   A designated caregiver may cultivate at their residence for a single
qualifying patient subject to compliance with A.R.S. § 36-2806.01;
      2.   All conditions and restrictions for medical marijuana dispensary
off-site cultivation locations apply except that the designated caregiver
cultivation location cultivation area is limited to a total 250 square feet
maximum, including any storage areas; and,
      3.   More than one designated caregiver may co-locate cultivation
locations as long as the total cultivation area does not exceed 250 square feet
maximum, including storage areas.
   F.   Medical Marijuana Qualifying Patient Cultivation Location:
      1.   A qualifying patient may cultivate at their place of residence
subject to compliance with A.R.S. § 36-2806.01; and,
      2.   A qualifying patient, cultivating marijuana, shall comply with all
lawful, applicable health regulations, including those promulgated by the
Arizona Department of Health Services and any other authorized regulatory
agency.
(Am. Ord. 11890, 12/7/2021)
6.6.2.   ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
   In all zones , the buildings used for accessory uses shall comply with the
following:
   A.   The standards of this Section
6.6.2 apply in all zones to buildings used for accessory uses , except as noted
in the following:
      1.   A structure if five feet or less in height and ten square feet or
less in area, such as a doghouse, a refuse container enclosure, or play
equipment.
      2.    A shelter for food producing animals if six feet or less in height
and 16 square feet or less in area.
   B.   An accessory building shall be built only on a lot occupied by a
principal building or use;
   C.   An accessory building  shall be developed in accordance with the
dimensional standards of the principal land use , except as provided by this
section and, when applicable, Sections
6.6.3, Residential Uses, and
6.6.5, Urban Agriculture Uses and Activities;
   D.   An accessory structure , except for an accessory dwelling unit , that
exceeds the allowable height of a wall within a perimeter yard and is detached
from a principal structure  shall comply with the perimeter yard width
standards of the principal structure , except that the accessory structure may
be built to a parcel line with the consent of the adjoining or, when separated
by an alley, adjacent property owner(s) or as permitted by Section
6.6.5, Urban Agriculture Uses and Activities;
   E.   Accessory structures , such as light poles, flagpoles, and other tall
and narrow structures that are similar, shall be exempt from the setback
requirement. Amateur radio towers are exempt from the setback requirement and
are allowed to a maximum height of 100 feet;
   F.   An accessory building , except for a stable or enclosure for animals ,
may be attached to a principal building , provided that its construction
complies with the development requirements of the principal building ;
   G.   The use of solar energy collectors for the purpose of providing energy
for heating or cooling shall be permitted in all zones , whether as part of a
principal building or as an accessory building . Such solar collection devices
shall not be included in computing lot coverage ;
   H.   All structures  for livestock and other large farm animals such as
ratites, as defined in the Tucson Code Chapter 4, Animals and Fowl, shall be
set back at least 50 feet from all property lines , except corrals that shall
be set back ten feet from all property lines . In addition, the proximity of
corrals and barns or other structures for large farm animals from a dwelling
unit on adjacent property shall be in accordance with Tucson Code Chapter 4,
Section 4-27;
   I.   The maximum height of a wall or fence within a perimeter yard shall be
six feet; however, the wall or fence may be higher than six feet, but no higher
than ten feet, if: (See
Figure 6.6.1-A, Height of Wall or Fence within a Side or Rear Perimeter Yard .)
      1.   At least 75% of the area above six feet in height is left
unobstructed and open through the use of architectural elements, such as
arches, columns, or wrought iron;
      2.   Part of, or located on top of, a retaining wall no higher than ten
feet measured from design grade and no higher than six feet measured from the
top of the retaining portion of the wall;
      3.   A greater height is required through the rezoning process or the
special exception land use process; or,
      4.   A greater height is required by a specific UDC standard.
   J.   In nonresidential zones , walls or fences, as permitted in Section
6.6.2.I above, may exceed the height standards, provided the wall or fence
complies with the perimeter yard standards applicable to buildings on the site
;
   K.   Accessory uses , buildings , and structures are not required to provide
additional parking, landscaping and screening, or loading spaces beyond what is
required of the principal use .
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3064.jpg]
Figure 6.6.1-A: Height of Wall or Fence Within a Side or Rear Perimeter Yard
(Am. Ord. 11171, 5/20/2014; Am. Ord. 11328, 12/8/2015; Am. Ord. 11890, 12/7/
2021)
6.6.3.   RESIDENTIAL USES
      The buildings used for an accessory use to a residential use shall comply
with the following:
      A.   An accessory building may be a building that is used as sleeping
quarters by the residents of the dwelling unit in accordance with Sections
6.6.1.A and B. The sleeping quarters may include bedrooms , bathrooms, and a
sitting room, provided the building complies with Section
6.6.1.C and is not the dominant use of the property;
      B.   An accessory dwelling unit may be used as living quarters in
accordance with Sections
6.6.1.A. and B. Two accessory dwelling units are permitted per parcel developed
with a Family Dwelling as defined in Section
11.3.7.A., with the exception of a Multifamily Development . A parcel developed
with a duplex is permitted one accessory dwelling unit . The accessory dwelling
unit may include a kitchen, bedrooms , bathrooms, and a sitting room, provided
the building complies with Section
6.6.1.C. and is not the dominant use of the property. The following standards
apply to these accessory dwelling units :
         1.   Accessory dwelling units are not subject to maximum residential
density standards per Section
6.3.4.
         2.   On a lot or parcel of more than one acre in size, one further
accessory dwelling unit is permitted in addition to those permitted per UDC
6.6.3.B., if at least one accessory dwelling unit on the lot or parcel is a
restricted affordable dwelling unit , as defined in
11.4.2. The affordable unit must be deed restricted and proof must be provided
as a condition of the building permit.
         3.   Vehicular parking is not required to be provided for accessory
dwelling units .
         4.   If the accessory dwelling unit is built as a new structure it
must be developed with a high albedo level (>60 SRI) or other cool roof
technology per the ICC Green Construction Code.
         5.   An accessory dwelling unit is limited to 75% of the gross floor
area of the principal dwelling, not to exceed 1,000 square feet of gross floor
area . An accessory dwelling unit may be up to 650 square feet of gross floor
area , regardless of the size of principal dwelling.
         6.   The minimum side and rear yard setback for an accessory dwelling
unit is five feet.
         7.   Except as specified above, an accessory dwelling unit shall be
developed in accordance with the dimensional standards of the principal land
use.
         8.   Accessory dwelling units proposed within an overlay zone or other
zoning area with specific design processes or guidelines, shall be subject to
those regulations when no more restrictive than those applicable to single-
family dwellings in that overlay and are no more restrictive than the entirety
of UDC
6.6.3.B.
         9.   Accessory dwelling units are not required to match the exterior
design, roof pitch or finishing materials of the single-family dwelling that is
located on the same lot as the accessory dwelling unit .
         10.   If an established and occupied family dwelling proposes one or
more accessory dwelling units in accordance with UDC
6.6.3.B., the lot or parcel shall not require a commercial site plan per UDC
3.3.3.G., be considered a multifamily development, require commercial
development standards, or require improvements to public streets other than
repairs due to construction activity.
      C.   Detached accessory buildings , including accessory dwelling units ,
are not permitted in the buildable area extending the full width of the lot
between the principal building and the front street lot line , except for shade
structures or carports not over 400 square feet in floor area , terraces and
steps not over three feet high above the natural grade , paved areas, and
fences or walls.
      D.   Accessory structures , except for accessory dwelling units , shall
not exceed 12 feet in height, unless attached to a principal structure . If
attached to the principal structure , maximum height permitted shall be the
same as for the principal structure .
(Am. Ord. 11070, 5/14/2013; Am. Ord. 11890, 12/7/2021; Am. Ord. 11996, 3/21/
2023; Am. Ord. 12131, 10/22/2024)
6.6.4.   NONRESIDENTIAL USES
   The building used for an accessory use to a nonresidential use shall comply
with the following:
   A.   An accessory building shall not be occupied as a dwelling, except as a
caretaker’s facility;
   B.   The area of a site occupied by an accessory use or building shall be
included as part of the lot coverage calculation; and,
   C.   The structure used for an accessory use within a nonresidential zone
shall comply with dimensional standards of the principal structure.
(Am. Ord. 11890, 12/7/2021)
6.6.5.   URBAN AGRICULTURE USES AND ACTIVITIES
   A.   Accessory Community Garden
      1.   Community gardens are permitted as an accessory use in any zone in
accordance with the standards provided below.
      2.   Permitted Activities and Uses
         The following activities and uses are permitted in a Community Garden:
         a.   Growing and harvesting of agricultural products;
         b.   The keeping of food producing animals  is permitted as an
accessory use  to the growing and harvesting of agricultural products in
accordance with Section
6.6.5.E, Keeping of Food Producing Animals . Permission from the property owner
is required and a sign must be posted identifying the person responsible for
caring for the animals and his or her contact information;
         c.   Greenhouses and on-site sale of agricultural products grown on-
site are permitted in accordance with Section
6.6.5.D and
6.6.5.F, respectively;
         d.   During an on-site sales event, a temporary booth or canopy may be
located within the front yard setback of the property and is exempt from
Sections
6.6.1.C and
6.6.3.B;
         e.   Outdoor activity, including the outdoor display of products for
sale grown on-site , is permitted.
      3.   The growing and harvesting of agricultural products that are not in
a structure are exempt from the perimeter yard requirements of the underlying
zone .
   B.   Composting
   Composting shall be maintained in accordance with applicable sections of the
Tucson Code, Section 4-28 of Animals and Fowl and Section 16-13 of the
Neighborhood Preservation Ordinance.
   C.   Gardens
      1.   Gardens are permitted as an accessory use to any residential or
nonresidential use.
      2.   Gardens  not in greenhouses are exempt from this Section
6.6, Accessory Uses, Buildings, and Structures. Further, gardens may be located
in the buildable area extending the full width of the lot between the principal
building and the front street lot line .
      3.   Gardens in greenhouses are subject to Section
6.6.5.D.
      4.   Vertical gardens mounted on a perimeter wall or fence are permitted
provided they do not affect the integrity of the wall or fence and the
fastening devices do not project or otherwise create a safety hazard to
adjacent property owners.
   D.   Accessory Greenhouses
   Greenhouses are permitted as accessory buildings or structures as follows:
      1.   Greenhouses must comply with Section
6.6.2, Accessory Buildings and Structures unless otherwise regulated in this
section.
      2.   Except when accessory to a community garden or urban farm,
greenhouses are prohibited in the buildable area extending the full width of
the lot between the principal building and the front street lot line .
      3.   Passive Greenhouses
      Passive greenhouses shall comply with the dimensional standards of
Section
6.6.2. Greenhouses cooled solely by an evaporative cooler are considered a
passive greenhouse .
      4.   Mechanical Greenhouses
      Accessory greenhouses are permitted in accordance with Section
4.9.2.B.1.c.
      5.   The maximum permitted height of a greenhouse is 12 feet in a
residential zone and in accordance with Section
6.6.4.C in a nonresidential zone .
   E.   Keeping of Food Producing Animals
      1.   This section applies to food producing animals  as defined in
Section
11.4.7, Animals , Food Producing.
         a.   The keeping of food producing animals  shall be conducted in
accordance with this Section
6.6.5.E and the Tucson Code, Chapter 4, Animals and Fowl. In the case of a
conflict, the standards of this Section shall control.
         b.   This Section
6.6.5.E does not apply to:
            (1)   The keeping of livestock; or,
            (2)   Animals not defined as food producing animals such as
pigeons, parrots, dogs, cats, and fish.
         c.   Uncastrated male miniature goats older than 5 months and male
fowl are prohibited.
      2.   The keeping of food producing animals is permitted as an accessory
use to:
         a.   Permitted residential use in residential and nonresidential zones
;
         b.   Accessory Community Garden per Section
6.6.5.A; or,
         c.   Accessory Urban Farm per Section
4.9.2.E.1.b.
      3.   Maximum Number of Food Producing Animals Permitted
         a.   Animal Units as defined in Section
11.4.2 are used as a basis for determining the maximum number of food producing
animals permitted.
         b.   Animal units are assigned as follows:
 
Food Producing Animal                         Units per Animal
Chicken                                       1
Duck                                          2
Turkey or Goose                               4
Miniature Goat (female or neutered male only) 5
 
         c.   The calculation for the maximum number of animals permitted is
the lesser of either two (2) Animal Units per 1,000 square feet of the lot size
or the maximum total Animal Units of the lot size as follows:
 
Lot Size                Maximum Number of Total Animal Units Permitted
Less than 16,000 sf     24
16,000 sf to 143,999 sf 36
144,000 sf or more      48
 
         d.   It is recommended that miniature goats be raised in pairs or
small groups for their well-being.
         e.   Exemptions: The following are exempt from this Section
6.6.5.E:
            (1)   Animal Production, General Farming, or Stockyard Operation
Uses or when an Accessory Shelter or Structure in the RH, SR, SH, RX-1, IR, or
MU zones. These uses must comply with Chapter 4 of the Tucson Code;
            (2)   Non-profit, agriculture-related organizations, such as the 4-
H Club and Future Farmers of America. These organizations must comply with
Chapter 4 of the Tucson Code; or,
            (3)   Rabbits, rodents, and invertebrates, such as worms. These
must comply with Chapter 4 of the Tucson Code.
         f.   Requests to increase the number of permitted food producing
animals  are considered in accordance with Section
3.3.4, 100' Notice Procedure.
      4.   Location and Setback Requirements
         a.   Food producing animals and shelters are prohibited in the
buildable area extending the full width of the lot between the principal
building and the front street lot line . Food producing animals and their
shelters are permitted in other perimeter yards .
         b.   Animal shelters six feet or less in height and sixteen square
feet or less in area are not required to setback from side or rear property
line , but are required to be behind the principal building and at least 20
feet from the dwelling unit on an abutting property.
         c.   Animal shelters more than six feet in height and greater than 16
square feet in area must be set back in accordance with Section
6.6.2.D. Shelters shall also be at least 20 feet from the dwelling unit on an
abutting property. Exceptions: A setback is not required from property lines
 abutting  alleys or other types of rights-of-way or easements or when adjacent
to a nonresidential use.
         d.   Requests to reduce the setback requirements for animal shelters
are considered in accordance with Section
3.3.4, 100' Notice Procedure, Section
3.11.1, Design Development Option, or Section
6.6.5.E.7, Existing Shelter Exemption.
      5.   The maximum permitted height of an animal shelter is 12 feet.
      6.   Food, water, and other items that may attract coyotes, bobcats,
javelinas and other predators must be kept in a secure location.
      7.   Existing Shelter Exemption
         a.    A shelter for food producing animals that has existed prior to
the effective date of the ordinance in a location that does not comply with the
food producing animal  shelter  setback standards set in the ordinance may
apply for an exemption from the affected perimeter yard  setbacks and dimension
standards of this section.
         b.    To qualify for the exemption the applicant must submit a PDSD
accepted site or plot plan and the shelter must meet the following criteria:
            (1)    There is proof from an aerial or other source of the
shelter’s existence within the qualifying time.
            (2)    There are no applicable Code Enforcement violations
involving the shelter for the past five years submitted by a property owner
within 300 feet of the subject property.
            (3)    The shelter is accepted as meeting basic construction
standards by PDSD.
         c.    PDSD shall establish a single fee to cover a single plan review
and inspection.
         d.    This exemption terminates on January 9, 2018.
   F.   On-Site Sale of Agricultural Products Grown On-Site
   The accessory sale of agricultural products is permitted in accordance with
the following:
      1.   Sales are limited to agricultural products grown on-site , including
produce and the eggs of food producing animals raised on-site ;
      2.   Outdoor sales of products grown on-site are permitted;
      3.   On-site sales are limited to the hours of 7 a.m. to 8 p.m.;
      4.   Number and Duration of Sales Events Permitted
         a.   In the residential, office, institutional reserve (IR), parking
(P), and recreational vehicle (RV) zones and residential uses in nonresidential
zones , the on-site sale of goods is restricted to no more than four advertised
events per calendar year. An event shall not occur on more than three
consecutive days. An “advertised event” is one in which the organizer
advertises the sales event Citywide online, or in any newspaper;
         b.   In the commercial, mixed use, industrial, neighborhood commercial
(NC), rural village center (RVC), and mixed use (MU) zones , there are no
restrictions on the number and duration of sales events provided the sales are
accessory to the growing of agricultural products;
         c.   The combination of yard sales and on-site sale of agricultural
products shall not exceed four (4) events per calendar year.
      5.   Temporary accessory structures associated with the agricultural
product sales, such as booths and awnings, are exempt from Sections
6.6.1.C and
6.6.3.B and may be located in the buildable area extending the full width of
the lot between the principal building and the front street lot line . The
accessory structures shall be removed at the end of the sales event.
(Ord. 11328, 12/8/2015; Am. Ord. 11732, 2/19/2020)
ARTICLE 7: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Section
7.1.   PURPOSE
7.2.   APPLICABILITY
7.3.   SOLAR CONSIDERATIONS
   
7.3.1.   Solar Energy Collectors Allowed
   
7.3.2.   Shadows from Multistory Structures
7.4.   MOTOR VEHICLE AND BICYCLE PARKING
   
7.4.1.   Purpose
   
7.4.2.   Applicability
   
7.4.3.   General Provisions
   
7.4.4.   Required Number of Motor Vehicle Parking Spaces
   
7.4.5.   Reductions and Exceptions
   
7.4.6.   Motor Vehicle Use Area Design Criteria
   
7.4.7.   Motor Vehicle Stacking Requirements
   
7.4.8.   Required Number of Bicycle Parking Spaces
   
7.4.9.   Bicycle Parking Design Criteria
   
7.4.10.   Parking Design Modification Request (PDMR)
   
7.4.11.   Required Number of Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment (EVSE)
   
7.4.12.   Electric Vehicle Parking Design Criteria
7.5.   OFF-STREET LOADING
   
7.5.1.   Purpose
   
7.5.2.   Applicability
   
7.5.3.   General Provisions
   
7.5.4.   Design Criteria
   
7.5.5.   Required Loading Areas
7.6.   LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING
   
7.6.1.   Purpose
   
7.6.2.   Applicability
   
7.6.3.   Exceptions
   
7.6.4.   Landscape Standards
   
7.6.5.   Screening Standards
   
7.6.6.   Use of Water
   
7.6.7.   Compliance with Neighborhood Plans
   
7.6.8.   Maintenance
   
7.6.9.   Administration
7.7.   NATIVE PLANT PRESERVATION
   
7.7.1.   Intent
   
7.7.2.   Purpose
   
7.7.3.   Applicability
   
7.7.4.   General Provisions and Standards
   
7.7.5.   Plant Preservation Standards
   
7.7.6.   Administration
7.8.   ACCESS
   
7.8.1.   Access Required - Changes of Use or Structures
   
7.8.2.   Access Required - Subdivisions
   
7.8.3.   Acceptable Types of Access
   
7.8.4.   Width of Access
7.9.   STREETS
7.10.   ALLEYS
7.11.   DETENTION AND RETENTION BASINS
7.12.   EASEMENTS REQUIRED
7.13.   EXCAVATING AND GRADING
7.14.   HYDROLOGY
7.15.   SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING DISPOSAL, COLLECTION, AND STORAGE
7.16.   UTILITIES
7.1.   PURPOSE
   This article sets forth the general development standards that apply to
principal and accessory structures and uses in the City . The standards are
intended to encourage high-quality development to enhance the safety,
aesthetics, character, and environmental quality of the community and to
minimize negative impacts between developments .
7.2.   APPLICABILITY
   The standards in this article applies apply to all principal and accessory
structures and uses established in the City of Tucson, unless exempted by the
terms of this article or elsewhere in this code.
7.3.   SOLAR CONSIDERATIONS
7.3.1.   SOLAR ENERGY COLLECTORS ALLOWED
   The use of solar energy collectors for the purpose of providing energy for
heating or cooling is permitted in all zones , whether as part of a principal
structure or as an accessory structure .
7.3.2.   SHADOWS FROM MULTISTORY STRUCTURES
   Shadows cast from any proposed multistory structure must be taken into
consideration as to their effect on adjacent properties. Where such shadows
adversely affect solar energy systems between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 3:00
p.m., a plot plan must show that the multistory structure has been reoriented
on the site to mitigate this effect or that other measures have been taken to
minimize the adverse effects of the shading. The development potential of any
property shall not be reduced by compliance with this section. (See
Figure 7.3.2-A.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3066.jpg]
Figure 7.3.2-A: Solar Considerations
7.4.   MOTOR VEHICLE AND BICYCLE PARKING
7.4.1.   PURPOSE
   This section establishes minimum requirements for motor vehicle and bicycle
parking to ensure that such facilities are consistent with the objectives of
the General Plan . As part of a balanced transportation system, these
regulations are intended to promote public safety and environmental quality.
Specifically, these regulations are intended to:
   A.   Ensure sufficient off-street motor vehicle and bicycle parking
facilities by establishing minimum parking requirements for land uses ;
   B.   Reduce excessive off-street parking ;
   C.   Promote pedestrian safety by separating vehicular use areas from
pedestrian areas and by providing a safe pedestrian path from parking spaces to
destinations;
   D.   Encourage safe, convenient, and efficient design of motor vehicle and
bicycle parking spaces , circulation, and access areas;
   E.   Improve air quality by requiring paving of vehicular use areas ; and,
   F.   Enhance community appearance.
7.4.2.   APPLICABILITY
   The provisions of this division apply to:
   A.   Proposed development or redevelopment;
   B.   Changes of use in existing development , except as permitted by Section
3.3.3.G, Zoning Compliance for Site  Improvements in Existence on May 1, 2005;
and,
   C.   Any expansion of an existing use or any addition of a new use to an
existing development .
7.4.3.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
   A.   Parking Required
      1.   Parking is required for every use unless otherwise specified in
Section
7.4.4.B, Minimum Number of Motor Vehicle Spaces Required, or 7.4.8.B, Minimum
Number of Bicycle Parking Spaces Required.
      2.   Each Land Use Group (Group), except for Residential and Storage, has
a standard minimum parking formula. The standard formula applies to every Land
Use Class (Class) within that Group, except for those Classes specifically
listed in the parking tables.
      3.   The Land Use Groups and the Classes within each Group are defined in
Article 11.
      4.   Required parking for uses not defined in Article 11 are determined
by the Zoning Administrator.
   B.   Parking for Individuals with Physical Disabilities
   Off-street parking spaces for individuals with physical disabilities must be
provided as required by the City of Tucson’s adopted Building Code.
   C.   Change of Approved Vehicular Use Area
   Any change of the vehicular use area as shown on the approved site plan must
comply with the requirements of this section.
   D.   Changes of Use
   Parking for changes of use is required as follows.
      1.   When the proposed use is the same as the use it is replacing, the
parking remains the same in accordance with Article 9, Nonconforming Uses ,
Buildings , or Structures.
      2.   When the proposed use is different that the use it is replacing, the
parking remains the same provided all of the following criteria are met:
         a.   The replacement use must be a permitted use in the current zone ,
except a replacement use may not include a restaurant or bar (Food Service or
Alcoholic Beverage Service uses) or a similar use listed in the applicable Land
Use Group;
         b.   The parking intensity for a proposed replacement use, except as
permitted by Section
3.3.3.H, Zoning Compliance for Site  Improvements in Existence on May 1, 2005,
must be the same or a lesser intensity as a prior use on the subject property
as documented by the applicant. The property owner must provide documentation
regarding the prior use as required by the Zoning Administrator;
         c.   Existing on-site parking, landscaping , and screening may remain
in their current configuration; however, the Planning and Development Services
Director may require new improvements including paving and striping when a
public safety hazard exists or may be created; and,
         d.   The proposed use must comply with the City of Tucson’s adopted
Building Code pertaining to accessibility for individuals with physical
disabilities .
      3.   When the proposed use is different than the use it is replacing and
the criteria of Section
7.4.3.D.2 cannot be met, the required number of motor vehicle and bicycle
parking spaces shall be in accordance with Sections
7.4.4 and
7.4.8, respectively, except as provided below.
      4.   When the change of use is in a tenant space within a shopping
center, mixed use , or multiple use  development , the required number of
bicycle parking spaces is based on the gross floor area , or whichever method
for determining the minimum required number bicycle parking spaces in
accordance with Section
7.4.8, of the tenant space in which the proposed change of use occurs.
   E.   Expansions
   Expansions of existing uses are subject to the following.
      1.   If an expansion is less than 25% or if a series of expansions
cumulatively results in less than a 25% expansion in floor area , the
requirements of this section apply only to the proposed expansion. Existing
development on the site is subject to the zoning regulations in effect at the
time of approval of the most recent approved plan for the existing development
. However, if the existing development was approved prior to April 1, 1969, and
there is no approved plan on file with the City , the vehicular use area for
the existing development shall comply with:
         a.   The parking, screening, and landscaping requirements in effect at
the time the development permit for the existing use was approved; and,
         b.   The paving and striping requirements of this division.
      2.   If an expansion is 25% or greater or if a series of expansions
cumulatively results in a 25% or greater expansion in floor area , the
requirements of this section apply to the entire site .
      3.   Expansions as noted in Section
7.4.3.E.1 and 2 are cumulated over time from April 1, 1969, for the application
of motor vehicle parking regulations and from May 9, 1990, for the application
of bicycle parking regulations. Once a development is brought into conformance
with the provisions of this division, subsequent expansions will begin
cumulating as of the date the development was brought into conformance .
   F.   Calculation of Required Motor Vehicle and Bicycle Parking Spaces
   The minimum number of parking spaces required must be calculated based on
the particular characteristics of the use. The following methods shall be used
to calculate the required number of parking spaces.
      1.   Based on Fixed Seats
      Use the total number of fixed seats to calculate the requirement. If
individual seats are not provided, each 18 linear inches of benches, pews, or
similar seating facilities is considered one seat.
      2.   Based on Beds
      Use the total number of beds to calculate the requirement.
      3.   Based on Bedrooms
      Use the total number of bedrooms to calculate the requirement.
      4.   Based on Gross Floor Area (GFA)
      Use the total GFA of all applicable land uses within the development
 site , plus the area of any outdoor areas necessary to provide the service to
the public or conduct the activity, such as outdoor eating areas or outdoor
areas used for sale of merchandise, to calculate the requirement. The
calculation does not include vehicular use areas , automobile display areas, or
other outdoor areas used for nonpublic purposes. Where such areas are
identified on a development plan but are not defined, the Zoning Administrator
shall determine the extent of the area.
      5.   Based on the Number of Residents
      Use the total number of residents for which the facility is authorized to
calculate the requirement.
      6.   Based on the Number of Students
      Use the total number of students for which the facility is designed to
calculate the requirement.
      7.   Based on the Number of Employees
      Use the shift with the greatest number of employees to calculate the
requirement.
   G.   Fractional Amounts
   When the calculation of required motor vehicle , bicycle parking spaces ,
and EVSE spaces results in a fractional number, a fraction of one-half or more
is adjusted to the next higher whole number, and a fraction of less than one-
half is adjusted to the next lower whole number.
(Am. Ord. 11953, 8/23/2022)
7.4.4.   REQUIRED NUMBER OF MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING SPACES
   A.   Calculation of Required Motor Vehicle Parking Spaces for Multiple or
Mixed Use  Development
   The total number of required spaces for a multiple or mixed use  development
is 90% of the sum of the amount required for each separate principal use in
Section
7.4.4.B, Minimum Number of Motor Vehicle Spaces Required. The square footage of
Entertainment, Food Service (i.e., restaurants), and/or Alcoholic Beverage
Service (i.e., bars) uses may not be included in the calculation for multiple
or mixed use  parking requirements. The parking requirements for these uses are
calculated individually in accordance with Section
7.4.4.B, Minimum Number of Motor Vehicle Spaces Required.
      1.   Exceptions
      The calculation for a multiple or mixed use  development does not apply
to Shopping Centers, Golf Course, Religious, Travelers’ Accommodation, and
Lodging uses. Refer to Section
7.4.4.B, Minimum Number of Motor Vehicle Spaces Required, for multiple or mixed
use  motor vehicle parking requirements pertaining to these uses.
   B.   Minimum Number of Motor Vehicle Parking Spaces Required
   The minimum number of required motor vehicle parking spaces is provided
below in
Table 7.4.4-1.
TABLE 7.4.4-1: MINIMUM NUMBER OF MOTOR VEHICLE SPACES REQUIRED
Land Use Group/Class Motor Vehicle Parking Required
TABLE 7.4.4-1: MINIMUM NUMBER OF MOTOR VEHICLE SPACES REQUIRED
Land Use Group/Class                                                              Motor Vehicle Parking Required
AGRICULTURAL USE GROUP                                                            0 required
CIVIC USE GROUP                                                                   1 space per 300 sq. ft. GFA, except as follows:
Cemetery                                                                          1 space per 25 burial plots or columbarium units, unless a private street
                                                                                  system is provided and designed to permit on-street parking
                                                                                  1 space per 100 sq. ft. GFA in all combined public assembly  areas or areas
                                                                                  where religious services are held, whichever is applicable
                                                                                   
Civic Assembly; Membership Organization; and Religious Use                        For multiple or mixed use  development  where Religious Use is the principal
                                                                                  land use, the total number of motor vehicle spaces required is the number
                                                                                  required for the Religious Use or the sum of those required for other uses on
                                                                                  the site , whichever is greater
Cultural Use - Zoo                                                                Parking area equal to 30% of the area occupied by the zoo
Educational Use*                                                                   
   Grades K - 8                                                                1 space per 10 students plus 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of floor area  in office
                                                                                  use
                                                                                  1 space per 5 students
   Grades 9 - 12                                                                
                                                                                  *Passenger drop-off areas are required for Grades K-12 per Section
                                                                                  4.9.3.E.7
Postsecondary Institutions; Instructional Schools                                 1 space per 200 sq. ft. GFA
COMMERCIAL SERVICES USE GROUP                                                     1 space per 300 sq. ft. GFA, except as follows:
Alcoholic Beverage  Service (including Large Bar)                                 1 space per 50 sq. ft. GFA
Animal  Service                                                                   1 space per 400 sq. ft. GFA
Automotive Washing                                                                 
Full-Service                                                                      1 space per 500 sq. ft. GFA, including service bays , wash tunnels, office,
                                                                                  and retail areas
Self-Service                                                                      0 required
Billboard                                                                         0 required
Day Care - Home Occupation                                                        No additional parking required above what is required for the residential use
Entertainment (including Large Dance Halls)                                       1 space per 5 fixed seats or 1 space per 50 sq. ft. GFA
Food Service                                                                      1 space per 100 sq. ft. GFA and outdoor seating areas. 1 space per designated
                                                                                  vendor stall for Food Courts which operate solely outdoors.
Medical Service - Extended Health Care                                            1 space per 2 beds
Medical Service - Major                                                           1 space per bed.
Medical Service - Outpatient                                                      1 space per 200 sq. ft. GFA
Parking                                                                           0 required.
Transportation Service                                                            1 space per 300 sq. ft. GFA of administrative or professional office area
                                                                                  only
Travelers’ Accommodation, Campsite                                              1 space per campsite
Travelers’ Accommodation, Lodging                                               1 space per rental unit plus 1 space per 300 sq. ft. GFA of conference,
                                                                                  restaurant, retail, bar, and banquet space.
Vehicle Storage                                                                   None (0) required
INDUSTRIAL USE GROUP                                                              1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA, except as follows:
Household Goods Donation Center                                                   1 space per 300 sq. ft. GFA.
Salvaging and Recycling                                                           1 space per 5,000 sq. ft. of lot  area plus 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of sales
                                                                                  and office area
RECREATION USE GROUP                                                              1 space per 100 sq. ft. GFA, except as follows:
Golf Course                                                                       3 spaces per hole plus 50% of parking required for retail, restaurant, and/or
                                                                                  bar associated with the golf course
Driving Range                                                                     1 space per fixed tee
Athletic Fields                                                                   15 spaces per field
Batting Cage                                                                      1 space per batting cage
Billiard/Pool Halls                                                               1 space per 200 sq. ft. GFA
Bowling Alley                                                                     3 spaces per lane
Court - Basketball or Volleyball                                                  5 spaces per court or 3 spaces per half court, if only a half court is
                                                                                  provided
Court - Tennis or Racquetball                                                     2 spaces per court
Health/Exercise Club/Gymnasium                                                    1 space per 200 sq. ft. GFA
Miniature Golf Course                                                             1 space per tee plus 1 space per 75 sq. ft. GFA
Rifle and Pistol Range                                                            1 space per firing lane
Rodeo Arena                                                                       1 space per 2,500 sq. ft. of lot  area minus the main arena area
Skating Rink                                                                      1 space per 200 sq. ft. GFA
Swimming Pool                                                                     0 required, if water surface area is less than 1,000 sq. ft.; 1 space per 200
                                                                                  sq. ft. of entire pool, if water surface area is 1,000 sq. ft. or more
RESIDENTIAL USE GROUP                                                              
Family Dwelling; Mobile Home Dwelling                                             The number of parking spaces required is based on the following:
                                                                                  2 spaces per dwelling unit  plus visitor parking required at a ratio of 0.25
   Single-Family and Mobile Home Dwellings                                     space per unit. Exception. Residential development in the R-1 zone  must
                                                                                  comply with Section
                                                                                  4.9.7.B.7
   Any Single-Family, Mobile Home, or Multifamily Development on a single site 1 space per dwelling unit . Exception. Residential development in the R-
with 2-5 units                                                                    1 zone  must comply with Section
                                                                                  4.9.7.B.7
                                                                                  The number of spaces per dwelling unit  is based on the number of bedrooms
                                                                                  in each unit as follows:
                                                                                  •   Studio, less than 400 sq. ft. GFA - 1.00 space per dwelling unit
   Multifamily Dwellings - 0-70 units/acre                                     •   Studio, more than 400 sq. ft. GFA, and 1 Bedroom - 1.50 spaces per
                                                                                  dwelling unit
                                                                                  •   Two Bedrooms - 2.00 spaces per dwelling unit
                                                                                  •   Three Bedrooms - 2.25 spaces per dwelling unit
                                                                                  •   Four or More Bedrooms - 2.50 spaces per dwelling unit
   Multifamily Dwellings - Over 70 units/acre                                  1.25 spaces per dwelling unit
   Projects of any density for the elderly or the physically disabled          0.75 space per dwelling unit
   Group Dwelling                                                              0.5 space per resident plus 2 spaces for the resident family
                                                                                  0.7 space per resident. On projects where rent/lease of space is by the
   Dormitory, Fraternity, or Sorority                                          bedroom , the requirement is 0.85 space per bedroom or 2.00 spaces per
                                                                                  dwelling unit , whichever is greater
Residential Care Services:                                                         
   1 - 5 Residents                                                             3 spaces
   6 - 10 Residents                                                            4 spaces
   11 - 15 Residents                                                           5 spaces
   16 - 20 Residents                                                           6 spaces
   21 or more Residents                                                        1 space per 2 beds
RETAIL TRADE USE GROUP                                                            1 space per 300 sq. ft. GFA, except as follows:
Auctions                                                                          1 space per 100 sq. ft. of seating area only
Farmers’ Market (when operated outdoors only) and Swap Meets                    1 space per 300 sq. ft. of display and sales area only, excluding vehicular
                                                                                  use areas
Furniture, Carpet or Appliance Store                                              1 space per 400 sq. ft. GFA
Gasoline Sales without Food and Beverage Sales                                    1 space per employee but not less than 2 spaces
                                                                                  1 space per 2,000 sq. ft. of storage area for the first 20,000 sq. ft. of
Medical Marijuana Dispensary Off-Site Cultivation Location                        storage area plus 1 space per 10,000 sq. ft. of storage area for over 20,000
                                                                                  sq. ft. of storage area, with a minimum of 2 spaces
Shopping Center                                                                   1 space per 300 sq. ft. GFA
                                                                                  1 space per 400 sq. ft. GFA of show room, retail, and office area, plus 1
Vehicle Sales                                                                     space per 10,000 sq. ft. of gross lot  area, plus 1 space per 300 sq. ft. GFA
                                                                                  of Automotive and Vehicle Repair use
STORAGE USE GROUP                                                                  
                                                                                  1 space per 5,000 sq. ft. GFA, plus 1 space per 5,000 sq. ft. of outdoor
Commercial Storage; Hazardous Material Storage                                    storage area for the first 20,000 sq. ft. of outdoor storage area, plus 1
                                                                                  space per 10,000 sq. ft. of outdoor storage area over 20,000 sq. ft. of
                                                                                  outdoor storage area
                                                                                  0 required for storage units, if storage units have direct vehicular access,
Personal Storage                                                                  and a minimum of 2 spaces for any associated office. 1 space per 4,000 sq.
                                                                                  ft. GFA, if storage units do not have direct vehicular access, and a minimum
                                                                                  of 2 spaces for any associated office
UTILITIES USE GROUP                                                               1 space per 500 sq. ft. GFA, with a minimum of 2 spaces per facility
                                                                                  1 space per 2,000 sq. ft. of storage area for the first 20,000 sq. ft. of
WHOLESALING USE GROUP                                                             storage area plus 1 space per 10,000 sq. ft. of storage area for over 20,000
                                                                                  sq. ft. of storage area
 
(Am. Ord. 11171, 5/20/2014; Am. Ord. 11199, 9/9/2014; Am. Ord. 11328, 12/8/
2015; Am. Ord. 11996, 3/21/2023; Am. Ord. 12060, 11/28/2023)
7.4.5.   REDUCTIONS AND EXCEPTIONS
   A.   Individual Parking Plan
      1.   The PDSD Director may approve a modification to the number of
required motor vehicle parking space and required number of EVSE parking spaces
on new and existing site through an Individual Parking Plan (IPP).
      2.   Applicability
      The provisions of this section apply to:
         a.   Proposed development and redevelopment of a site ;
         b.   Changes of use in existing development ; and,
         c.   Any expansion of an existing use or any addition of a change of
use to an existing development .
      3.   Permitted Uses and Types of Development
      A proposal must include one or more of the following uses or types of
development :
         a.   Combined residential and non-residential development in a single
structure or unified development ;
         b.   Projects within 1,320 feet (one-fourth mile) of a transit stop or
public parking facility;
         c.   Religious uses where the parking plan will accommodate weekend
and evening use;
         d.   Residential care services or housing developments for the elderly
or individuals with physical disabilities ;
         e.   Low-income housing ;
            f.   A project that can accommodate shared parking arrangements for
uses with alternate hours of operation and peak-use times; and/or
            g.   The parking area of any existing development may continue to
be used in its current configuration except where a public safety hazard
exists, may be created, or adjustments in parking space dimensions are
required.
      4.   Individual Parking Plan Requirement
      An IPP must include the following information:
         a.   Number of required and proposed parking spaces. Indicate the data
source used in establishing the number of proposed parking spaces;
         b.   Location of parking spaces, including accessible parking spaces;
         c.   Existing and proposed site conditions and uses, including any
available on-street parking ;
         d.   Site access and traffic circulation patterns;
         e.   Location and distance from the project site to existing
residential neighborhoods;
         f.   Neighborhoods adjacent to the site with a Residential Parking
Permit program;
         g.   Availability, location, and distance to alternate modes of
transportation;
         h.   Hours of operation and peak use time (s) of each use;
         i.   Evidence that all required parking for the proposed uses will
either be on-site or at an approved off-site parking location;
         j.   Existing and proposed shared parking agreements, when applicable.
The shared parking agreement must be prepared in a manner acceptable to the
PDSD Director ;
         k.   For projects within 400 feet of an R-3 or more restrictive zone
or Historic Preservation Zone, the IPP project must address how the proposal
will not cause a safety hazard, noise, or parking impacts on an adjacent
existing neighborhood. The IPP shall include the following:
            (1)   Methods to avoid potential increases in noise and light
intrusion as described in Section
7.4.5.A.5.h, i and j;
            (2)   Methods to deter vehicular access into adjacent residential
neighborhoods using signage or other means; and,
            (3)   Methods to prevent drive-through traffic or habitual parking
within adjacent residential neighborhoods or commercial development .
         l.   Any other information deemed appropriate by the PDSD Director
including a traffic study.
         m.   For all restaurants or bars, the applicant is required to conduct
a neighborhood meeting and shall provide notice of the neighborhood meeting in
accordance with Section
3.2.2.C.
      5.   Findings for Approval
      The PDSD Director may approve an IPP if all of the following criteria are
met in the IPP and documented in findings:
         a.   The zone permits the proposed use(s);
         b.   All parking is provided on-site or at an off-site location per
Section
7.4.6.B.1, Off-Site Parking;
         c.   For multiple or mixed use  projects , the site can accommodate
shared parking arrangements for uses with alternate hours of operation or peak
use times ;
         d.   Site access and traffic circulation are not obstructed;
         e.   Accessible parking spaces required by the City of Tucson’s
adopted Building Code have not been reduced or eliminated;
         f.   The number of bicycle parking spaces has not been reduced or
eliminated;
         g.   Vehicular access, drive-through traffic, and habitual parking in
adjacent commercial development and residential neighborhoods is deterred;
         h.   Light intrusion onto an adjoining residential use or zone is not
created. Outdoor lighting shall comply with the City of Tucson/Pima County
Outdoor Lighting Code;
         i.   Proposed outdoor seating areas are 100 feet or more from
residentially-zoned properties unless separated by a building . Combined
residential and non-residential development in a single structure or unified
development is exempt from this finding; and,
         j.   Outdoor loudspeakers or music (live or recorded) are 600 feet or
more from residentially zoned properties.
      6.   Review and Approval Procedures
         a.   An IPP for projects within 400 feet of R-3 or more restrictive
zones or Historic Preservation Zones is reviewed in accordance with Section
3.3.5, 400' Notice Procedure.
         b.   An IPP for projects more than 400 feet from R-3 or more
restrictive zones or Historic Preservation Zones is reviewed in accordance with
Section
3.3.3, PDSD Director Approval Procedure.
      7.   Amendments
      A revised IPP is required when one or more of the following occurs:
         a.   A change of use to a more parking intensive use or different
hours of operation or peak use times than the use shown on the last approved
IPP;
         b.   An expansion of a building ;
         c.   An expansion of a use that is more parking intensive than the use
it is partially or entirely replacing; or,
         d.   The parking or mitigation methods as set forth in the existing
IPP no longer comply with one or more of the required finding for approval as
provided in Section
7.4.5.A.5.
      8.   Violation of an Individual Parking Plan
      If a development is operated in a manner that violates the conditions of
the approved IPP, the use may be suspended or terminated in accordance with
Section
10.4, Penalties and Remedies.
   B.   Downtown Parking District
   The following off-street motor vehicle and bicycle parking regulations apply
within the Downtown Parking District as set forth in Section
11.4.5.
      1.   Change of Use within an Existing Building
      No additional motor vehicle or bicycle parking spaces are required for a
change of use which does not expand the existing building .
      2.   Expansions of Existing Development
         a.   No additional motor vehicle or bicycle parking spaces are
required for the following:
            (1)   Expansions that do not involve construction of new building
or the elimination of existing required parking spaces; or,
            (2)   Expansions that involve construction of new structures of
less than 1,000 square feet of gross floor area or less than 25% of the
existing gross floor area , whichever is less.
         b.   Expansions that involve construction of a new building (s) of
1,000 square feet or more of gross floor area or 25% or more of the gross floor
area of the existing building must provide motor vehicle and bicycle parking
spaces only for the area of expansion.
         c.   Expansions that involve the removal of existing required motor
vehicle or bicycle parking spaces must relocate the removed spaces either on
site or in conformance with the provisions of this division.
      3.   New Development
         a.   Office Use
         Required off-street motor vehicle parking for office use is one space
for every 500 square feet of gross floor area .
         b.   Uses Other Than Office
         Required off-street motor vehicle parking for all uses other than
office uses in the Downtown Parking District is one space per 400 square feet
of gross floor area .
         c.   Residential
         Required off-street motor vehicle parking for residential uses in the
Downtown Parking District is one space for each dwelling unit , one space for
each apartment where rent/lease of space is not by the bedroom , or one space
for each bedroom in projects where rent/lease of space is by the bedroom .
      4.   Public Area Amenity Incentive
      Required off-street  motor vehicle parking spaces for a use may be
reduced by a percentage equal to twice the ratio of open space to GFA up to a
maximum of 8%, if an interior public open space is provided. The interior
public open space may be a roofed atrium, courtyard, plaza, galleria, or
similar area. To qualify for a public area amenity reduction in required
parking, all of the following criteria must be met:
         a.   The space is designed to encourage pedestrian activity and public
use;
         b.   The space is not, in whole or in part, designated as tenant area;
         c.   Not more than 15% of the total area of the space is allocated
toward corridor space;
         d.   The space is a minimum of 30 feet wide in any horizontal
direction, with a floor-to-ceiling height of at least 20 feet;
         e.   The space is visible and physically accessible directly from a
public right-of-way or public open space and is located no more than one floor
level above or below grade ;
         f.   A minimum of one linear foot of seating is provided for every 30
square feet of interior public open space ; and,
         g.   A natural lighting source, either direct or indirect, such as
skylights or clerestory windows, is provided for the space.
      5.   Motor Vehicle Parking Location
      Motor vehicle parking in the Downtown Parking District may be located
within 1,500 feet of the use provided the parking is within the District
boundaries and is approved by the PDSD Director .
      6.   Bicycle Parking
      Bicycle parking spaces in the Section
11.4.5, Downtown Parking District, and the Section
11.4.7, Fourth Avenue Business District, may be provided:
         a.   On site . The PDSD Director may allow short-term bicycle parking
to be more than 50 feet from a public entrance (s) based on a finding from the
City of Tucson’s Bicycle Coordinator that the proposed location is consistent
with best practices pertaining to siting short-term bicycle racks, particularly
in regards to visibility, security, and convenience for bicyclists; or,
         b.   By paying the City parking in-lieu fee in accordance with Section
7.4.5.B.7.
      7.   In-Lieu Fee
      The off-street parking requirements established by this Section may be
satisfied in whole or in part by paying the City parking in-lieu fee in an
amount established by separate ordinance to be used by the City for the
installation of bicycle parking facilities or the construction of one or more
Downtown public parking facilities.
      8.   Design Criteria
      All new parking facilities must be designed so that vehicles are not
visible from the adjoining  street level, through incorporation of design
elements such as pedestrian arcades, occupied space, or display space.
   C.   Reduction Based on On-Street Parking for Certain Residential Uses
   On-street parking for single-family dwellings, mobile home dwellings, and
Residential Care Services with ten or fewer residents may be counted on a
space-for-space basis toward the total required amount of parking up to 50% if
the on-street parking is located on the same side of the street as the use and
does not extend beyond the street  frontage of the subject property.
   D.   Exemption Based on Maintenance of Historic Structure
   Non-residential uses with a parking formula of one space per 300 square feet
gross floor area or less intense formula that occupy a structure listed
individually on the National Register of Historic Places or listed as a
contributing property in a National Register Historic District, are exempt from
Section
7.4.4.B, Minimum Number of Motor Vehicle Spaces Required, provided the historic
designation of the contributing structure is maintained.
   E.   Reduction Based on Additional Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment
      1.   General Requirements
         The number of required motor vehicle parking spaces may be reduced by
including more EVSE than required in
Table 7.4.11-1: Minimum Required EVSE . The following conditions apply.
         a.   The cumulative reduction does not exceed 30% of the required
number of spaces prior to any reduction; and
         b.   The required number of EVSE is based on the total number of motor
vehicle parking spaces provided; and
         c.   Parking spaces for individuals with physical disabilities must be
provided and designed as required by the City of Tucson's adopted Building Code
and the number provided shall be based on the total number of motor vehicle
parking spaces required before any reduction has occurred. This does not apply
to additional accessible electric vehicle (EV) charging spaces as required by
Section
7.4.11.B.2; and
         d.   The amount of parking reduced for additional EVSE in specific
Land Use Group, Class and Types are listed in
Table 7.4.5-1 below.
Table 7.4.5-1: Motor Vehicle Parking Space Reductions Based on Additional
Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment (EVSE )
                     For Each Additional EV      For Each Additional EV Ready
Land Use Group/Class Installed Station, Total    Outlet, Total Provided Parking
                     Provided Parking Reduced by Reduced by
                           For Each Additional EV   For Each Additional EV
Land Use Group/Class       Installed Station, Total Ready Outlet, Total
                           Provided Parking Reduced Provided Parking Reduced by
                           by
ALL OTHER USE GROUPS/      1                        n/a
CLASSES
COMMERCIAL USE GROUP                                
Administrative and         1                        1
Professional Office
Alcoholic Beverage Service 2                        n/a
Commercial Recreation      2                        n/a
Entertainment (e.g.,
Sports Stadium or Center;  2                        n/a
Theater - Live; & Theater
- Movie)
Food Service               2                        n/a
Medical Service            1                        1
Parking                    1                        1
Personal Services          2                        n/a
Research and Product       1                        1
Development
Technical Services         2                        n/a
Travelers' Accommodation,  1                        1
Lodging
RESIDENTIAL USE GROUP                               
Mobile-home                n/a                      n/a
Multifamily Dwellings and  1                        1
Group Dwellings
RETAIL TRADE USE GROUP                              
Food and Beverage Sales,   2                        n/a
excluding Farmer's Markets
General Merchandise Sales  2                        n/a
General Merchandise Sales,
excluding Large Retail     2                        n/a
Establishment
Large Retail Establishment 2                        n/a
Marijuana Dispensary       2                        n/a
Marijuana Dispensary Off-  2                        n/a
site Cultivation Location
Marijuana Dispensary Off-
site Manufacturing         2                        n/a
Location
Medical Marijuana
Qualifying Patient         2                        n/a
Cultivation Location
Shopping Center            2                        n/a
 
   F.   Other Permitted Reductions
      1.   General Requirements
      The number of required motor vehicle parking spaces may be reduced under
the following conditions:
         a.   The project complies with one or more of the permitted reductions
in Section
7.4.5.E.2-8 below;
         b.   The cumulative reduction for this sub-section does not exceed 20%
of the required number of spaces prior to any reduction;
         c.   If more than one reduction is applied, the parking requirement is
calculated based on the required number prior to any reduction; and,
         d.   The required number of spaces for individuals with physical
disabilities is based on the total number of motor vehicle parking spaces
required before any reduction has occurred.
      2.   Reduction Based on Providing Additional Accessible Parking
         a.   For existing development , the number of required parking spaces
may be reduced by two spaces for every one non-required accessible parking
space.
         b.   For proposed development , the number of required parking spaces
may be reduced by one parking space for every one non-required accessible
parking space.
      3.   Reduction Based on Providing Additional Bicycle Parking
      For every six non-required bicycle parking spaces that meet the short or
long-term bicycle parking standards, the motor vehicle parking requirement may
be reduced by one space. Motor vehicle parking spaces may be converted to
bicycle parking spaces pursuant to Section
7.4.9.B.1.g.
      4.   Reduction Based on Valet Parking
      The Zoning Administrator may approve valet parking as a means of
satisfying a portion of the off-street parking requirements when there is an
assurance of continued operation of valet parking and evidence of an available
area for the valet parking and vehicle stacking spaces . Internal residential
neighborhood streets may not be used for valet parking operations, which
include drop-off, pick-up, parking, and driving access between the valet
parking area and business it serves.
      5.   Reduction Based on MS&R Criteria
      The number of off-street parking spaces required for any nonresidential
development located on a street designated on the MS&R Plan may be reduced in
accordance with the calculations in Section
5.4.6, MS&R Street  Perimeter Yard and Parking Adjustment.
      6.   Reduction Based on Landscaping and Screening Criteria
         a.   The following reductions apply to existing development :
            (1)   The number of spaces required may be reduced if the
development is modified to comply with all applicable sections of Section
7.6, Landscaping and Screening, except for Section
7.6.4.B.1, Canopy Trees in Vehicular Use Areas; or,
            (2)   For every three non-required canopy trees provided in the
vehicular use area , the motor vehicle parking requirement may be reduced by
one space. The planting area for each tree must comply with the canopy tree in
vehicular use area spatial requirements in accordance with Section
7.6.4.B.1.a.
         b.   For comprehensive redevelopment or development of a site , the
motor vehicle parking requirement may be reduced by one space for every four
non-required canopy trees provided in the vehicular use area . The planting
area for each tree must comply with the canopy tree in vehicular use area
spatial requirements in accordance with Section
7.6.4.B.1.a.
      7.   Reduction Based on Providing Trash and Recycling Enclosures
      When an existing development is modified to comply with the enclosure
requirement for trash and recycling, the number of required parking spaces may
be reduced up to two parking spaces per container enclosure , but not to exceed
10% of the required parking.
   G.   Diversion of Required Parking
      1.   Temporary Diversion
      Motor vehicle parking spaces within a vehicular use area may be used
temporarily for storage or display of boats, cars, recreational vehicles, semi-
truck trailers, furniture, or items of any other nature, subject to all of the
following conditions:
         a.   The vehicular use area contains more than nine spaces for motor
vehicle parking;
         b.   If the vehicular use area contains fewer than 250 spaces, no more
than 10% of the total number of vehicle parking spaces is diverted to another
use;
         c.   The maximum period of diversion is 15 days . Additional 15 day
extensions up to a maximum of 60 days per year may be granted for reasonable
cause upon written request from the applicant;
         d.   Spaces are not diverted to another use more than once in any
calendar month;
         e.   The spaces diverted are not designated or designed for use by the
physically disabled; and,
         f.   The diversion is not for the purpose of dismantling or repairing
vehicles.
      2.   Diversion Other Than Temporary
      Code required parking spaces for any land use may not be sold, leased, or
otherwise diverted to another use until off-street parking provisions are
secured and provided on another site satisfying all provisions of this section.
Approval is required for any proposed diversion of the vehicular use area .
         a.   Exception
         Any park-and-ride lot set aside to facilitate the use of the mass
transit system may use up to a maximum of 5% of the required vehicular use area
.
(Am. Ord. 11070, 5/14/2013; Am. Ord. 11171, 5/20/2014; Am. Ord. 11201, 9/23/
2014; Am. Ord. 11732, 2/19/2020; Am. Ord. 11922, 7/12/2022; Am. Ord. 11953, 8/
23/2022; Am. Ord. 12152, 3/18/2025)
7.4.6.   MOTOR VEHICLE USE AREA DESIGN CRITERIA
   A.   General
   The vehicular use area includes the parking spaces, parking area access
lanes (PAALs ), and any areas necessary to provide maneuvering, refuse
collection locations, or loading spaces. Landscaping and screening within the
vehicular use area are considered part of the vehicular use area .
   B.   Location
   Required motor vehicle parking must be located on-site except as follows.
      1.   Off-Site Parking
      Off-site parking is permitted under the following conditions.
         a.   For projects outside the Downtown Parking District , off-site
parking must be located within 600 feet of the project site . For projects in
the Downtown Parking District , off-site parking must be located within 1,500
feet of the land use provided the parking is within the District boundaries and
is approved by the PDSD Director . For purposes of this section, the distance
between required parking and the use it serves is the walking distance measured
along the pedestrian access system from the closest points between the building
or use and the vehicular use area .
         b.   The off-site parking location has parking in excess of the
minimum required parking for its use or can demonstrate alternate hours of
operation to the use it serves.
         c.   Non-residential uses may not use residentially-zoned property for
off-site parking.
         d.   A formal written and signed shared parking agreement between the
owner(s) of the shared parking area and the owner(s) of the shared parking use
in a form approved by the City is required.
         e.   The off-site  parking area meets the design criteria provided in
this section.
         f.   When required parking is separated from the principal use by an
arterial or collector street , signage directing customers to the nearest legal
pedestrian crossing is required.
         g.   Historic Districts. Land uses within a historic district may
apply the location requirements of this section unless different requirements
are established specific to that historic district .
      2.   Parking for Certain Residential Uses
         a.   Individual Residential Lots
         Visitor parking spaces on individual residential lots are permitted
under the following conditions:
            (1)   At least one visitor parking space is provided on each
residential lot within a project site ;
            (2)   The visitor parking space is at least eight and one half feet
by 18 feet in size; and,
            (3)   The designated visitor parking space(s) is shown on the
tentative plat or site plan , whichever is applicable.
         b.   On-Street Parking
         Visitor parking for single-family and mobile home dwellings is
permitted on-street if the street is wide enough to accommodate parking on both
sides of the street .
         c.   Common Use Area
         Visitor parking in common use areas is permitted. Visitor parking
spaces must be within 250 feet of the front or street side yard property lines
of each residential unit.
      3.   Tandem Parking
      Tandem parking for motor vehicles are allowed only for:
         a.   Residential Care Services with four or fewer spaces provided;
         b.   Single-family residential development ;
         c.   Mobile home dwellings;
         d.   Duplexes on individual lots ;
         e.   Valet parking ;
         f.   Non-residential uses within contributing properties to National
Register historic districts;
         g.   Home Occupations ; or,
         h.   Vehicle Storage or Display, when it is accessory to the principal
use .
      4.   Overflow Parking
      For uses where the peak parking demand is occasional or seasonal (e.g.,
shopping centers and golf courses), the Zoning Administrator may allow open
space areas to be converted to overflow parking areas for special occasions or
high-demand days . These areas can retain a natural appearance and be off-
limits to vehicles except during these peak periods. Pervious pavement
materials that have a decorative or natural appearance may be used.
   C.   Areas That May Not Be Counted As Required Parking
   The following areas are not counted as required parking:
      1.   Spaces in service bays , stacking areas, or car wash bays ;
      2.   At gasoline pumps or other hose locations;
      3.   Those used for the storage or display of vehicles for sale or rent
to the public; and,
      4.   Parking spaces may not be located under, or within five feet of, a
vertical line intersecting the ground and any structural element extending from
a billboard, including, but not limited to, overhangs, cantilevered beams, and
elevated walkways.
   D.   Motor Vehicle Use Area Dimensions
      1.   Motor Vehicle Use Area Dimensions
      The minimum parking space, access lane , Parking Area Access Lane (PAAL)
, and driveway dimensions are required as follows.
Figure 7.4.6-A is to be used in conjunction with
Tables 7.4.6-1 &
2 below.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3068.jpg]
Figure 7.4.6-A: Motor Vehicle Use Area Dimensions
TABLE 7.4.6-1: MOTOR VEHICLE USE AREA DIMENSIONS
A B1 C D2 E F G
TABLE 7.4.6-1: MOTOR VEHICLE USE AREA DIMENSIONS
A                     B1   C    D2    E    F    G
0 (Parallel Parking)3 -    -    -     -    -    -
30                    8.51 16.4 12.02 17.0 44.8 37.4
45                    8.51 18.7 13.02 12.0 50.4 44.4
60                    8.51 19.8 16.02 9.8  55.6 51.4
90                    8.51 18.0 24.02 8.5  60.0 -
1 See Section
7.4.6.D.2 for applicable exceptions
2 See
Table 7.4.6-2 for applicable exceptions
3 See Section
7.4.6.D.2.c for dimensional requirements
 
 
Table 7.4.6-2: MOTOR VEHICLE USE AREA DIMENSIONS CONTINUED
Use Area Component                                            Minimum Width
Driveway                                                      10 feet
One-way access lane  (except when serving a fire lane)
One-way access lane  or PAAL serving as a fire lane
One-way PAAL within a Storage Use development                 20 feet
Two-way access lane
Two-way PAAL                                                  24 feet
Two-way access lane  or PAAL within a Storage Use development 30 feet
 
      2.   Exceptions and Additional Dimensional Requirements
         a.   Accessible Parking Space Size
         Parking spaces for individuals with physical disabilities must be
provided and designed as required by the City of Tucson’s adopted Building
Code.
         b.   Minimum Width Requirement When Adjacent to Barrier
         A motor vehicle off-street parking space must have a minimum width of
ten feet when the side(s) of the parking space abuts a vertical barrier over
six inches in height, other than a vertical support for a carport .
         c.   Parallel Parking Spaces
         A parallel parking space must be eight feet wide and 23 feet in
length, except as follows. A parallel parking space can be reduced to 18 feet
in length if the space is located immediately adjacent to a driveway , access
lane , PAAL , alley , or street intersection and the parking space is designed
to provide maneuvering area on at least one end. On-street parking must be
approved by the Traffic Engineer.
   E.   Additional Access Lane and Parking Area Access Lanes (PAAL) Design
Criteria
      1.   Intersections
         a.   A minimum unobstructed radius of five feet is required for all
PAAL intersections, except as follows. A minimum unobstructed radius of 18 feet
is required where an access lane or PAAL designated as a fire lane or is used
to access refuse and/or recycling collection or loading zones intersects
another access lane or PAAL .
         b.   All intersection radii must be physically defined by curb or
similar material when permanent improvements or fixtures, including landscaping
, are located adjacent to the intersection. In all other instances, the
intersection must be delineated, at a minimum, by paint or similar markings.
      2.   Height Clearance
      The minimum height clearance along access lanes and PAALs is 15 feet,
except as follows. The minimum height clearance within parking garages may be
less than 15 feet as permitted by the City ’s adopted Building Code.
   F.   Circulation
      1.   Ingress and Egress Locations
      Each vehicularingress and egress point to or from a street must comply
with the curb cut regulations as specified in Chapter 25, Streets and Sidewalk,
of the Tucson Code.
      2.   Setbacks from Access Lanes and PAALs
         a.   Access lanes and PAALs must be setback at least one foot from:
            (1)   An open structure , such as a carport or covered pedestrian
access path as measured from the closest part of the structure or roof
overhang; or,
            (2)   A structure when the access lane or PAAL serves as a drive-
through lane.
         b.   Access lanes and PAALs must be setback at least two feet from a
wall, screen , or other obstruction over six inches. The additional area is
necessary to provide clearance for fire, sanitation, and delivery vehicles.
      3.   Sight Visibility
      Sight visibility at points of ingress into, egress from , or within the
vehicular use area must be provided in accordance with Section
10-01.5.0, Sight Visibility, of the Technical Standards Manual.
      4.   Back-Up Spur (See
Figure 7.4.6-B.)
         a.   A back-up spur must be provided at the end of a row of parking if
no ingress or egress is provided at that end.
         b.   The spur must be a minimum of three feet in depth and have a
three foot radii and a wheel barrier to prevent encroachment onto any
unsurfaced areas.
         c.   A minimum distance of three (feet must be provided between the
back of spur and any wall, screen , or other obstruction over six inches in
height .
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3070.jpg]
Figure 7.4.6-B: Back Up Spur
   G.   Striping
   Parking spaces must be marked with a four inch wide, white stripe along all
sides, except at the entrance to the stall or where the limits of the space are
defined by other means, such as curbing, except as follows. Striping is not
required when tandem parking is permitted in accordance with Section
7.4.6.B.3, Tandem Parking.
   H.   Barriers
      1.   Barriers, such as post barricades or wheel stop curbing, are
required in a vehicular use area to prevent vehicles from extending beyond the
property lines , to prevent cars from damaging adjacent  landscaping , walls,
or buildings , overhanging adjacent  sidewalk areas , and/or driving onto
unimproved portions of the site .
         a.   Exception
         Barriers are not required to prevent vehicles from overhanging
adjacent  sidewalk areas when the sidewalk is curbed and the applicant can
demonstrate that a clearance space of at least four feet in width is provided
for pedestrian access. When demonstrating compliance, the applicant must
account for a vehicle overhang of two and one-half feet and any other
obstructions in the sidewalk , such as, bicycle parking racks, vending
machines, and merchandise display space.
      2.   Barriers may not impede pedestrian circulation and accessible
routes.
      3.   When required, wheel stop curbing must be a minimum of two and one-
half feet from the front of the parking space. (See
Figure 7.4.6-C.) Exception: When a tree is located at the edge or between
parking spaces, the minimum required vehicle overhang shall be in accordance
with Section
5-01.3.3, Vehicle Overhangs, of the Technical Standards Manual.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3072.jpg]
Figure 7.4.6-C: Wheel Stop Curbing
   I.   Surfacing Requirements
      1.   All vehicular use areas must be surfaced with one of the following
materials.
         a.   Pervious and impervious asphaltic concrete;
         b.   Pervious and impervious cement concrete;
         c.   A penetration treatment of bituminous material and seal coat of
bituminous binder and mineral aggregate; or,
         d.   Alternative surfacing as determined appropriate by the City
Engineer. Exception: Vehicular use areas for residential development with four
or fewer spaces provided, and vehicle storage are exempt from the surfacing
requirements.
      2.   The surface must be maintained in a smooth, durable, and well-
drained condition and be kept clear of debris or other accumulated refuse.
   J.   Lighting
   Lighting provided in any vehicular use area or for a bicycle parking
facility must be in compliance with the adopted Outdoor Lighting Code of the
City of Tucson.
   K.   Use of Street or Alley for Maneuvering Area
   A street or alley can not be used for maneuvering directly into or from any
parking space located wholly or partially outside the public right-of-way ,
except as follows:
      1.   The following uses are permitted to use a street or alley for access
and maneuvering:
         a.   Residential uses (including, but not limited to, single-family
dwellings, mobile home dwellings, duplexes on individual lots, multifamily
development, and Residential Care Services) that provide four or fewer off-
street motor vehicle parking spaces;
         b.   Home occupations ; or,
         c.   Non-residential uses within contributing properties to a National
Register Historic District.
      2.   An alley , when used for access, must be a minimum of 20 feet wide,
free of obstructions, and surfaced with a dust control method that is
acceptable to the TDOT City Engineer.
      3.   A street may be used for maneuvering directly into or from a parking
space, provided the parking space is located completely within the right-of-way
and the design of the parking layout is approved by the TDOT City Engineer.
      4.   These exceptions are not applicable on MS&R designated streets as
provided in the MS&R Plan .
   L.   Screening and Landscaping Requirements
      1.   Vehicular use areas shall be developed in accordance with Section
7.6.4.B, Vehicular Use Areas.
(Am. Ord. 11070, 5/14/2013; Am. Ord. 11996, 3/21/2023)
7.4.7.   MOTOR VEHICLE STACKING REQUIREMENTS
   A.   Requirement
   The minimum vehicle stacking capacity required is as follows.
 
TABLE 7.4.7-1: MINIMUM VEHICLE STACKING REQUIREMENTS
Use                                      Minimum Vehicle Stacking Capacity (per
                                         drive-through lane)*
Automotive Washing (Self-Service)        1 vehicle space
Automotive Washing (Full-Service) and
Food Service where there are separate    4 vehicle spaces
points of service for ordering and pick-
up
All other uses                           3 vehicle spaces
* The space at the point of service counts as one vehicle space.
 
   B.   Design Criteria
      1.   Each stacking space must be a minimum of nine feet in width and 18
feet in length.
      2.   The stacking area for drive-through lanes must not cross on-site
pedestrian access.
      3.   Stacking spaces may not impede on-site traffic circulation and
ingress to and egress from the project site .
      4.   Drive-through lanes must be striped, marked, or otherwise clearly
delineated.
7.4.8.   REQUIRED NUMBER OF BICYCLE PARKING SPACES
   A.   Purpose
   The purpose of this section is to encourage the use of bicycles by providing
safe and convenient places to park bicycles. These regulations further the City
’s goal of being a bicycle friendly community by ensuring that the necessary
facilities are in place to accommodate cyclists.
   B.   Minimum Number of Bicycle Parking Spaces Required
      1.   The number of short and long-term bicycle parking spaces required
for each Land Use Group, Class and Type is listed in
Table 7.4.8-1 below.
         a.   Exceptions
            (1)   No long-term bicycle parking is required on a site where
there is less than 2,500 square feet of gross floor area .
            (2)   Bicycle Parking In-Lieu Fee. The required number of bicycle
parking spaces may be satisfied partially or completely by paying the City
 bicycle parking in-lieu fee in an amount established by separate ordinance to
be used by the City to install bicycle parking and associated improvements in
the right-of-way . The in-lieu fee may not be used if there are vehicular use
areas , plazas, exterior courtyards, or other open areas on the site , other
than required landscaping , large enough, separately or in combination, to
accommodate all or a portion of the required bicycle parking.
            (3)   When there are existing bicycle racks in the right-of-way ,
the PDSD Director may allow a modification to the required number of bicycle
parking spaces based on a finding from the City ’s Bicycle Coordinator that the
number of existing racks will adequately serve the proposed use and other
nearby uses the racks currently serve.
            (4)   When the requirements of this Section are required due to an
expansion in accordance with Section
7.4.3.E, Expansions, the PDSD Director  may grant a modification to the
required number of bicycle parking spaces  based on a finding from the City ’s
Bicycle  Coordinator or designee that a reasonable attempt has been made to
provide all or a portion of the required bicycle parking in a manner that that
the bicycle  parking does not create a safety hazard for pedestrians, cyclists,
and motorists and is clearly visible from adjacent  sidewalks , drives, and/or
public entrances .
      2.   Minimum Required Bicycle Parking Spaces
Table 7.4.8-1: Minimum Required Bicycle Parking Spaces
Land Us e Group/Class Short-Term Bicycle Parking Long-Term Bicycle Parking
                      Required                   Required
Table 7.4.8-1: Minimum Required Bicycle Parking Spaces
Land Us e Group/Class                                                      Short-Term Bicycle Parking Required   Long-Term Bicycle Parking Required
AGRICULTURAL USE GROUP                                                     None.                                 None.
                                                                           1 space per 8,000 sq. ft. GFA,        1 space per 12,000 sq. ft. GFA,
CIVIC USE GROUP                                                            minimum requirement is 2 spaces;      minimum requirement is 2 spaces;
                                                                           except as follows:                    except as follows:
Cemetery                                                                   None.                                 None.
                                                                           Spaces for 2% of the maximum expected 1 space per 20 employees. Minimum
Civic Assembly; Membership Organization; Religious Use                     daily attendance. Maximum requirement requirement is 2 spaces.
                                                                           is 50 spaces.
Cultural Use - Zoo                                                         10% of the required number of motor   None.
                                                                           vehicle parking.
Educational Uses:                                                                                                
                                                                           Grades 1-12: 1 space per 20 students  Grades 1-12: 1 space per 10 employees
   Grades K - 12                                                        of planned capacity. Minimum          plus 1 space per 20 students of
                                                                           requirement is 2 spaces.              planned capacity. Minimum requirement
                                                                                                                 is 2 spaces.
                                                                           1 space per 10 students of planned    1 space per 10 employees plus 1 space
   Postsecondary Institutions; Instructional Schools                    capacity. Minimum requirement is 2    per 10 students of planned capacity;
                                                                           spaces.                               or 1 space per 20,000 sq. ft. GFA,
                                                                                                                 whichever is greater.
                                                                                                                 1 space per 12,000 sq. ft. GFA,
COMMERCIAL USE GROUP                                                       2 spaces.                             minimum requirement is 2 spaces;
                                                                                                                 except as follows:
Administrative and Professional Office                                     1 space per 20,000 sq. ft. GFA.       1 space per 6,000 sq. ft. GFA.
                                                                           Minimum requirement is 2 spaces.      Minimum requirement is 2 spaces.
Alcoholic Beverage  Service                                                1 space per 2,000 sq. ft. GFA.        1 space per 12,000 sq. ft. GFA.
                                                                           Minimum requirement is 2 spaces.      Minimum requirement is 2 spaces.
Animal  Service                                                            None.                                 None.
Billboard                                                                  None.                                 None.
Car Wash, Self-Service                                                     None.                                 None.
Day Care                                                                   1 space per 40,000 sq. ft. GFA.       1 space per 12,000 sq. ft. GFA.
                                                                           Minimum requirement is 2 spaces.      Minimum requirement is 2 spaces.
Daycare - Home Occupation                                                  None.                                 None.
Entertainment (e.g., Sports Stadium or Center; Theater - Live; & Theater - Spaces for 2% of the maximum expected 1 space per 20 employees. Minimum
Movie); except,                                                            daily attendance. Maximum requirement requirement is 2 spaces.
                                                                           is 150.
   Dance Hall                                                           1 space per 2,000 sq. ft. GFA.        1 space per 12,000 sq. ft. GFA.
   Carnival/Circus                                                      None.                                 None.
   Rodeo Arena                                                          Spaces for 2% of the maximum expected 1 space per 20 employees. Minimum
                                                                           daily attendance.                     requirement is 2 spaces.
Financial Service                                                          1 space per 5,000 sq. ft. GFA.        1 space per 12,000 sq. ft. GFA.
                                                                           Minimum requirement is 2 spaces.      Minimum requirement is 2 spaces.
Food Service                                                               1 space per 2,000 sq. ft. GFA.        1 space per 12,000 sq. ft. GFA.
                                                                           Minimum requirement is 2 spaces.      Minimum requirement is 2 spaces.
Medical Service:                                                                                                 
   Extended Health Care (e.g., nursing home, assisted living)           0.05 spaces per bedroom . Minimum     0.15 spaces per bedroom . Minimum
                                                                           requirement is 2 spaces.              requirement is 2 spaces.
   Major (e.g., hospital)                                               1 space per 20,000 sq. ft. GFA.       1 space per 50,000 sq. ft. GFA.
                                                                           Minimum requirement is 2 spaces       Minimum requirement is 2 spaces.
   Outpatient                                                           1 space per 5,000 sq. ft. GFA.        1 space per 12,000 sq. ft. GFA.
                                                                           Minimum requirement is 2 spaces.      Minimum requirement is 2 spaces.
                                                                                                                 Except for unattended surface parking
Parking                                                                    None.                                 lots , 1 space per 20 auto spaces.
                                                                                                                 Minimum requirement is 2 spaces.
Personal Service                                                           1 space per 5,000 sq. ft. GFA.        1 space per 12,000 sq. ft. GFA.
                                                                           Minimum requirement is 2 spaces.      Minimum requirement is 2 spaces.
Transportation Service                                                     None.                                 1 space per 12,000 sq. ft. GFA.
                                                                                                                 Minimum requirement is 2 spaces.
Traveler’s Accommodation, Campsite                                       1 space per 20 campsites.             None.
                                                                           2 spaces plus 1 space per 6,000 sq.
Travelers’ Accommodation, Lodging                                        ft. GFA of conference, restaurant,    1 space per 20 guest rooms. Minimum
                                                                           bar, and/or banquet space. Maximum    requirement is 2 spaces.
                                                                           requirement is 50 spaces.
Vehicle Storage                                                            None.                                 None.
                                                                                                                 1 space per 15,000 sq. ft. GFA.
INDUSTRIAL USE GROUP                                                       None.                                 Minimum requirement is 2 spaces.
                                                                                                                 Maximum required is 10 spaces.
RECREATION USE GROUP                                                       Per Director ’s approval, except as Per Director ’s approval, except as
                                                                           follows:                              follows:
Billiard/Pool Hall; Health/Exercise Club/Gymnasium; Skating Rink; and      1 space per 2,000 sq. ft. GFA.        1 space per 12,000 sq. ft. GFA.
Bowling Alley                                                              Minimum requirement is 2 spaces.      Minimum requirement is 2 spaces.
Athletic Fields                                                            2 spaces per field.                   None.
Batting Cage                                                               0.25 spaces per batting cage. Minimum None.
                                                                           requirement is 2 spaces.
Court - Basketball, Racquetball, Tennis, or Volleyball                     0.25 spaces per court. Minimum        None.
                                                                           requirement is 2 spaces.
Golf Course                                                                None.                                 2 spaces.
Driving Range                                                              2 spaces.                             None.
Miniature Golf Course                                                      0.25 spaces per tee.                  None.
Rifle and Pistol Range                                                     None.                                 None.
                                                                           1 space per 2,000 sq. ft. of entire
Swimming Pool                                                              pool area. Minimum requirement is 2   None.
                                                                           spaces.
RESIDENTIAL USE GROUP                                                                                            
Single-Family & Mobile Home Dwellings                                      None.                                 None.
Multifamily Dwellings and Group Dwelling                                   0.10 spaces per bedroom . Minimum     0.5 spaces per bedroom . Minimum
                                                                           requirement is 2 spaces.              requirement is 2 spaces.
Residential Care Services                                                  0.05 spaces per bedroom . Minimum     0.10 spaces per bedroom . Minimum
                                                                           requirement is 2 spaces.              requirement is 2 spaces.
RETAIL TRADE USE GROUP*                                                                                          
Retail Trade Uses Less Than 50,000 sq. ft. GFA                             1 space per 5,000 sq. ft. GFA.        1 space per 12,000 sq. ft. GFA.
                                                                           Minimum requirement is 2 spaces.      Minimum requirement is 2 spaces.
Retail Trade Uses 50,000 sq. ft. GFA - 99,999 sq. ft. GFA                  1 space per 6,000 sq. ft. GFA.        1 space per 12,000 sq. ft. GFA.
Retail Trade Uses More Than 100,000 sq. ft. GFA                            1 space per 7,000 sq. ft. GFA.        1 space per 12,000 sq. ft. GFA.
                                                                           Maximum requirement is 150 spaces.    Maximum requirement is 50 spaces.
*The required number of bicycle parking spaces  for multiple or mixed use
 development  composed of more than one building  are calculated on a per                                       
building  basis using the formulas provided above
Auctions                                                                   None.                                 None.
Construction Material Sales, Furniture, Carpet, or Appliance Store; Heavy                                        1 space per 12,000 sq. ft. GFA.
Equipment Sales; and Vehicle Rental and Sales                              2 spaces.                             Minimum requirement is 2 spaces.
                                                                                                                 Maximum requirement is 10 spaces.
                                                                           1 space per 5,000 sq. ft. of display
Farmers’ Market or Swap Meets                                            and sales area only. Minimum          None.
                                                                           requirement is 2 spaces.
Gasoline Sales without Food and Beverage Sales                             None.                                 None.
Home Improvement Center                                                    1 space per 12,000 sq. ft. GFA.       1 space per 12,000 sq. ft. GFA.
                                                                           Maximum requirement is 10 spaces.     Maximum requirement is 10 spaces.
                                                                                                                 1 space per 40,000 sq. ft. GFA.
Medical Marijuana Dispensary Off-Site Cultivation Location                 2 spaces.                             Minimum requirement is 2 spaces.
                                                                                                                 Maximum requirement is 10 spaces.
STORAGE USE GROUP                                                                                                
                                                                                                                 1 space per 40,000 sq. ft. GFA.
Commercial Storage & Hazardous Material Storage                            None.                                 Minimum requirement is 2 spaces.
                                                                                                                 Maximum requirement is 10 spaces.
Personal Storage                                                           2 spaces.                             None.
UTILITIES                                                                 None.                                 None.
                                                                                                                 1 space per 40,000 sq. ft. GFA.
WHOLESALING USE GROUP                                                     2 spaces.                             Minimum requirement is 2 spaces.
                                                                                                                 Maximum requirement is 10 spaces.
 
(Am. Ord. 11199, 9/9/2014; Am. Ord. 11328, 12/8/2015)
7.4.9.   BICYCLE PARKING DESIGN CRITERIA
   A.   Purpose
   These standards ensure that required bicycle parking is designed so that
bicycles may be securely locked without undue inconvenience and will be
reasonably safeguarded from intentional or accidental damage.
   B.   General Criteria
      1.   Parking and Maneuvering
         a.   Bicycle parking may not impede on-site pedestrian access. A
clearance space of at least four feet in width must be provided for pedestrian
access.
         b.   Each bicycle parking space must be accessible without moving
another bicycle.
         c.   Adequate maneuvering space must be provided behind all outdoor
bicycle parking facilities .
         d.   The bicycle parking area must be hard surfaced and maintained in
a smooth, durable, and well-drained condition. Stabilized decomposed granite is
an acceptable surface material for bicycle parking areas .
         e.   Outdoor bicycle parking areas must be lighted so that they are
thoroughly illuminated and visible from adjacent  sidewalks , parking lots , or
buildings during hours of use.
         f.   Bicycle parking facilities will be maintained in good condition
and kept clear of trash and debris.
         g.   Vehicular Use Areas . Short- and long-term bicycle parking are
permitted in vehicular use areas provided the parking area is separated from
vehicular parking and drive areas by a barrier or is located a sufficient
distance from vehicular uses areas to prevent damage to the parked bicycles.
Examples of acceptable barriers include curbs, bollards, concrete planters,
landscape buffers, or other suitable barrier devices. Striping in combination
with other barrier devices is permitted.
      2.   Bicycle Racks
      Bicycle racks must comply with all of the following criteria: (See
Figures 7.4.9-B and C for illustrative examples of these criteria.)
         a.   Bicycle racks must be securely anchored to the ground, floor,
wall, or ceiling;
         b.   The bicycle frame and one wheel can be locked to the rack with a
high security, U-shaped lock if both wheels are left on the bicycle;
         c.   A bicycle six feet long can be securely held with its frame
supported so that the bicycle cannot be pushed or fall in a manner that will
damage the wheels or components;
         d.   A single rack is designed and located to accommodate two
bicycles;
         e.   Racks must not have sharp edges that can be hazardous to
pedestrians, particularly individuals with visual disabilities. Artistic
bicycle racks are acceptable provided they meet the criteria herein;
         f.   Each required short-term bicycle parking space must be at least
two feet by six feet;
         g.   A bicycle rack must be a minimum of two and one half feet from a
wall or other obstruction; and,
         h.   An access aisle at least five feet wide must be provided between
two rows of bicycle parking. The aisle width is measured between the lengthwise
dimensions (i.e., six feet) of the bicycle parking spaces between the two rows.
   C.   Short-Term Bicycle Parking
   The purpose of short-term bicycle parking is to encourage shoppers,
customers, messengers, and other visitors to use bicycles by providing a
convenient and readily accessible place to park bicycles.
      1.   Short-term bicycle parking must be provided in racks per Section
7.4.9.B.2 or lockers per Section
7.4.9.D.2.d.
      2.   Location
      Short-term bicycle parking must be:
         a.   Within 50 feet of each public entrance to a building as measured
along the most direct pedestrian access route (See
Figure 7.4.9-A below).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3074.jpg]
Figure 7.4.9-A: Bicycle Parking Location
            (1)   Exception
            The PDSD Director may allow short-term bicycle parking to be more
than 50 feet from a public entrance (s) based on a finding from the City of
Tucson’s Bicycle Coordinator or designee that the proposed location is
consistent with best practices pertaining to siting short-term bicycle racks,
particularly in regards to visibility, security, and convenience for
bicyclists.
         b.   Located outside the building (s);
         c.   Clearly visible from the adjacent  sidewalks , drives, and/or a
public entrance (s); and,
         d.   Where buildings have more than one public entrance or a site has
more than one building , short-term bicycle parking must be distributed so that
at least one short-term bicycle parking space is within 50 feet of each public
entrance .
   D.   Long-term Bicycle Parking
   The purpose of long-term bicycle parking is to provide employees, students,
residents, commuters and others who generally stay at a site for several hours,
a secure and weather-protected place to park bicycles. Although long-term
parking does not have to be provided on-site , the intent of these standards is
to allow bicycle parking to be within a reasonable distance in order to
encourage bicycle use. Long-term bicycle parking facilities must comply with
the following criteria:
      1.   Location
      Long-term bicycle parking must be located on-site or offsite within 300
feet of the building . Long-term bicycle parking for multiple or mixed use
 developments and shopping centers should be distributed proportionately among
the uses;
      2.   Security
      To provide security, long-term bicycle parking must have controlled
access. Examples include, but are not limited to:
         a.   Inside residential units;
         b.   Inside buildings provided the bicycle parking does not create a
safety hazard or impede pedestrian circulation and in an area that is visible
from employee work areas or in a locked room;
         c.   In a bicycle room or an area enclosed by a fence that is eight
feet high or connected floor-to-ceiling accessed by key, smartcard, or other
secure method; or,
         d.   In bicycle lockers that fully enclose the bicycle, resist
tampering, are securely anchored, and constructed of durable materials, such
as, but not limited to, steel. These lockers may be leased (keyed or smartcard)
lockers or on-demand lockers (self-lock or smartcard) lockers.
      3.   Weather Protection
      Long-term bicycle parking must be covered to provide weather protection
and may be provided inside buildings , under roof overhangs or awnings, in
bicycle lockers , or within or under other structures . Where long-term bicycle
parking is not within a building or locker, the cover must be permanent and at
least seven feet above the floor or ground.
      4.   Signage
      Where long-term bicycle parking is not within a building and a key, code,
or secure method is needed to access the parking facility, a sign must be
provided instructing cyclists how access may be obtained.
      5.   Lighting
      Long-term bicycle parking not within a building must be lit by overhead
lighting.
   E.   Bicycle Parking Figures
      1.   Examples of Acceptable Bicycle Rack Design
      The following bicycle racks comply with the criteria of Section
7.4.9.B.2 and are provided for illustrative purposes only. Other bicycle rack
designs may be used provided they comply with Section
7.4.9.B.2.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3076.jpg]
Figure 7.4.9-B: Bike Rack Design
      2.   Examples of Bicycle Parking Layouts
      The following bicycle parking layouts comply with the criteria of Section
7.4.9.B.2 and are provided for illustrative purposes only. Other layouts may be
used provided they comply with Section
7.4.9.B.2.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3078.jpg]
Figure 7.4.9-C: Bicycle Parking Layouts
7.4.10.   PARKING DESIGN MODIFICATION REQUEST (PDMR)
   A.   Purpose
   This section is established to provide an administrative process through
which specific parking design regulations of the UDC may be modified. This
procedure is not intended to delete or waive UDC regulations, but is intended
to allow design flexibility in UDC compliance and alternative design solutions
within the intent of the regulation.
   B.   Applicability
   The following requirements may be considered for a modification under this
section:
      1.   Number of motor vehicle parking spaces ;
      2.   Dimensional and location requirements of Section
7.4.6 (Motor Vehicle Use Area Design Criteria) including, but not limited to
off-site  parking location, parking space width, access lane  and PAAL width,
and back-up spur depth; and,
      3.   Number of bicycle parking spaces .
   C.   Review and Approval Procedures
      1.   Applications must include property ownership information, a site
plan , and other information deemed by the PDSD Director as necessary to
evaluate the request.
      2.   Review of PDMR requests is processed in accordance with Section
3.3.3, PDSD Director Approval Procedure.
   D.   Findings for Approval
   The PDSD Director may approve a modification as provided by this section if
all of the following applicable criteria are met and documented in findings.
      1.   The modification does not result in the deletion of an UDC
requirement.
      2.   The modification is not a request previously denied as a variance.
      3.   The modification is not to a condition of approval for a rezoning,
Special Exception Land Use , variance, or Individual Parking Plan.
      4.   The modification does not adversely impact adjacent properties or
development .
      5.   The modification does not impede sight visibility at points of
ingress into, egress from , or within the vehicular use area for either
vehicular or pedestrian traffic or otherwise create or increase a safety
hazard.
      6.   The modification provides design alternatives to better integrate
the development into the design character of the immediate neighborhood.
      7.   Except as provided below, a PDMR may modify a dimensional
requirement by no more than 10%.
      8.   A modification may be granted for decreasing the required motor
vehicle parking by 20% or less, but in no case more than five spaces. The
modification in off-street  motor vehicle parking spaces is for the purpose of
improving the site design in a manner which will further the intent of the
PDMR. This includes improvements such as, but not limited to, enhancement of
landscaping , pedestrian facilities, or bicycle provisions beyond the
requirements of the UDC .
      9.   The modification does not decrease the minimum parking space
dimension to less than eight feet in width. The number of parking spaces with
decreased dimensions may not exceed 10% of the total number of parking spaces
provided. The parking spaces with decreased dimensions must be marked as
‘compact’.
      10.   The modification does not decrease the parking area access lane or
driveway dimension by more than 5% of the minimum width required.
         a.   Exceptions:
            (1)   In instances when the access is a fire lane, the width of a
parking area access lane or driveway may not be reduced.
            (2)   The parking area access lane or driveway may be decreased by
more than 5% for residential development of five units or less and with
approval of Tucson Fire
      11.   The back-up spur dimensional requirements may be modified when the
last space in a bay of parking is wider than eight and one-half feet or when
the PDSD Director determines that the proposed modification will not create a
safety hazard.
      12.   A modification may be granted for decreasing the required bicycle
parking by 10% or less, but in no case shall the modification result in there
being less than two bicycle parking spaces . The modification in the number of
bicycle parking spaces is for the purpose of improving the site design in a
manner which will further the intent of the PDMR. This includes improvements
such as, but not limited to, enhancement of landscaping or pedestrian
facilities beyond the requirements of the UDC .
(Am. Ord. 11732, 2/19/2020; Am. Ord. 11996, 3/21/2023)
7.4.11.   REQUIRED NUMBER OF ELECTRIC VEHICLE SUPPLY EQUIPMENT (EVSE).
   A.   Purpose
      The purpose of this section is to encourage the use of electric vehicles
by providing equitable and convenient access to electric vehicle charging
infrastructure. These regulations support the City's climate strategy to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions from the transportation sector by ensuring that the
necessary facilities are in place to accommodate electric vehicles.
   B.   Minimum Required EVSE  
      1.   The percentage of total required motor vehicle parking spaces that
must also have access to at least Level 2 EVSE for specific Land Use Group,
Class and Types are listed in
Table 7.4.11-1 below. The required EVSE parking spaces shall be based upon the
total number of parking spaces provided following any approved parking
reductions or modifications.
      2.   Four percent (e.g., one in 25 spaces) but no less than one of
electric vehicle (EV) charging spaces, in any given parking facility, must meet
accessible parking space design standards. Such spaces shall not serve to meet
the required number of accessible parking spaces required per the International
Building Code.
      3.   Retail Trade Uses and the following Commercial Use Classes:
Alcoholic Beverage Service, Commercial Recreation, Entertainment, Food Service,
Personal Services and Technical Services, with less than 50 total required
motor vehicle parking spaces prior to any reduction are exempt from Minimum
Required EVSE .
      4.   The number of total EVSE required parking spaces may be reduced by
installing Level 3 charging stations. Each installed Level 3 charging station
meets the requirement for three EV charging spaces.
      5.   In the case of a proposed expansion on an existing site, the EVSE
requirements shall be based upon the number of parking spaces provided as part
of the expansion and not the total number of parking spaces provided on site.
Table 7.4.11-1: Minimum Required EVSE
Land Use Group/Class EV Installed EV Ready Required EV Capable Required
                     Required
Land Use Group/Class EV Installed  EV Ready Required EV Capable Required
                     Required
COMMERCIAL USE GROUP                                
Administrative and   None required 5%                15%
Professional Office
Alcoholic Beverage   5%            None required     10%
Service
Commercial           5%            None required     10%
Recreation
Entertainment (e.g.,
Sports Stadium or
Center; Theater -    5%            None required     10%
Live; & Theater -
Movie)
Food Service         5%            None required     10%
Medical Service      None required 5%                15%
Parking              None required 5%                15%
Personal Services    5%            None required     10%
Research and Product None required 5%                15%
Development
Technical Services   5%            None required     10%
Travelers'
Accommodation,       None required 5%                15%
Lodging
RESIDENTIAL USE                                     
GROUP
Mobile home          None required 1 per unit        None required
Multifamily
Dwellings and Group  None required 10%               20%
Dwellings
RETAIL TRADE USE                                    
GROUP
Food and Beverage
Sales, excluding     5%            None required     10%
Farmer's Markets
General Merchandise  5%            None required     10%
Sales
General Merchandise
Sales, excluding     5%            None required     10%
Large Retail
Establishment
Large Retail         5%            None required     10%
Establishment
Marijuana Dispensary 5%            None required     10%
Marijuana Dispensary
Off-site Cultivation 5%            None required     10%
Location
Marijuana Dispensary
Off-site             5%            None required     10%
Manufacturing
Location
Medical Marijuana
Qualifying Patient   5%            None required     10%
Cultivation Location
Shopping Center      5%            None required     10%
 
(Ord. 11953, 8/23/2022; Am. Ord. 12152, 3/18/2025)
7.4.12.   ELECTRIC VEHICLE PARKING DESIGN CRITERIA
   A.   Purpose
      These standards ensure that required electric vehicle charging spaces are
designed so that electric vehicle drivers may easily find and utilize EVSE
without undue inconvenience.
   B.   General Criteria
      1.   EVSE Siting
         a.   When siting EVSE , the charging equipment must not interfere with
other uses and access on site.
         b.   EVSE shall be installed so that EV charging is feasible in the
number of spaces required.
   C.   EV Installed  
      The purpose of EV Installed  EVSE is to provide easy access for EV
charging to a wide range of the general public. This is the most visible and
significant investment in EVSE infrastructure. The installation of a charging
station allows an EV driver to charge a vehicle without additional equipment.
The installation of a networked station allows for managed charging access,
monitoring, billing, and remotely accessed updates for the user and property
manager.
      1.   EV Installed Stations must be securely anchored to the ground,
floor, wall, or ceiling.
      2.   Stations shall be installed to minimize tripping hazards and draping
of the charging cord.
      3.   EV parking spaces with access to installed stations shall be
identified with signage and pavement markings including an EV symbol and
regulatory instructions such as "No Parking Except for Electric Vehicle
Charging."
      4.   Installed EVSE stations shall be accessible for EV charging during
business hours at a minimum.
   D.   EV Ready   
      The purpose of EV Ready  EVSE is to provide lower cost ready access to EV
charging in locations with familiar or semi-regular users. Location-specific
management strategies can be utilized to monitor or bill for charging access.
Users may be required to provide their own charging cables to connect to an
available outlet, or management may opt to provide this component. EV Ready
spaces provide significant cost savings over retrofits if they are upgraded to
EV Installed stations in the future.
      1.   The outlet near the EV Ready parking space shall be permanently and
visibly marked as "EV Ready ."
      2.   This marking shall be changed if upgraded to EV Installed .
      3.   In the service panel or subpanel directory, the branch circuit shall
be identified as "EV Ready ."
      4.   Information for how to access and charge at EV Ready parking spaces
through site- specific management plans shall be clearly visible in the parking
lot.
   E.   EV Capable  
      The purpose of EV Capable conduit is to provide cost effective 'future
proofing' for future EV charging at a site.
      1.   The raceway termination location near the EV Capable parking space
shall be permanently and visibly marked as "EV Capable ."
      2.   This marking shall be changed if upgraded to EV Ready or EV
Installed.
      3.   The service panel or subpanel circuit directory shall identify the
overcurrent protective device space(s) reserved for future electrical vehicle
charging as "EV Capable ".
(Ord. 11953, 8/23/2022)
7.5.   OFF-STREET LOADING
7.5.1.   PURPOSE
   This section establishes requirements for the safe receipt or distribution
of materials or merchandise by vehicle to provide for:
   A.   An off-street space or berth for temporary parking of a vehicle while
loading or unloading merchandise, cargo, or materials;
   B.   Expediting moving traffic and lessening street congestion by minimizing
traffic conflicts between streets and the loading areas for various land use
activities;
   C.   Adequate loading areas for new land uses and for expansion of existing
land uses ;
   D.   A safer pedestrian environment by providing separate and distinct
spaces from the pedestrian areas for loading areas ;
   E.   Safe, convenient, and efficient ingress-egress for loading areas ; and,
   F.   Safe and efficient on-site vehicular circulation systems by providing
separate loading areas from the vehicular traffic lanes.
7.5.2.   APPLICABILITY
   The provisions of this section apply to:
   A.   New development ;
   B.   Changes of use locating in existing development , as required in
Section
7.5.3.D, Changes of Use.
   C.   Any expansion of an existing land use or any addition of a new use to
an existing development , as required in Section
7.5.3.E, Expansions.
7.5.3.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
   A.   Land Use Groups and Land Use Classes
   The specific Land Use Groups and Land Use Classes listed in Sec
7.5.5, Required Loading Areas, are defined in Article 11, Definitions and Rules
of Construction.
   B.   Calculations for Loading Areas
   The calculation for the required number of loading areas is based on the
proposed land use and the size of the project as provided in Section
7.5.5, Required Loading Areas. The size of the project  is the gross floor area
of the use, including any outdoor area dedicated  to the use, but excluding
vehicular use areas
   C.   Change of Approved Vehicular Use Area
   Whenever zoning approval has been granted for a vehicular use area which
includes loading areas , the approval is conditioned upon the continued
compliance with the provisions contained in the approved plan. Any change to
the vehicular use area as shown on the approved plan must comply with the
requirements of this section and be reapproved.
   D.   Changes of Use
   Whenever the use of an existing development is changed to a different use
which requires a loading area or loading areas of greater size under this
section than were required for the prior use, additional loading areas or a
loading area of greater size, whichever is applicable, must be provided.
   E.   Expansions
   Any expansion of an existing use or any addition of a new use to an existing
development which results in an expansion in gross floor area is subject to the
following requirements:
      1.   If an expansion or a series of expansions cumulatively results in
less than a 25% expansion in gross floor area , the requirements of this
section apply only to the expanded use.
      2.   If an expansion or a series of expansions cumulatively results in a
25% or greater expansion in gross floor area , the requirements of this section
apply to the entire site .
      3.   Expansions are cumulated over time from April 1, 1969. Once a
development is brought into conformance with the requirements of this section,
subsequent expansions will begin accumulating as of the date the development
was brought into conformance .
7.5.4.   DESIGN CRITERIA
   All loading areas , including any non-required loading areas , must comply
with the following requirements.
   A.   Location and Use Requirements
   The location and use of a loading area are as follows.
      1.   A loading area must be located on the same site or lot as the use
they serve.
      2.   A loading area required for a billboard must be located immediately
adjacent to the billboard and outside the area defined by a vertical line
intersecting the ground and any structural element extending from the
billboard, including, but not limited to, overhangs, cantilevered beams, and
elevated walkways.
      3.   A loading area may be co-located within the approach area for
dumpster containers and the stacking spaces of drive-through aisles when safety
and access issues are appropriately addressed and delivery and solid waste
collection schedules are coordinated so as not to conflict with one another.
   B.   Access Requirements
   The access requirements to a loading space are as follows.
      1.   A street may be used for access and maneuvering into and out of a
loading area provided:
         a.   The street is used for access to only one loading area on that
site .
         b.   The street is not shown on the Major Streets and Routes (MS&R)
Plan .
         c.   The street is not a local residential street .
         d.   The street does not abut a residential zone within the same block
.
      2.   An alley may be used for access and maneuvering into and out of a
loading area provided:
         a.   The alley is used for access to only one loading area on that
site .
         b.   The alley is a minimum 20 feet wide.
         c.   The alley is surfaced in a manner acceptable to the City
Engineer.
         d.   The alley does not abut a residential zone within the same block
.
      3.   The maneuvering area must be designed so that there is safe access
into and out of a loading area . The size and configuration of the maneuvering
area must be based on AASHTO (American Association of State Highway and
Transportation Officials) standards for turning radii and distances required of
the vehicles for which the loading area is designed.
      4.   The access route to a loading area must have an overhead clearance
of 15 feet.
   C.   Screening and Landscaping Requirements
   The screening and landscaping of a loading area must be in accordance with
Section
7.6, Landscaping and Screening Regulations.
   D.   Lighting Requirements
   The lighting of a loading area , if present, must be in conformance with
adopted City of Tucson Outdoor Lighting regulations.
   E.   Surfacing Requirements
   The surfacing of a loading area must be in accordance with Section
7.4.6.I, Surfacing Requirements.
   F.   Striping Requirements
   A loading area must be striped in accordance with Section
7.4.6.G, Striping, Surfacing Requirements, to distinguish it from motor vehicle
parking spaces  and other uses on the site .
   G.   Dimensional Requirements
   The minimum size of a loading area , exclusive of access and maneuvering
area, must be:
      1.   Type A: 12 feet by 35 feet;
      2.   Type B: 12 feet by 55 feet; and,
      3.   Overhead Clearance is 15 feet.
7.5.5.   REQUIRED LOADING AREAS
   The number of loading areas listed for each Land Use Group is applicable for
all Land Use Classes within that Land Use Group, unless a Land Use Class is
listed specifically stating otherwise.
TABLE 7.5.5-A: REQUIRED LOADING AREAS
Land Use Group/Class Loading Areas Required
TABLE 7.5.5-A: REQUIRED LOADING AREAS
Land Use Group/Class                     Loading Areas Required
Agricultural Use Group (Section          Not required
11.3.2)
Civic Use Group (Section                 Not required except for:
11.3.3)
Civic Assembly                            
Less Than 25,000 sq. ft. GFA             0
   Over 25,000 sq. ft. GFA            1 Type A
Commercial Services Use Group (Section   Not required except for:
11.3.4)
   Offices: Less Than 50,000 sq. ft. G0A
   50,001 to 100,000 sq. ft. GFA      1 Type A
   Over 100,000 sq. ft. GFA           2 Type A
Billboard                                1 Type A
Restaurants/Bars                          
   Less Than 5,000 sq. ft. GFA        0
   Over 5,000 sq. ft. GFA             1 Type A
Industrial Use Group (Section            Not required except for:
11.3.5)
   ALL USES: Less than 25,000 sq. ft. 0
GFA
   25,001 to 50,000 sq. ft. GFA       1 Type B
   Over 50,000 sq. ft. GFA            2 Type B
Recreation Use Group (Section            Not required
11.3.6)
Restricted Adult Activities Use Group
(Section                                 Not required except for:
11.3.8)
                                         Same as required for similar land use
                                        class in Commercial Services Use
                                         Group, Retail Trade Use Group or
                                         Industrial Use Group
Retail Trade Use Group (Section          Not required except for:
11.3.9)
Merchandise Sales                         
   Less Than 25,000 sq. ft. GFA       0
   25,001 to 100,000 sq. ft. GFA      1 Type A
   Over 100,000 sq. ft. GFA           2 Type A
Storage Use Group (Section               Not required except for:
11.3.10)
Commercial Storage and Personal Storage   
w/o Direct Vehicular Access:
   Less Than 50,000 sq. ft. GFA       1 Type A
   Over 50,000 sq. ft. GFA            2 Type A
Utilities Use Group (Section             Not required
11.3.11)
Wholesaling Use Group (Section           Not required except for:
11.3.12)
   ALL USES: Less than 50,000 sq. ft. 1 Type B
GFA
   Over 50,000 sq. ft. GFA            2 Type B
 
7.6.   LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING
7.6.1.   PURPOSE
   The purpose of this section is to establish standards for the installation
and maintenance of landscaping and screening according to recognized xeriscape
principles and to provide for the protection of native vegetation . The
standards are intended to accomplish the following:
   A.   Implement Mayor and Council policy to conserve energy, water, and other
natural resources through the use of xeriscape  landscaping principles; to
promote air quality; to improve community aesthetics; and to protect the public
health, safety, and general welfare as follows:
      1.   Help achieve City water conservation goals through the use of
drought-tolerant plantings and xeriscape principles in landscape design;
      2.   Reduce air pollution and dust by encouraging the use of vegetation
for air filtration and absorption of carbon dioxide and production of oxygen;
      3.   Reduce the heat and glare radiated by the built environment;
      4.   Reduce soil erosion by slowing storm water runoff;
      5.   Assist in ground water recharge; and,
      6.   Limit the use of allergenic, pollen-producing plants.
   B.   Establish or retain a neighborhood character by providing design
standards to:
      1.   Buffer the potential negative effects that more intensive land uses
may have upon adjacent  land uses ; and,
      2.   Where development is subject to neighborhood or area plan standards,
incorporate the adopted landscape policies of neighborhood or area plans to the
extent they are consistent with the provisions of this section.
   C.   Contribute to and enhance the economic welfare of the City and the
quality of life of citizens and visitors through the following:
      1.   Promote the image of the southwestern desert environment;
      2.   Create an attractive appearance along City  streets ; and,
      3.   Carry out the intent of design standards for development along
Scenic Routes and Gateway Routes .
7.6.2.   APPLICABILITY
   The provisions of this section apply to the following:
   A.   All new development ; and,
   B.   Expansion of existing development , as provided below:
      1.   Buildings Greater Than 10,000 Square Feet
      On sites where the gross floor area of the existing building (s) is more
than 10,000 square feet, expansion in square footage of land area, floor area ,
lot coverage , or vehicular use area as follows:
         a.   If the expansion is less than 25%, the standards of this section
apply only to the proposed expansion. Existing development on the site is
subject to the zoning standards in effect at the time the existing development
received zoning approval.
         b.   If the expansion is 25% or greater or if expansions as of
February 15, 1991, cumulatively result in a 25% or greater expansion in land
area, floor area , lot coverage , or vehicular use area , the standards of this
section apply to the entire site .
      2.   Buildings 10,000 Square Feet or Less
      On sites where the gross floor area of the existing building (s) is
10,000 square feet or less, expansions in square footage of land area, floor
area , lot coverage , or vehicular use area as follows.
         a.   If the expansion is less than 50%, the standards of this section
apply only to the proposed expansion. Existing development on the site is
subject to the zoning standards in effect at the time the existing development
received zoning approval.
         b.   If the expansion is 50% or greater or if expansions as of
February 15, 1991, cumulatively result in a 50% or greater expansion in land
area, floor area , lot coverage , or vehicular use area , the standards of this
section apply to the entire site .
7.6.3.   EXCEPTIONS
   The provisions of this section do not apply to the following.
   A.   Single-family  dwelling units or duplexes on separate lots , except
commonly owned areas in Section
8.7.3, Flexible Lot Developments (FLD); or,
   B.   Approved plats and plans developed in the City prior to February 17,
1991 if:
      1.   The site is developed in accordance with the approved plat or plan;
and,
      2.   Development complies with the standards of Section
7.6.4.A, Use of Drought-Tolerant Vegetation.
7.6.4.   LANDSCAPE STANDARDS
   A.   Use of Drought-Tolerant Vegetation
      1.   Except as otherwise provided by this section, all plant material
used for landscaping must be selected from the Arizona Department of Water
Resource’s Low Water Use/Drought Tolerant Plant List.
      2.   Areas of reseeding or hydroseeding after grading are subject to the
Native Seed List standards of Section
5-02.6.0, Exhibit I, of the Technical Standards Manual.
      3.   Plants not listed on the Arizona Department of Water Resource’s Low
Water Use/Drought Tolerant Plant List cannot be used within the Scenic Corridor
Zone (SZC) where the use of native vegetation is required in the buffer area
adjacent to a Scenic Route in accordance with Section
5.3.4.
      4.   Plants not listed on the Arizona Department of Water Resource’s Low
Water Use/Drought Tolerant Plant List may be used as follows:
         a.   Existing Plants
         Existing trees and shrubs may be incorporated in a landscaped area if
their locations do not conflict with the plant location standards of this
section;
         b.   Protected Riparian Areas
         Within Protected Riparian Areas pursuant to an approved mitigation or
restoration plan; and,
         c.   Oasis Allowance
         An oasis is an area where non-drought tolerant landscaping designs are
permitted. Plants not listed on the Arizona Department of Water Resource's Low
Water Use/Drought Tolerant Plant List may be used in an oasis if the plants are
grouped in separately programmed irrigation areas according to their water
requirements. The location and maximum area on a site that may be used for
oasis areas, including those located in a street landscape border , is
determined as follows.
            (1)   Multifamily Residential Uses
            Up to 5% of the site , or one 100 square feet per dwelling unit ,
or 8% of the required open space , whichever is greater.
            (2)   All Other Uses
            Equal to, but not more than, 2.5% of the site .
            (3)   Locational Standards
            The following factors should be considered when determining the
location of the oasis area.
               (a)   Providing optimum exposure for site users by selecting
areas near main buildings , pedestrian facilities, and active use areas; and,
               (b)   Selecting areas that incorporate outdoor seating or
assembly spaces.
            (4)   Street Landscape Border
            Oasis areas may be located in the street landscape border only if:
               (a)   The oasis areas do not total more than 5% of the area of
the street landscape border ; and,
               (b)   The non-drought tolerant plants used in the oasis area are
flowering bedding plants.
            (5)   Turf Areas of 10 Acres or Greater
            Turf areas of ten acres or more are regulated by the state . The
Arizona Department of Water Resources shall be notified of cases where proposed
turf or other high water uses exceed ten acres .
            (6)   Exceptions for Oasis Limitations
            The oasis area limitations in Section
7.6.4.A.4.c and turf area restrictions in this section do not apply to:
               (a)   Public parks and botanical gardens ;
               (b)   Outdoor recreation facilities , whether under public or
private ownership, for public use, schools, day care centers;
               (c)   The playing areas of golf courses;
               (d)   Cemeteries; or,
               (e)   Mobile home spaces within mobile home parks.
   B.   Vehicular Use Areas
   The standards in this Section
7.6.4.B apply to all developments that provide more than four motor vehicle
parking spaces , except as provided in Section
7.6.4.B.1.c, Exemptions.
      1.   Canopy Trees in Vehicular Use Areas
         a.   General Standards
         Within a vehicular use area , one canopy tree is required for each
four motor vehicle parking spaces or fraction thereof.
            (1)   The canopy trees must be evenly distributed throughout the
vehicular use area . Every parking space must be located within 40 feet of the
trunk of a canopy tree (as measured from the center of the tree trunk).
            (2)   Fifty percent of the trees required for landscape borders
located within ten feet of the paved portion(s) of a vehicular use area may be
counted towards both the minimum parking lot  canopy tree standard and the
landscape border canopy tree standard.
            (3)   An unpaved planting area, which must be a minimum of 34
square feet in area and four feet in width, must be provided for each canopy
tree .
            (4)   In development where it is necessary to bring the existing
vehicular use areas into conformance with these regulations, gaps are allowed
in the tree coverage requirement of even distribution, provided that at least
the minimum required number of trees is placed within or adjacent to the
vehicular use area with coverage which is as uniform as possible. Canopy trees
 adjacent to the vehicular use area may count toward meeting this requirement,
provided the trees meet the criteria listed in Section
7.6.4.B.1.a(1).
         b.   Alternative Standard
         In lieu of the number of canopy trees required by subsection a. above,
the applicant may provide the number of canopy trees needed to create a shade
pattern caused by the trees at maturity and buildings that covers 50% of the
paved area within the vehicular use area from 9:20 a.m. to 3:20 p.m. Mountain
Standard Time on June 21st.
         c.   Exemptions
         The following are exempt from Section
7.6.4.B.1.a, General Standards:
            (1)   Duplexes on individual lots with four or fewer spaces
provided;
            (2)   Home occupations ;
            (3)   Mobile home dwellings;
            (4)   Non-residential uses within contributing properties to a
National Register Historic District are exempt from Section
7.6.4.B;
            (5)   Residential Care Services with four or fewer spaces provided;
            (6)   Single-family dwellings;
            (7)   Vehicle storage ;
            (8)   Structurally covered or underground garages ;
            (9)   For expansion of an existing development that is located on a
lot of record on February 17, 1991, that is 10,000 square feet or less in size,
the existing vehicular use areas are exempt from the canopy tree standard, if
the existing vehicular use area is in compliance with the zoning standards in
effect at the time the existing vehicular use area was developed; or,
            (10)   For expansion of an existing development , the existing
vehicular use areas are exempt from the canopy tree standard if the existing
vehicular use area is subject to site plans approved between February 15, 1991,
and August 2, 2004.
      2.   Plant Protection
      Areas where plants are susceptible to injury by vehicular or pedestrian
traffic must be protected by appropriate means, such as curbs, bollards, or low
walls.
      3.   Planter Area
      For each tree required by this code, a planter area with a minimum
unpaved area of 34 square feet and a four-foot minimum width is required.
         a.   The planter area must have a raised border four inches high to
prohibit the tires of the vehicle from encroaching onto the planter. Standard
wheel barriers are acceptable but not encouraged, as they can be easily moved
and could allow damage to the tree.
   C.   Landscape Borders
   There are two types of landscape borders: street landscape borders and
interior landscape borders .
      1.   All Landscape Borders
      The following apply to all landscape borders.
         a.   One canopy tree is required for every 33 linear feet of landscape
border or fraction thereof, excluding vehicular ingress or egress points.
         b.   A minimum of one canopy tree is required within a required
landscape border.
         c.   Trees may be planted at varying distances apart.
      2.   Street Landscape Borders
      To enhance the visual appearance of the streetscape, a street landscape
border is required in accordance with
Table 7.6.4-1 along the street  frontage of a site as follows, except as
provided in Section
7.6.4.C.4, Exceptions to the Landscape Border Standards:
         a.   Minimum Width
         Street landscape borders must be a minimum of ten feet wide as
measured from the street  property line . On streets designated as Major
Streets and Routes (MS&R), the street landscape border must be measured from
the future MS&R right-of-way line as determined by Section
5.4.4, Establishment of MS&R Right-of-Way Lines and Gateway Routes.
         b.   Residential Subdivisions
         Street landscape borders for residential subdivisions of eight or more
lots shall conform to the following standards.
            (1)   Street landscape borders are only required along the exterior
boundaries of subdivisions . Landscape borders are not required along front
yard street frontages.
            (2)   Walls, fences, or other screening must be placed behind the
landscape border.
            (3)   The landscape border must be recorded as common area and
maintained by the homeowners association (HOA) for the subdivision . The
subdivision CC&Rs shall reference and require compliance with the maintenance
standards in Section
7.6.8, Maintenance. The PDSD Director  may allow the recording of a public use
easement with the subdivision  plat  in cases where the standards of this
section are the only reason for the creation of an HOA. The public use easement
shall require the abutting  property owner to install and maintain a landscape
border in accordance with the standards in this section.
            (4)   Street landscape borders fronting on local streets may be
reduced to a minimum of five feet.
         c.   Located on Site
         Street landscape borders must be located entirely on site , except
that, if approved by the City Engineer or designee, up to five feet of the
required ten foot width may be placed within the adjacent  right-of-way area or
within the Major Streets and Routes (MS&R) right-of-way area on MS&R streets .
         d.   Inorganic Ground Cover
         Except as otherwise provided by this section, the area between the
right-of-way line and sidewalk and the area between the sidewalk and the curb,
if not covered with vegetation, must be covered with an appropriate inorganic
ground cover, such as decomposed granite.
         e.   Vegetative Ground Cover
         Fifty percent or more of the area of the street landscape border must
be covered with shrubs or vegetative ground cover. The required ground coverage
must be achieved within two years from the date of planting.
         f.   Scenic Route
         Street landscape borders on property with street  frontage on a
designated Scenic Route are subject to the standards of Section
5.3.4, Scenic Route Buffer Area. A buffer area in accordance with Section
5.3.4, Scenic Route Buffer Area, is required on property with street  frontage
on a designated Scenic Route .
         g.   Landscaping on Adjacent  Sites
         Existing drought tolerant vegetation on adjacent  sites must be
considered in design to prevent abrupt changes in plant types and to maintain a
visual continuity along street frontages.
         h.   Structural Overhangs
         Covered parking canopies or other structural canopies, such as those
used in service stations, may not overhang into street landscape borders in
order to avoid conflicts between the structures and crowns of trees.
      3.   Interior Landscape Borders
      Interior landscape borders are required as a buffer and visual transition
along the common property lines between adjacent  land uses and zones as
follows, except as provided in Section
7.6.4.C.4, Exceptions to the Landscape Border Standards.
         a.   Interior landscape borders are required as determined in
Table 7.6.4-1, which ranks land uses and zones based upon their land use
intensity and the impact a use will have on adjacent  land uses .
         b.   The minimum required width of an interior landscape border is the
lesser of ten feet or the width of the building setback required by the UDC for
the proposed building or use.
         c.   Where motor vehicle parking spaces or parking area access lanes
(PAALs) are located next to the property line or where the interior landscape
border conflicts with a utility easement, an interior landscape border is not
be required if all of the following requirements are met:
            (1)   An equivalent number of trees are planted elsewhere on the
site between the building (s) and the property line , or if the use on the site
does not include buildings , the required canopy trees are located between the
principal use and the property line ;
            (2)   The trees are evenly distributed over the site ; and
            (3)   The minimum planting area required in Section
7.6.4.B.3, Planter Area, is provided for each canopy tree .
         d.   Detention/retention facilities may be incorporated into the
interior landscape border if they are designed in accordance with Section
7.6.6.C.1, Storm Water Runoff.
      4.   Exceptions to Landscape Border Standards
         a.   Downtown Parking District
         Within the Downtown Parking District as defined in Section
11.4.5, Definitions - D, the standards for landscape borders are as provided as
follows.
            (1)   A street landscape border , measured from the development
side of the future sidewalk location, must be maintained along all public
right-of-way frontages of vehicular use areas and parking structures .
            (2)   A street landscape border is not be required if the ground
level story of a building containing a parking structure is not used for motor
vehicle parking or if the parking structure is completely screened and enclosed
by a masonry wall.
            (3)   An interior landscape border is required only if the adjacent
 zone or land use is residential.
         b.   Expansions
         For expansions of an existing development located on a lot of record
on February 17, 1991, 10,000 square feet or less in size, the development is
subject only to the following landscape border standards.
            (1)   On streets other than a Scenic or Gateway Route (refer to
Sections
5.3 and
5.5), the width of a street landscape border must be a minimum of five feet.
With the permission of the City Engineer or designee, up to one-half the street
landscape border width may be located in the public right-of-way or in the
Major Streets and Routes (MS&R) right-of-way area .
            (2)   Interior landscape borders are not be required in existing
vehicular use areas , if the existing vehicular use area was developed in
compliance with the zoning standards in effect at the time of development .
         c.   Interior Landscape Border
         Interior landscape borders are not required as follows.
            (1)   Around interior pads within a site or between adjacent  sites
with common driveways , shared motor vehicle parking, or vehicular access
easements or between two adjacent nonresidential uses of equal intensity as
determined by
Table 7.6.4-I.
            (2)   Where an alley , drainageway, or other right-of-way ten feet
or more in width physically separates the site from an adjacent property.
            (3)   Where, prior to February 15, 1991, an open space area was
provided as a buffer between the site and an adjacent less intensive use or
zone , if the open space area is:
               (a)   At least ten feet wide; and,
               (b)   Restricted in perpetuity to natural or landscaped open
space use through dedication to the public, deed restriction, or covenant
running with the land.
            (4)   Between two similar uses, whether or not the uses are within
the same zoning classification.
         d.   Street Landscape Border
         Street landscape borders are not required along street frontages where
the landscaping standards of Section
5.3.4, Scenic Route Buffer Area, apply.
         e.   Historic Preservation Zone (HPZ)
         The Planning and Development Services Department Director may grant a
complete or partial exception to the landscape border standards for development
within a HPZ. The exceptions may be granted if, after completion of the HPZ
development review required by the HPZ, the PDSD Director determines that the
standards are not compatible with the character and design elements of the HPZ.
         f.   Planned Area Development (PAD)
         For development  adjacent to a Planned Area Development (PAD) zone ,
the landscaping standards are those which are required for development
 adjacent to residential zones , except where an adjacent PAD District has been
developed or planned for nonresidential uses. In that case, the landscaping
standards are based on the adjacent  land use.
         g.   Community Garden and Urban Farm Uses are exempt from the
landscape border requirements of Section
7.6.4.C, Landscape Borders.
TABLE 7.6.4-1: LANDSCAPE BORDER (SECTION
7.6.4.C) AND SCREENING STANDARDS (SECTION
7.6.5)
         Adjacent  Street or Zone (Developed or Vacant)
Land Use Streets Zones [1]
         MS&R    Non-MS&R Residential Office Commercial Industrial
TABLE 7.6.4-1: LANDSCAPE BORDER (SECTION
7.6.4.C) AND SCREENING STANDARDS (SECTION
7.6.5)
             Adjacent  Street or Zone (Developed or Vacant)
Land Use     Streets Zones [1]
             MS&R    Non-MS&R Residential Office         Commercial Industrial
Residential  [2] [3] [2] [3]  ---         ---            ---        ---
Subdivisions
Multifamily  [2]     [2]      [2]         ---            ---        ---
MH Parks     [2] 5'  [2] 5'   [2] 5'      [2] 5' screen  ---        ---
             screen  screen   screen
Office       [2]     [2] 30"  [2] 5' wall ---            ---        ---
                     screen
Commercial   [2] 30" [2] 5'   [2] 5' wall [2] 5' screen  ---        ---
             screen  screen
Industrial   [2] 30" [2] 5'   [2] 5' wall [2] 5' wall    [2] 5'     ---
             screen  screen                              screen
All Other    [2] 30" [2] 5'   [2] 5'      [2] 5' screen  [2] 5'     ---
Uses         screen  screen   screen                     screen
Specific Uses (when within 100' of property line )
Recreation   [2] 5'  [2] 5'   5' screen   5' screen      ---        ---
Areas        wall    screen
Drive        [2] 30" [2] 5'   5' wall     5' screen      ---        ---
Through      screen  screen
Mechanical   (Screened entirely from view along the      ---        ---
Equipment    street  frontage .)
Mobile       [2] 6'  [2] 6'
Homes; R.V.  screen  screen   6' screen   5' screen      ---        ---
Storage
Multiunit    [2] 6'  [2] 6'
Storage      screen  screen   6' wall     6' wall        ---        ---
Facility
Outdoor
Display of   [2] 30" [2] 5'
Merchandise, screen  screen   5' wall     5' screen      ---        ---
Sales or
Rental
Billboards   [2] 6'  [2] 6'
and Outdoor  screen  screen   6' wall     6' screen      6' screen  ---
Storage
Parking Lots [2] 30" [2] 5'   5' wall     5' wall        ---        ---
             screen  screen
Refuse
Storage and  [2] 6'  [2] 6'   6' wall     6' wall        6' screen  ---
Laundry      screen  screen
Yards
Service Bays [2] 30" [2] 5'   5' wall     5' wall        ---        ---
             screen  screen
Utility      [2] 6'  [2] 6'   6' wall     6' wall        6' screen  ---
Service      screen  screen
KEY AND NOTES (for the purposes of this Table)
Residential Zones : OS, IR, RH, SR, SH, RX-1, RX-2, R-1, R-2, MH-1, MH-2, R-3,
MU
Commercial Zones : P, RV, NC, RVC, C-1, C-2, C-3, OCR-1, OCR-2
Office Zones : O-1, O-2, O-3
Industrial Zones : P-I, I-1, I-2
 
[1] For development  adjacent to PAD zones , see Section
7.6.4.C.4.f.
[2] Street Landscape or Interior Landscape Border required along site
boundary.
[3] Only applies to subdivisions of 8 or more lots . See Section
7.6.4.C.2.b.
 
   D.   Use of Turf
         1.   Installation of ornamental turf in commercial, industrial, and
institutional developments, and common areas of residential development is
prohibited.
         2.   Ornamental turf is defined as:
            a.   Grass areas with any single dimension of eight feet or less.
            b.   Grass areas exceeding a 4:1, or 25%, slope.
            c.   Grass areas that are not accessible by paved pathways and/or
are restricted by physical barriers that prohibit accessibility.
            d.   Grass areas installed closer than ten feet to a street and/or
in front entryways to residential neighborhoods or subdivisions unless
associated with active recreational activities.
            e.   Grass areas that are not utilized for active recreational
purposes.
         3.   Except as provided by Section
7.6.4.A.4.c(6), Exceptions for Oasis Limitations, turf  areas that do not meet
any of the criteria provided in Section
7.6.4.D.2 are allowed only within an oasis and may only be 50% of the total
oasis allowance .
   E.   Plant Cover/Dust Control
   All disturbed, grubbed, graded, or bladed areas not otherwise improved must
be landscaped, reseeded, or treated with a layer of inorganic or organic ground
cover to help reduce dust pollution.
      1.   Ground surfaces in planting beds, planters, medians, or tree
understory within a landscaped area that are not covered with shrubs, accent
plants, vines, ground cover, or other vegetation from the Arizona Department of
Water Resource’s Low Water Use/Drought Tolerant Plant List must be treated with
an inorganic ground cover.
      2.   Unless maintained as undisturbed natural desert , all portions of a
site not occupied by buildings , structures , vehicular use areas , oasis
areas, pedestrian circulation areas, or required landscape elements must be
landscaped with vegetation from the Arizona Department of Water Resource’s Low
Water Use/Drought Tolerant Plant List, reseeded with a native seed mix, or
treated with an inorganic ground cover and maintained in a clean condition. All
portions of a site including common areas, natural areas, and revegetated or
landscaped areas are to continuously be maintained to remove populations of
buffelgrass (Pennisetum ciliare).
      3.   Unless maintained as undisturbed natural desert , future building
pads within a phased development must be temporarily landscaped with vegetation
from the Arizona Department of Water Resource’s Low Water Use/Drought Tolerant
Plant List, reseeded with a native seed mix, or treated with an appropriate
inorganic ground cover and maintained in a clean condition. All portions of a
site including common areas, natural areas, and revegetated or landscaped areas
are to continuously be maintained to remove populations of buffelgrass
(Pennisetum ciliare).
      4.   If vegetative ground cover is not intended, a minimum two-inch layer
of organic or inorganic material (i.e., decomposed granite, rock mulch, or
other material) is required as ground cover under and around the vegetation in
landscaped areas to help cool soil areas, reduce evaporation, and retard weed
growth. Existing areas of undisturbed native vegetation retained on the site
are not required to have the soil mulched or amended.
   F.   Use of the Public Right-of-Way
   Nonrequired landscaping may be placed in the public right-of-way , if the
following standards are met:
      1.   The landscaping is approved by the City Engineer or designee and
complies with the City Engineer’s standards on construction, irrigation,
location, and plant type;
      2.   All vegetation complies with the standards of Section
7.6.4, Landscaping Standards; and,
      3.   The landscaping does not interfere with the use of the sidewalk .
(Am. Ord. 11070, 5/14/2013; Am. Ord. 11127, 11/6/2013; Am. Ord. 11328, 12/8/
2015; Am. Ord. 12005, 6/6/2023)
7.6.5.   SCREENING STANDARDS
   The purpose of screening is to provide visual barriers, noise reduction, and
to provide privacy.
   A.   When Required
   Screening for individual land uses and zones must be provided as determined
in
Table 7.6.4-1 and in addition to the required landscape borders. Screening is
not required between similar uses in accordance with
Table 7.6.4-1.
   B.   Screening Materials
      1.   Walls
         a.   All walls required by this section must be of masonry material or
masonry with a stucco or textured finish.
         b.   Decorative openings may be incorporated into the upper 20% of an
otherwise solid masonry wall located along a street  frontage .
      2.   Earth Berms
      The slope of an earth berm, used alone or in combination with a retaining
wall, may not exceed one foot of rise for every three feet of linear distance.
The width of an earth berm must be self stabilizing.
      3.   Hedges and Other Vegetation Screens
         a.   Plants used for screening purposes may not be smaller than a five
gallon can size when planted. The plants may be aligned, or unevenly spaced,
but must provide a continuous screen at maturity within two years.
         b.   Vegetative screens shall be planted in areas not less than three
feet in width.
      4.   Fences
         a.   Wood fences shall provide a continuous opaque  screen .
         b.   Nonwood fences, such as chain link, may not be used along a
street  frontage along a Gateway Route or within the SCZ.
         c.   Nonwood fences shall have wooden slat inserts, or a similar
material with equal or better durability, to provide opacity.
   C.   Location
      1.   Along interior lot lines of the site , the required perimeter
screens must be located on the property line , unless the screen is provided
between the property line and the use and a landscaped area of a minimum width
of 20 feet is provided between the screen and the property line . In situations
where a utility or drainage easement runs along a property line and the width
of easement lying within a site is not used as part of the site , then the
required screen may be located at the easement line.
      2.   Whether or not required by this section, screens along a street
 frontage must be located on the development side of the street landscape
border so that they do not obstruct the view of the street landscape border
from the street .
      3.   Screens may be located within the street landscape border , if the
following standards are met.
         a.   Minimum Width
         The street landscape border is a minimum of ten feet wide.
         b.   Vegetative Screens
         Hedges and other vegetative screens may not extend more than three
feet into the street landscape border . If, based on the growing
characteristics of the type of plant used, the ultimate width of the vegetative
screen will be greater than three feet, the vegetative screen must be
sufficiently set back from the landscape border to accommodate the wider
growth.
         c.   Non-vegetative Screens
         Fences or walls constructed in a single continuous line may not extend
into a street landscape border more than the actual width of the fence or wall.
Where a fence or wall incorporates offsets or similar design features, a screen
may extend a maximum of three feet into the street landscape border . (See
Figure 7.6.10-H, Screening Standards - Variations for Walls.)
         d.   Earth Berms
            (1)   Where earth berms are used, the crest of the berm must be
located on site and no closer than one foot from the street  property line or,
on sites subject to the MS&R zone , the MS&R right-of-way line .
            (2)   If berms are used in conjunction with vegetation or a
retaining wall to achieve the screen , the vegetation or wall has to occur at
the area of the landscape border farthest away from the property line in
accordance with Section
7.6.5.C.
            (3)   Bermed areas, front and back sides, must be landscaped to
comply with minimum standards when located within the street landscape border
area. Vegetation also minimizes erosion .
            (4)   If the toe of the berm slope abuts a sidewalk or pedestrian
area, design precautions must be implemented to prevent water from washing
debris, dirt, rocks, etc., onto the sidewalk or eroding the pedestrian path.
            (5)   When berms are used, design solutions are to be provided
accomplishing screening standards if the berm cannot satisfy the standards
(i.e., at the ends where the berm slopes or if the berm is cut to place a
tree).
   D.   Height Measurement
   The height of a screen required under
Table 7.6.4-1 is measured as follows.
      1.   The height of a screen  adjacent to a property line or along a
street  frontage is the vertical distance measured on the development side of
the screen from the design grade at the base of the screen to the top of the
screen .
      2.   For all structures that are not buildings (e.g., ground mounted
mechanical equipment) that are visible from the street  frontage , the screen
 height is measured from the design grade at the base of the structure to its
highest point.
      3.   The maximum permitted height of a free-standing screen is six feet.
   E.   Sight Visibility Triangle
   The maximum permitted height of a screen is 30 inches within a sight
visibility triangle (see Section
10-01.5.0, Sight Visibility, of the Technical Standards Manual). Trees may be
planted within these areas in accordance with Section
5-01.0.0, Landscaping and Screening Standards.
   F.   Phased Development
   Screening for phased development is required as follows:
      1.   The perimeter screening element along the property lines must be
installed during development of the first phase; or
      2.   Where the undisturbed natural desert is maintained in areas to be
developed in subsequent phases, a temporary screen may be erected around the
perimeter of the initial phase, subject to the following:
         a.   Temporary screening may be an opaque wood fence, a chain link
fence with wood slats, or any equivalent type of screen ; and,
         b.   Temporary screening must be replaced by a permanent screen if
construction of the subsequent phases is not started within two years of the
date the original phase received a certificate of occupancy.
   G.   Exceptions to Screening Standards
      1.   The required screen along a street  frontage for vehicular use and
outdoor display areas may be lowered to 30 inches if the site is located:
         a.   On a street that is not designated as an MS&R; and
         b.   Across the street from nonresidential uses or unimproved,
nonresidentially zoned parcels .
      2.   Where a building wall abuts a street landscape border , the building
may serve as the required screen .
      3.   The PDSD Director may grant a partial or complete exception to the
screening standards for development within a Historic Preservation Zone . The
exceptions may be granted if, after completion of the historic district
 development review required by Historic Preservation Zone , the PDSD Director
determines that the standards are not compatible with the character of the
historic district .
      4.   A partial or complete exception may be granted to the screening
standards for uses with extensive landscaped open space , including parks,
cemeteries, or golf courses.
      5.   For development  adjacent to a Planned Area Development (PAD), the
screening standards are those that are required for development  adjacent to
residential zones , except where an adjacent PAD has been developed or planned
for nonresidential uses. In that case, the required screening standards are
based on the adjacent  land use.
      6.   Community Garden and Urban Farm Uses are exempt from the screening
requirements of Section
7.6.5, Screening Standards.
(Am. Ord. 11328, 12/8/2015)
7.6.6.   USE OF WATER
   The following standards conserve water and assist in carrying out xeriscape
design principles.
   A.   Water Conservation Design
   Landscape plans shall incorporate water-conserving designs. A water-
conserving design must take into account soil and drainage factors and
microclimates, includes grouping of plants with similar water standards and use
of efficient irrigation systems, and attempts to preserve on-site vegetation.
   B.   Use of Reclaimed Water
      1.   Reclaimed water must be used in new and expanded development in
accordance with the adopted Mayor and Council Water Policies and other
applicable state and local standards.
      2.   The availability of a reclaimed water service does not confer any
right to plant turf areas except as permitted under this Section
7.6.4.D, Use of Turf.
   C.   Stormwater Runoff
      1.   Storm water detention/retention basins not integrated with paved
vehicular use areas must be designed in accordance with the Storm Water
Detention Retention Manual.
      2.   Grading , hydrology, and landscape structural plans must be
integrated to make maximum use of site storm water runoff for supplemental on-
site irrigation purposes. The landscape plan shall indicate use of all runoff,
from individual catch basins around single trees to basins accepting flow from
an entire vehicular use area or roof area.
   D.   Ornamental Water Features
      1.   Ornamental water features, such as fountains or ponds, may be used,
if all the following conditions are met.
         a.   The total water surface area does not exceed 1% of the net site
area of the development .
         b.   The water feature is located within the oasis area.
         c.   The sum of the square feet of water surface area and the square
feet of turf area does not exceed the total allowed square feet for the oasis
allowance .
         d.   Water in moving water features is recycled through the feature.
         e.   The water feature is designed to prevent water seepage or
leaking.
      2.   This section does not apply to swimming pools or spas.
   E.   Irrigation
      1.   A water-conserving irrigation system is required for all new
landscape plantings. For sites that are larger than one acre and on which the
gross floor area of all buildings is more than 10,000 square feet, an
underground irrigation system is required.
      2.   Storm water and runoff harvesting to supplement drip irrigation are
required elements of the irrigation system for both new plantings and preserved
vegetation.
      3.   An irrigation plan must be submitted together with the landscape
plan required in Section
7.6.9.B, Review Procedures, and must comply with the standards below.
         a.   System Specifications
            (1)   The source of irrigation water, whether potable or reclaimed,
must be indicated on the irrigation plan.
            (2)   Rigid irrigation pipes and flexible drip system irrigation
lines under paved surfaces must be contained in pipe sleeves.
            (3)   Pipes or lines carrying water under constant pressure must be
buried to a minimum depth of 24 inches. Those that are under intermittent
pressure must be buried to a minimum depth of 18 inches.
            (4)   Nonpressure polyethylene lines must be buried to a minimum
depth of eight inches. Nonpressure PVC lines must be buried to a minimum depth
of 12 inches.
            (5)   Turf , shrub, and bubbler heads closer than 12 inches to any
paved surface must be pop-up heads.
            (6)   Turf , shrub, and bubbler heads located within 24 inches of
any paved surface must be installed with a system that allows the riser
assembly to absorb impacts and return to normal position.
            (7)   Spray irrigation systems may be used only in the oasis area
for turf . These areas must be served by low precipitation rates. Matched
precipitation rate heads should be used.
            (8)   Temporary spray irrigation systems may be used to establish
hydroseeded areas. All other plant material, excluding turf , must be irrigated
with drip irrigation or low-flow bubblers. Drip irrigation is encouraged. The
systems will be reviewed on a case-by-case basis.
            (9)   Trees and shrubs outside of areas of spray irrigation must be
irrigated with low-flow bubblers or emitters.
            (10)   Unless required under the rainwater harvesting ordinance,
rain-sensing and moisture-sensing devices are encouraged.
         b.   System Design and Layout
            (1)   Irrigation systems must be designed with attention to
prevailing winds, degree of slope , type of soil, soil percolation
(infiltration), season, and type of vegetation to be watered. These design
constraints, and any others that may be specific to the site , must be clearly
indicated on all irrigation documents.
            (2)   Spray irrigation systems shall be designed to provide 100%
head-to-head coverage of the area of irrigation to avoid dry spots and
overspray onto any paved or unplanted surface.
            (3)   Areas of different water requirements, such as the oasis,
trees and shrubs, the vehicular use area , landscape borders, and native
vegetation areas, must be controlled by separate remote control valves.
            (4)   The design of irrigation systems and irrigation schedules
should attempt to match application rates with infiltration rates in order to
minimize runoff and reduce evaporation.
            (5)   Sprinkler heads and nozzles within each control valve should
have matching precipitation rates.
            (6)   Spray irrigation systems may not be installed in planting
strips less than ten feet wide. Strip spray heads are not be allowed.
            (7)   Irrigation timers must be set for irrigation cycles between
8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. between May and September to minimize water loss due to
evaporation.
            (8)   Rain-sensing and moisture-sensing devices are encouraged.
      4.   Temporary irrigation proposals may be reviewed on a case-by-case
basis.
7.6.7.   COMPLIANCE WITH NEIGHBORHOOD PLANS
   Where a development is subject to neighborhood or area plan standards,
landscape plans must incorporate, to the greatest extent possible, the
landscape, screening, and design provisions of the adopted plan. In case of a
conflict between this section and the provisions of a neighborhood or area
plan, this section shall apply.
7.6.8.   MAINTENANCE
   All required landscaping , irrigation systems, walls, screening devices,
curbing, and detention basin landscape improvements on the site or within the
abutting  right-of-way shall be maintained as shown on the approved plans. The
property owner is responsible for proper maintenance to achieve permanent,
safe, and successful landscaping as required by this section. Failure to
maintain the improvements or landscaping required by this section constitutes a
violation of the UDC .
   A.   Plant Materials
      1.   Any plant material in areas of required landscaping that does not
survive must be replaced with an equivalent size and species within 30 days .
      2.   Plant material must be pruned as necessary to control size but not
to disrupt the natural growth pattern or characteristic form of the plant
except as necessary to achieve height clearance for visibility and pedestrian
passage or to achieve a continuous opaque hedge if required.
      3.   Clipping and pruning of the plant material are required to allow
maximum shading while preserving surveillance opportunities and preventing
obstructive overhang into walks, curb areas, drives, and line of sight
triangles as required by the Unified Development Code .
      4.   All dead or removed plant material must be replaced with plant
material acceptable under the standards of the xeriscape  landscaping
standards. Replacement material must be a minimum 15-gallon size for trees and
five gallon size for shrubs.
      5.   Regular landscape maintenance shall ensure water efficiency and
include, but not be limited to, pruning, mulching, weeding, litter removal,
aerating and dethatching turf areas, and fertilizing nonnative plant materials,
as necessary.
   B.   Inert Materials
      1.   Exterior improvements , such as benches, walls, or ramadas, must be
of durable materials appropriate to the desert climate. Material with integral
coloring or stucco is preferred for seating fixtures and other permanent
improvements .
      2.   Inert materials used in the landscaping areas must be of a nature to
withstand the extremes of the desert climate and minimize heat gain or
reflected heat.
      3.   The inert materials must be replaced as needed due to displacement
or erosion .
   C.   Planting Areas
      1.   Inert materials must be used in inaccessible, narrow, or hard to
maintain sections of the planting areas.
      2.   Landscaped areas must be kept free of trash, weeds, debris, and dead
plant material and must be maintained in a clean and neat fashion.
      3.   Use of river rock is discouraged adjacent to building windows.
   D.   Landscape Removal
      1.   Substantial modifications, as determined by the PDSD Director , and/
or removal of plant materials or other landscape elements shall require review
and approval of a revised landscape plan by PDSD.
      2.   The removal or destruction of landscape material that has been
installed according to an approved landscape plan and not replaced constitutes
a violation of the UDC .
      3.   Minor modifications of the landscaping occurring as a result of
routine maintenance, necessary replacement of elements because of damage or
disease, or other causes is not subject to review by PDSD.
   E.   Screening and Wall Maintenance
      1.   Paint and stucco must be renewed on the surfaces of fences and walls
as needed.
      2.   Wooden slats in chain link fences must be replaced as needed to
retain the opacity of the screen .
      3.   Any screening device that has deteriorated to the point where it
does not serve as a screen must be replaced by the property owner. Vegetation
used to meet the screening standards may not be replaced with new vegetation
after two years past the installation. Replacement must be with another option
for screening, such as a fence or a wall, in order to achieve an immediate
screen . This standard does not apply to the occasional replacement of single
plants within a vegetative screen .
   F.   Irrigation System Maintenance
   Irrigation systems must be maintained and replaced as necessary to continue
to conserve water. Detection and repair of leaky or broken pipes, valves, and
fittings and malfunctioning and/or misaligned heads, emitters, and bubblers
must be part of a regular maintenance program for the site .
      1.   Automatic Irrigation Controllers are recommended to be reset a
minimum of four times a year (spring, summer, fall, and winter) to adjust for
plant water requirements that vary according to the season.
      2.   Whenever possible, repair of irrigation equipment must be done with
the originally specified materials or their equivalent.
7.6.9.   ADMINISTRATION
   A.   Design and Review Procedures
   The applicant for development approval is advised to schedule a presubmittal
conference with the PDSD and Tucson Water Department staff with reference to
specific design or review procedures.
   B.   Review Procedures
   Landscape plans are reviewed in the same manner and concurrent with the
applicable site plan review required for development approval. Comments on the
landscape plans and requests for corrections or resubmittals are made in
conjunction with responses to the applicable tentative plat , or site plan .
For development located along Scenic Routes and Gateway Routes , the additional
review procedures set forth in Section
5.3 and Section
5.5, respectively, apply.
   C.   Site Inspection and Enforcement
      1.   Inspections
      All landscaping required by this section must be inspected by the PDSD
prior to a final certificate of occupancy being issued by the City or prior to
the building being occupied.
      2.   Enforcement
      With the permission of the owner or tenant, City staff may enter a site
or any part of a site for the purpose of performing inspections to verify
compliance with the standards of this section.
   D.   Variances
   The Design Review Board (DRB) shall review all variance requests from the
Landscaping and Screening Standards as provided in Section
2.2.6.C.5 and forward a recommendation in accordance with Section
2.2.6.B.6.
7.7.   NATIVE PLANT PRESERVATION
7.7.1.   INTENT
   A.   Tucson’s setting is in the Sonoran Desert, a unique biological
community known as the Arizona Uplands found only in southern Arizona and
limited areas of northern Mexico. Some of the plants and animals living in this
area are found nowhere else in the world. One of the most distinctive plants is
the Saguaro cactus (Carnegiea gigantea), a visual symbol synonymous with Tucson
and the Sonoran Desert. The Saguaro, along with certain other Sonoran genus and
species, is extremely slow growing and not easily transplanted with success.
   B.   Development in the Tucson area has decreased the number of these unique
native plants resulting in the loss of a natural resource. City -wide goals and
policies for preservation of the native plants found in the Sonoran Desert have
been established in the Vision: A Guide for the Future of the City of Tucson,
adopted in 1989 and in the General Plan , Section 2, Vegetation and Wildlife,
adopted in 1992. This section addresses the preservation of native Upland
vegetation that provides much of the visual character of the Sonoran Desert and
supports wildlife.
   C.   In conjunction with development , buffelgrass invasion is spreading
along roadways , wash systems and into the undisturbed Sonoran Desert.
Buffelgrass (Pennisetum ciliare) is converting a fire-resistant desert to
flammable grassland. In 2005, the state of Arizona placed buffelgrass on the
Arizona Noxious Weed List prohibiting its entry or sale in the state .
Buffelgrass is a wildfire risk to desert ecosystems threatening life, property,
tourism and the regional economy. Buffelgrass, as it burns, can kill the
Saguaro cactus, other native vegetation and is detrimental to desert wildlife
species including the desert tortoise and mule deer.
   D.   This section is intended to encourage preservation-in-place of healthy
native plants through sensitive site design that minimizes the disruption of
areas within the site containing native plants, while allowing for salvage and
transplanting plants on the site that are likely to survive. The section also
provides for replacement of plants that are removed for development at ratios
to assure site revegetation and to compensate for probable loss of transplanted
and replacement plants. Mitigation credits are offered to encourage
preservation-in-place . Mature trees and Saguaros should be given particular
consideration for preservation-in-place . When preservation-in-place is not
possible, emphasis should next be given to plant salvage for use elsewhere on
the site , and lastly, if plants are removed from the site , the revegetation
concept should emphasize the recreation of the natural character and plant
distribution similar to the undisturbed vegetation on and adjacent to the
subject site .
7.7.2.   PURPOSE
   These standards provide for the preservation, protection, transplanting, and
replacement of existing designated native plants including cacti, succulents,
trees, and shrubs through the establishment of comprehensive procedures,
requirements, and standards that protect the public health, safety, and general
welfare by:
   A.   Preserving a sense of place through the potential enhancement of the
community’s appearance from public streets and between incompatible land uses ;
   B.   Maintaining property values, the quality of life, and lifestyles valued
and enjoyed by the community through the preservation of the unique Sonoran
vegetation;
   C.   Contributing to economic development through the maintenance of a
regional identity that attracts tourism and new businesses, while promoting
business retention and expansion;
   D.   Improving air quality through the preservation of mature vegetation
that removes carbon monoxide and filters dust and particulates from the air;
   E.   Promoting water conservation through retention of existing drought-
tolerant vegetation that requires no supplemental irrigation;
   F.   Assisting in climate modification and reducing energy costs through the
use of native vegetation to shade buildings , streets , sidewalks , and other
outdoor areas;
   G.   Retaining vegetative features of habitats that are important to native
wildlife species; and,
   H.   Stabilizing desert soils by minimizing soil erosion through
preservation of or revegetation with native plants.
7.7.3.   APPLICABILITY
   The provisions of this section apply to all development as listed below.
   A.   New Development
   All new development proposed in the City of Tucson shall comply with the
standards of this section.
   B.   Expansions of Existing Development
      1.   If the expansion is less than 25%, the standards of this section
apply only to the proposed expansion area.
      2.   If the expansion is 25% or greater or if expansions after March 24,
1997, cumulatively result in a 25% or greater expansion in land area, floor
area , lot coverage , or vehicular use area , the standards of this section
apply to the proposed expansion area and the remaining undeveloped site area.
   C.   Concurrent Applicability of Other Related Sections
   The standards of this section; the Hillside Development Zone (HDZ) (Section
5.2); the Environmental Resource Zone (ERZ) (Section
5.7); the Watercourse Amenities, Safety, and Habitat (WASH) ordinance (Section
29 of the Tucson Code); the Scenic Corridor Zone (SCZ) (Section
5.3); and the Landscape and Screening Standards (Section
7.6) are all calculated separately. Plants or areas preserved or planted for
the purposes of compliance with one standard may be considered for the purposes
of compliance with this section.
   D.   Exceptions
   The provisions of this section do not apply to the following:
      1.   Single-family residential development on lots recorded before March
24, 1997, or single-family residential development on a lot within a
subdivision that is subject to an approved Native Plant Preservation Plan after
the sale and development of a principal structure on that lot ;
      2.   Single-family residential subdivisions for which a tentative plat
has been submitted or approved prior to July 1, 1997, per Article 8,
Subdivision Standards, provided the plat  is recorded within one year from the
approval date of the final plat , infrastructure  is in place, and 50% of the
lots  are developed within five years after July 1, 1997;
      3.   Projects on a site that does not contain any plant on the Protected
Native Plant List as demonstrated by the applicant and subject to approval
through procedures established at the Planning and Development Services
Department (PDSD). This application can be submitted prior to an applicable
review process and approved for an exception on the site . The approved
exception is valid for up to one year from the date of the approval; or,
      4.   Projects on a site or parcel that contains Protected Native Plants
that will not be substantially impacted by development on the site as
demonstrated by the applicant per this section and subject to approval through
procedures established at the PDSD, provided that construction occurs per the
approved plan.
7.7.4.   GENERAL PROVISIONS AND STANDARDS
   A.   Submittal Requirements
   A Native Plant Preservation Plan in accordance with Section
2-12.0.0 of the Administrative Manual is required for all projects under the
applicability of this section according to the methodology selected by the
applicant as outlined in Section
7.7.5, Plant Preservation Standards. If buffelgrass is present, populations are
to be mapped and included as part of the Native Plant Preservation Plan  or the
Environmental Resource Report . Continued buffelgrass eradication and
monitoring methodology, including common areas, is required for developed and
undeveloped portions of a site .
      1.   If the Plant Inventory Methodology is selected, a Native Plant
Inventory , an Analysis, and a Plant Preservation and Salvage Plan in
accordance with Section
2-11.4.4 of the Administrative Manual must be submitted.
      2.   If the Plant Appraisal Methodology is selected, a plant appraisal in
accordance with Section
7.7.5.A.2 based on a Native Plant Inventory for each plant to be removed from
the site in accordance with Section
2-11.4.1, Native Plant Inventory, of the Administrative Manual must be
submitted.
      3.   If the Set Aside Methodology is selected, an Environmental Resource
Report in accordance with Section
7.7.5.A.3 and Section
2-11.4.5, Set Aside Submittal, of the Administrative Manual must be submitted.
   B.   Plan Approval Prior to Site Modifications
      1.   No grubbing, grading , construction, or salvaging of any plants on
the site may take place prior to the submittal and approval of the required
Native Plant Preservation Plan . Protected Native Plants designated in the
Technical Standards Manual may not be destroyed, damaged , salvaged,
transplanted, or removed from the site except in accordance with the approved
Plan. Once a Native Plant Preservation Plan has been approved, a salvage-only
permit may be issued. The salvage-only permit may be issued upon completion of
one of the following conditions:
         a.   For rezoning or annexation cases, ordinance adoption by the Mayor
and Council;
         b.   For tentative plats or development plans, approval from all City
departments and public and semipublic agencies that review the plat or plan;
and,
         c.   For site plans , an official submittal to the PDSD with all site
plan review fees paid in full.
      2.   The salvage-only permit does not allow site grubbing, grading , or
construction of any kind, other than the salvaging of those materials as
indicated on the approved Native Plant Preservation Plan . No protected native
plants , even if indicated on the approved Native Plant Preservation Plan for
removal or destruction, may be destroyed or removed from the site until a
grading permit has been issued for the project .
   C.   Plan Approval Prior to Permitting
   The Native Plant Preservation Plan must be submitted prior to or
concurrently with any plan(s) required for development approval, including a
grubbing/grading plan, landscape plan , site plan , or tentative plat . No
permits may be issued prior to submittal and approval of the Native Plant
Preservation Plan .
   D.   Professional Expertise
   Preparation of all elements of the Native Plant Preservation Plan and on-
site monitoring as required under Section
7.7.5.C.5, On-Site Monitoring, must be performed by a plant professional, such
as:
      1.   An arborist certified by the International Society of Arboriculture;
      2.   A landscape architect; or,
      3.   A horticulturist, biologist, or botanist with a minimum B.A. or B.S.
in an appropriate arid environment natural resource field.
   E.   Plant Disposition
   The Native Plant Preservation Plan must indicate the disposition of
Protected Native Plants in excess of those needed to meet the standards of this
section and other applicable standards. It is encouraged that all Protected
Native Plants that are not proposed to remain on-site be salvaged and
transplanted off-site . The Plan shall affirm, by a statement on the Plan,
conformance with the requirements of the Federal Endangered Species Act and the
Arizona Native Plant Law. Applicants are advised that required salvage permits
that must be obtained from the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service for the
applicable Endangered and Threatened genus and species and required
notification that must be provided to the Arizona Department of Agriculture
prior to site modification. Compliance with this section does not constitute
conformance with state or federal regulations.
7.7.5.   PLANT PRESERVATION STANDARDS
   A.   Plant Preservation Methodologies
   One of the following four methodologies is required when preparing a Native
Plant Preservation Plan for Protected Native Plants on the project site . The
applicant must state on the plans and/or in the report which methodology has
been chosen.
      1.   Plant Inventory Methodology
      The Plant Inventory Methodology is based upon a Native Plant Inventory of
all Protected Native Plants in accordance with Section
2-11.4.1.A of the Administrative Manual. The viability and transplantability of
Protected Native Plants must be rated according to Section
7.7.5.A.1.b and must be used to determine the numbers and locations of plants
required for preservation. The minimum number of Protected Native Plants
required for preservation is based upon a percentage of the Viable Protected
Native Plants inventoried on-site . In addition, this methodology provides for
mitigation through the planting of replacement plants for Protected Native
Plants that are damaged , destroyed, or removed from the site . The number of
replacement plants required for mitigation is based upon the number of Viable
Protected Native Plants that are removed from the site . The preservation-in-
place of Protected Native Plants may be credited toward the number of
mitigation plants required. Refer to
Table 7.7.5-1 and the Native Plant Preservation Worksheet, Section
2-12, Exhibit I, of the Administrative Manual. The provisions of this
subsection may be combined, or used in conjunction, with the Plant Appraisal
Methodology or the Set Aside Methodology, in accordance with Section
7.7.5.A.4, Combined Methodologies.
         a.   Minimum Protected Native Plant Preservation Standards
         The minimum required standards for the preservation of Protected
Native Plants in the Plant Inventory Methodology are as follows.
            (1)   Endangered Species and “Crested” Saguaros
            One hundred percent of Federal Endangered Species and “Crested”
Saguaros must be preserved-in-place or salvaged and transplanted on-site .
            (2)   Saguaros and Ironwoods
            At least 50% of all Viable Saguaros and Ironwood trees must be
preserved-in-place or salvaged and transplanted on-site .
            (3)   Other Protected Native Plants
            At least 30% of each genus and species of other Viable Protected
Native Plant must be preserved-in-place or salvaged and transplanted on-site .
         b.   Native Plant Viability and Transplantability Status
         The Native Plant Viability and Transplantability Status must be
determined for each native plant of the minimum size and must be used to
determine numbers and locations of plants required for preservation.
            (1)   Plant Viability Standards
            Plant viability is based upon plant health, age, and form. Plants
rated Low are not considered Viable and are not required to be assessed
according to the Transplantability Standards. Plants rated Medium or High are
considered viable and must be assessed under the Transplantability Standards.
               (a)   High
               A high plant viability rating must be assigned to plants meeting
the following standards:
                  (i)   Health
                  Plant health is good to excellent with no major infestations
of pests or apparent diseases;
                  (ii)   Age
                  Plant age is young or mature with a likely chance of long
survival; and,
                  (iii)   Form
                  Plant is relatively undamaged with a healthy branching habit.
               (b)   Medium
               A medium rating must be assigned to plants that do not meet all
of the standards for a high rating but have sufficient merit, in the opinion of
the qualified professional conducting the inventory, to warrant preservation.
               (c)   Low
               A low plant viability rating must be given to plants meeting any
one or more of the following:
                  (i)   Health
                  Plant health is poor. Generally the result of severe
infestations of pests or diseases or a lack of water over time;
                  (ii)   Age
                  Plant is in a state of decline, suggesting a low probability
of lengthy survival; and,
                  (iii)   Form
                  Plant form and character is severely damaged . For trees,
this may include new branches from large, old, dead trunks or weak branching
habit.
            (2)   Plant Transplantability Standards
            Plant transplantability standards are based upon plant genus and
species, size, soils, context, and topography. The following five categories
must be inventoried to determine the ability to salvage the Viable plants that
will not be preserved-in-place. Plants rated Low for transplantability should
not be considered for salvage and transplant. Plants rated medium or high that
are not preserved-in-place should be considered for salvage and transplant on-
site or off-site .
               (a)   High
               A high rating for transplantability is assigned to viable plants
that also meet the following standards:
                  (i)   Genus and Species
                  Has a high survival rate for reestablishment after
transplant;
                  (ii)   Size
                  Overall plant dimensions are suitable for transplanting based
upon the genus and species;
                  (iii)   Soils
                  Can be excavated, are cohesive, and seem capable of
supporting the rootball system;
                  (iv)   Topography
                  Permits access with the appropriate equipment needed to
remove plants and their rootball systems; and,
                  (v)   Context
                  Adjacent plants do not pose a likely interference with root
systems or interfere with plant removal.
               (b)   Medium
               A medium Transplantability rating is assigned to plants that do
not meet all of the standards for a high rating but do have sufficient merit,
in the opinion of the qualified professional conducting the inventory, to
warrant transplanting.
               (c)   Low
               A low rating for Transplantability is assigned to plants that
also meet the following standards:
                  (i)   Genus and Species
                  Has a low survival rate for reestablishment after transplant;
                  (ii)   Size
                  Overall plant dimensions are not suitable for transplanting
based upon the genus and species;
                  (iii)   Soils
                  Too rocky, sandy, or shallow to excavate a cohesive rootball
system;
                  (iv)   Topography
                  Seriously limits access to the specimen by the appropriate
equipment (i.e., steep slopes , rock barriers); and,
                  (v)   Context
                  Adjacent plants interfere with removal or present likely
conflicts with the rootball system.
         c.   Preservation Credits
         The preservation-in-place of certain Protected Native Plants ,
including those that are subject to the minimum standards of Section
7.7.5.A.1.a, Minimum Protected Native Plant Preservation Standards, are
credited toward the mitigation  standards of this section as determined by the
size of the Protected Native Plant  as listed in
Table 7.7.5-1, Protected Native Plant Preservation Credits and Mitigation
Standards. The preservation credits shall be in the form of the number of
plants that may be used to offset the number of additional plants of that same
genus and species required, based on the mitigation  standards, Section
7.7.5.A.1.d. Generally, the preservation of larger Protected Native Plants
results in a greater credit toward the mitigation  standards. For example, the
preservation-in-place  of one 12-foot Saguaro results in a credit of three
Saguaros.
         d.   Mitigation Standards
         Viable Protected Native Plants harmed by on-site salvage and
transplant, off-site removal, or damage or destruction during development must
be mitigated by replacement with a plant or plants of the same genus and
species in conformance with
Table 7.7.5-1. Plants used for mitigation may either be nursery grown plants,
plants that are transported to the site in conformance with the state Native
Plant Protection Act, A.R.S. §§3-901 et seq., or plants salvaged from the site
that are not required for the minimum preservation standards of Section
7.7.5.A.1.a(2), Saguaros and Ironwoods, or (3), Other Protected Native Plants .
Salvage and transplant on-site of Protected Native Plants that are in excess of
the minimum standards in Section
7.7.5.A.1.a(3) do not require any further mitigation . Each native plant that
is salvaged and transplanted on-site to meet the minimum standards of Section
7.7.5.A.1.a(2) or (3) must be supplemented with one additional plant of the
same genus and species as listed in
Table 7.7.5-1. Each Viable Protected Native Plant that is removed from the site
, damaged , or destroyed during development must be replaced on-site with an
additional number of plants of the same genus and species as determined by
Table 7.7.5-1.
TABLE 7.7.5-1: PROTECTED NATIVE PLANT PRESERVATION CREDITS AND MITIGATION
STANDARDS
Protected                         Ironwood
Native Plant  Saguaro Other Cacti Trees    Other Trees Ocotillo Yuccas Shrubs
[1]
TABLE 7.7.5-1: PROTECTED NATIVE PLANT PRESERVATION CREDITS AND MITIGATION
STANDARDS
Protected             Other    Ironwood  Other
Native Plant Saguaro  Cacti    Trees     Trees     Ocotillo  Yuccas   Shrubs
[1]
Inventory    All      All      >4" C     >4" C     >2' H     >2' H    >3' H
Percent
Preservation 50%      30%      50%       30%       30%       30%      30%
on-Site [2]
             6-10' H  >2' H or 6-12" C = 6-14" C =
Preservation = 2      D = 2    2         2         >6' = 2   >4' H or >6' H = 2
Credits [3]  >10' H = [4]      >12" C =  >14" C =            D = 2
             3                 3         4
Replacement
Ratio for    3:1      2:1      3:1       2:1       2:1       2:1      2:1
RFS [5]
Mitigation
Ratio for    1:1      1:1      1:1       1:1       1:1       1:1      1:1
TOS [6]
             From                                  From Site
             Site :                                : >2' H
Replacement  >2' H    1' H or  15 G      15 G      From      5 G      5 G
Size [7]     From     D [8]                        Nursery:
             Nursery:                              >4' H
             >4' H
 
> = greater than or equal to; C = caliper ; D = diameter; G = gallon; H =
height; TOS = plants transplanted on-site ; and RFS = plants removed from site
, damaged , or destroyed
[1] See Section 5-03, Protected Native Plant List, of the Technical Standards
Manual
[2] See Section
7.7.5.A.1.a, Minimum Protected Native Plant Preservation Standard
[3] See Section
7.7.5.A.1.c, Preservation Credits
[4] Except Pima Pineapple Cactus, Needle-spined Pineapple Cactus, and Desert
Night-Blooming Cereus which are credited if preserved at a 4" H or D
[5] Ratio of number of plants required to be replaced to number of plants RFS
[6] Ratio of number of plants required to be supplemented to the number of
plants TOS
[7] See Section
7.7.5.A.1.c and d, Preservation Credits and Mitigation Standards, respectively
[8] Except Pima Pineapple Cactus, Needle-spined Pineapple Cactus, and Desert
Night-blooming Cereus which have a minimum replacement size standard of 4" H or
D
      2.   Plant Appraisal Methodology
      The preservation and mitigation standards of the Plant Appraisal
Methodology is satisfied by the replacement of the monetary value of each genus
and species of Protected Native Plant that is removed from the site , damaged ,
or destroyed with native plants of the same genus and species of equal value
that are brought to the site in conformance with the following standards. The
provisions of this subsection may be combined, or used in conjunction, with the
Plant Inventory Methodology or the Set Aside Methodology, in accordance with
Section
7.7.5.A.4, Combined Methodologies.
         a.   Site Appraisal
         A plant appraisal must be prepared that identifies and state the
financial value of each Protected Native Plant that is proposed to be removed
from the site , damaged , or destroyed and shall be keyed to the Native Plant
Inventory in accordance with Section
2-11.4.1, Native Plant Inventory for the Plant Inventory Methodology, the Plant
Appraisal Methodology, and the Combined Methodologies (Outside of Set Aside
Areas), of the Administrative Manual. The plant appraisal must be conducted by
a certified arborist according to the most current methods and procedures
accepted by the Council of Tree and Landscape Appraisers. A plant professional
(see Section
7.7.4.D, Professional Expertise) who can demonstrate competence in appraisal
methodologies, through participation in an approved Western International
Society of Arboriculture plant appraisal workshop, may also conduct a plant
appraisal according to the most current methods and procedures accepted by the
Council of Tree and Landscape Appraisers.
         b.   Preservation and Mitigation Standards
         Protected Native Plants that are proposed to be or are removed from
the site , damaged , or destroyed during development must be replaced by plants
of the same genus and species. The Native Plant Preservation Plan must detail
the size and value of replacement plants to demonstrate that the monetary value
of replacement plants is equal to the monetary value of each genus and species
of Protected Native Plant that is removed from the site , damaged , or
destroyed. Alternately, plants may be replaced on a one-to-one basis (genus,
species, and size) from the site or from nursery/salvage stock to satisfy the
requirement of monetary replacement value.
         c.   Expiration of Appraisals
         Appraisals must be current within six months of submittal of the
Native Plant Preservation Plan and is valid for a period of two years after the
Plan approval date. A revised appraisal value is required for development that
does not proceed before the two year time limit of the appraisal has expired.
         d.   Amendment of Appraisals
         Where any Protected Native Plant is removed from the site , damaged ,
or destroyed and is not identified on the site appraisal prepared in accordance
with Section
7.7.5.A.2.a, Site Appraisal, the Protected Native Plants  must be appraised
pursuant to this section, and the appraisal must be amended to include all
additional Protected Native Plants  removed and their financial value.
      3.   Set Aside Methodology
      The preservation and mitigation standards of this section is satisfied by
the set aside of an area of the site as Natural Undisturbed Open Space (NUOS)
in conformance with the following standards. The provisions of this section may
be combined, or used in conjunction, with the Plant Inventory Methodology
(Section
7.7.5.A.1) and/or the Plant Appraisal Methodology (Section
7.7.5.A.2), in accordance with Section
7.7.5.A.4, Combined Methodologies.
         a.   Site Assessment
         An Environmental Resource Report (ERR) in accordance with Sections
2-03.5.0, Environmental Resource Report, and
2-11.4.5, Set Aside Submittal, of the Administrative Manual must be prepared
for the entire site  to determine the general viability, density , and variety
of Protected Native Plants  within areas on the site . The ERR  shall include
an assessment of such areas of NUOS and shall prioritize the natural resource
value of vegetated areas on the site  in conformance  with the intent and
purpose of this section. Any area left undisturbed as provided in this Section
must be shown in the ERR , and no other assessment need be done for such areas.
The natural resource value for an area is assessed by the consideration of
factors such as:
            (1)   Health, size, density , and variety of native plant species;
            (2)   The visual resource value of the area(s); and,
            (3)   The potential to maximize the preservation of contiguous
areas of NUOS both on- and off-site .
         b.   Mitigation Standards
         A minimum of 30% of the site shall be set aside in perpetuity as NUOS
area. The set aside area shall consist of the area(s) with the highest resource
value as determined by the ERR or area(s) that is left undisturbed and
preserved as provided in Section
5.7, Environmental Resource Zone.
         c.   Federal Endangered Species, Saguaros, and Ironwood Tree
Mitigation Standards
         The ERR shall include an inventory and analysis of all plants listed
as Federal Endangered Species, all Saguaros, and all Ironwoods designated as
Protected Native Plants in accordance with Section
2-11.0.0, Native Plant Preservation Plan Requirements, of the Administrative
Manual. Preservation and mitigation  standards for these genus and species
shall conform to Section
7.7.5.A.1, Plant Inventory Methodology.
         d.   Set Aside Protection
         Boundaries of all set aside areas must be clearly delineated on an
aerial photograph and site plan , or subdivision  plat and fenced in accordance
with Section
7.7.5.C, Plant Protection During Development, and the Technical Standards
Manual for the duration of any construction activities.
      4.   Combined Methodologies
      The preservation and mitigation standards of this section must be
satisfied by one of the following two options.
         a.   Set Aside Methodology Combined with Inventory or Appraisal
Methodologies or a Combination of Both Methodologies
            (1)   The preservation and mitigation standards of this section
must be satisfied by the set aside of an area of the site as NUOS in
conformance with the standards found in Section
7.7.5.A.3, Set Aside Methodology. An area of up to 5% of the site area may be
excluded from the 30 percent set aside area. The excluded area must be
contiguous  to and within the outer perimeter of the 30% set aside area. For
the excluded area, the preservation and mitigation  standards of this section
are met by using Section
7.7.5.A.1, Plant Inventory Methodology; Section
7.7.5.A.2, Plant Appraisal Methodology; or Section
7.7.5.A.4.b, Inventory/Appraisal Methodology.
            (2)   Protected Native Plants to be transplanted on-site and/or
replacement plants must be located outside of the set aside area. Protected
Native Plants located outside of the set aside area that are preserved in place
that are of the same size, genus, and species as those inventoried in the
excluded area in accordance with Section
7.7.5.A.1, Plant Inventory Methodology, may be considered as being preserved in
place on a one-to-one basis.
            (3)   The percent preservation on-site , outside of the set aside
area, remains 50% for Ironwoods and Saguaros. (See
Table 7.7.5-1, Protected Native Plant Preservation Credits and Mitigation
Standards.)
         b.   Inventory or Appraisal Methodology
         Each genus and species of plants can be addressed by choosing either
Section
7.7.5.A.1, Plant Inventory Methodology, or Section
7.7.5.A.2, Plant Appraisal Methodology. A summary table must be submitted
showing the methodology chosen for each genus and species of Protected Native
Plant  found on the site .
   B.   General Plant Standards
   All replacement plants that are used on the site to satisfy the mitigation
standards of this section must meet the following standards.
      1.   Minimum Size Standards
      All replacement plants that are brought to the site to satisfy the
mitigation standards of this section must meet the following minimum size
standards:
         a.   Saguaros and Ocotillos must be at least four feet in height, or
if the replacement plants are salvaged and transplanted from the project site ,
then such plants shall be at least two feet in height;
         b.   Trees must be in at least 15-gallon containers and must comply
with the minimum sizes as provided by the Arizona Nursery Association Grower’s
Committee Recommended Average Tree Specifications;
         c.   Barrel Cacti (Ferocactus acanthodes and Ferocactus wislezenii)
must be at least one foot in height or diameter;
         d.   All other cacti, except Saguaros, must be at least four inches in
height; and,
         e.   All yuccas and shrubs must be grown in at least five gallon
containers.
      2.   Plant Health Standards
      All Protected Native Plants that are brought to the site to satisfy the
mitigation standards of this section must be in good health and condition and
must be provided with the necessary irrigation and maintenance designed to
ensure their establishment and good health for the duration of any stay in a
temporary holding area and after placement in a permanent location on-site .
      3.   Placement Standards
      All Protected Native Plants must be planted in locations able to support
their long-term health and survival and must be planted in densities and
configurations to approximate the natural character of the Sonoran Desert.
      4.   Salvage Standards
      All plants that are salvaged and transplanted on-site must be rated as
Viable and Transplantable in accordance with Section
7.7.5.A.1.b, Native Plant Viability and Transferability Status, prior to
relocation.
      5.   Identification Standards
      All Protected Native Plants must be properly tagged and/or permitted in
accordance with the Federal Endangered Species Act, the Arizona Native Plant
Law, and this section, as applicable.
      6.   Containerized Plant Standards
      Containerized plants used to meet the standards of this section must be
protected with browse control cages or some other technique proven to be
effective in deterring herbivores.
   C.   Plant Protection During Development
      1.   Tagging and Flagging Standards
      All Protected Native Plants designated by the approved Native Plant
Preservation Plan to be preserved-in-place, salvaged and transplanted on-site ,
or removed from the site for transplant elsewhere must be tagged with an
identification number and flagged with color coding so that final disposition
is easily identified per the standards below.
         a.   All plants must be tagged with an embossed metal, or approved
equal, inventory number that cross references to the inventory list and aerial
photograph and color-coded flagging according to the following schedule so that
the disposition of each plant can be easily identified. Plants within fenced
NUOS areas do not require tagging or flagging. Note that plants that are not
Viable and are proposed for destruction do not require tagging or flagging.
Plants that are Viable and are proposed for destruction require inventory
number tags and flagging:
            (1)   Blue Flagging
            Plants proposed for transplant on-site ;
            (2)   Yellow Flagging
            Plants proposed for removal off-site ; and,
            (3)   White Flagging
            Plants proposed for preservation-in-place .
         b.   Tags must be located in a consistent, visible location on each
plant. The initial inspection by City staff will be performed once the tagging
, flagging, and/or fencing of NUOS areas has been completed and an inspection
request has been received by City staff. A note must be added to the plans that
instructs the contractor/owner to call for the inspection.
         c.   Once affixed, the tags may not be removed until the approved
Native Plant Preservation Plan is implemented and a final inspection and sign-
off has been performed by the project monitor and City staff. The tags must be
removed after final inspection.
         d.   The color-coded flagging legend must be given to each crew
supervisor and displayed on a poster in three prominent locations on the
project site for viewing by the public and construction crew personnel.
      2.   Fencing Standards
      All Protected Native Plants designated by the approved Native Plant
Preservation Plan to be preserved-in-place and all areas designated to remain
undisturbed or as NUOS must be fenced off in accordance with Section
7.7.5.C.4, Fencing Standard. No plants may be salvaged from within fenced areas
per this section. Fencing must remain in place for the duration of construction
activities.
      3.   Plant Nondisturbance Area
      All plants designated by the approved Native Plant Preservation Plan to
be preserved-in-place must be retained at their existing grade during and after
construction for a distance as outlined in Section
7.7.5.C.4, Fencing Standards.
      4.   Fencing Standards
         a.   Fencing is required during construction for all undisturbed
natural desert areas of Protected Native Plants and for individual Protected
Native Plants to be preserved-in-place. The area to be fenced must be beyond
the “drip-line ” of the vegetation by one-half the distance of the “drip-line ”
radius. For Saguaros and cacti, the area to be fenced must be equal to the
distance of one-half the height of the plant. The preservation of a substantial
portion of the root system for either undisturbed natural desert areas of
Protected Native Plants or individual Protected Native Plants preserved-in-
place will improve the survival rate and health of these plants as well as
preserve a portion of their associated plant community . Grading and
construction that encroaches into the required root zone may be allowed on a
case-by-case basis as determined by an inspector with the Planning and
Development Services Department depending upon the size and species of the
Native Plant. Under no circumstances may grading encroach to the base or trunk
of a Native Plant.
         b.   The site developer must include language in all contracts with
contractors about the importance of staying out of all undisturbed natural
desert areas and away from all individual Protected Native Plants to be
preserved-in-place.
      5.   On-Site Monitoring
      On-site monitoring of all aspects of site clearing, grading , plant
protection, preservation, salvage, and mitigation must be provided during
project construction at the expense of the developer for all residential
development that is over five acres and for all commercial and industrial
development that is over one acre . The monitoring must be performed by an
individual who is qualified in arid lands native plant resource identification
and protection as specified in Section
7.7.4.D, Professional Expertise. The monitor must provide periodic progress
reports to the developer outlining the status of work accomplished and any
problems encountered. A copy of these reports must be submitted to the PDSD for
the project  file.
      6.   Submittal Compliance
      The monitor is responsible for an assessment of the condition of the site
’s plants one year after the final inspection has been performed on the site .
The monitor shall visit the site and prepare a report on plant status,
including general plant condition, the identification of plants under stress
and the appropriate method to relieve the stress, and recommendations for
replacement of plants that are dead or dying. Dead or dying plants must be
replaced with the same size plant at a one-to-one ratio of like genus and
species. Copies of the report must be submitted to the site owner/developer and
to PDSD. The owner must respond to the plant needs as outlined in the status
report within six months of report submittal or within a shorter period if
required to improve the health of stressed plants and prevent plant loss.
7.7.6.   ADMINISTRATION
   A.   Site Inspection and Enforcement
   All landscape standards of this section must be inspected for compliance per
Section
7.6.9.C, Site Inspection and Enforcement.
   B.   Variances
   The Design Review Board (DRB) shall review all variance requests from the
Native Plant Preservation standards as provided in Section
2.2.6.C.7, Native Plant Preservation - Variances, and shall forward its
recommendation in accordance with Section
2.2.6.B.6, Required Action.
7.8.   ACCESS
7.8.1.   ACCESS REQUIRED - CHANGES OF USE OR STRUCTURES
   Changes of use or structures must have legal and physical vehicular access
(e.g., public or private street access or an access easement ) to a public
street and provide reasonable improvements for pedestrian facilities, in
accordance with the applicability and substantive requirements of Sections
7-01.0.0, Pedestrian Access, and
10-01.0.0, Street Technical Standards, of the Technical Standards Manual.
7.8.2.   ACCESS REQUIRED - SUBDIVISIONS
   All subdivisions must provide a minimum of one legal, all-weather access
connection to all lots in conformance with Section
10-01.0.0, Street Technical Standards, of the Technical Standards Manual. If
the proposed all-weather access connection is located outside the subdivision
boundary, then the applicant must include assurances  for financial
participation in the offsite improvement.
   A.   All subdivisions developed in phases must be designed to provide legal
access of sufficient size for vehicular and pedestrian access to all phases of
the development .
   B.   Any proposed subdivision being divided from a larger piece of property
must assure legal access of sufficient size to provide vehicular and pedestrian
access to that portion of the property not included in the proposed subdivision
.
7.8.3.   ACCEPTABLE TYPES OF ACCESS
   A.   Public street access , which is ingress-egress to a parcel provided by
an abutting public street .
   B.   Private street access , which is ingress-egress to a parcel provided by
an abutting private street in which the owner of the parcel has a legal
interest to assure perpetual use for access.
   C.   Access easement , which is ingress-egress to a parcel provided over
some other parcel through an area dedicated for such perpetual use.
7.8.4.   WIDTH OF ACCESS
   A.   The minimum width required for access to a parcel is that dimension
sufficient to provide for the type of access. The minimum required width is
based on access improvements being centered within the dimension. If the
improvements are located off-center, an additional width may be required.
   B.   All lots shall be designed with access to a public street . If a
proposed lot does not have public street  frontage , access must be provided by
means of a private street or an access easement of sufficient size to
accommodate motor vehicle and pedestrian access and public services as required
for the type of development proposed for the lot .
   C.   If access is provided by an easement and the easement serves more than
two single-family homes the City may require the easement to be developed as a
street or as a parking area access lane (PAAL) . The determination as to
whether a developed street or PAAL is required will be made at the time of
review of the proposed land division or development of the property based on
the need for public services, such as utilities , refuse collection, and fire
suppression, and on the projected average daily traffic (ADT) of the access
easement .
7.9.   STREETS
   Streets must be designed in accordance with Section
5.4, Major Streets and Routes Setback  Zone, of the UDC ; Section
10-01.0.0, Street Technical Standards, of the Technical Standards Manual;
Chapter 25, Streets and Sidewalks, of the Tucson City Code; and, the all
applicable sections of the Standard Details for Public Improvements for City of
Tucson/Pima County (2003 edition) and the Standard Specification for Public
Improvements for City of Tucson/Pima County (2003 edition).
7.9.1.   Whenever a tract to be subdivided includes any part of a street
designated in the adopted MS&R Plan , the street  must be platted in
conformance  with the MS&R Plan  and Section
5.4, Major Streets and Routes  Setback  Zone.
7.9.2.   Certain proposed streets , as designated by the City Engineer or
designee, must be extended to the subdivision  boundary to provide future
connection with adjoining  unplatted land.
7.9.3.   Street layout must provide for the continuation or discontinuation of
such streets  as the City Engineer or designee may designate.
7.9.4.   The City of Tucson may not accept private streets  for dedication as
public streets  if the private street  was not constructed in conformance  with
the requirements of this section and Section
10-01.0.0, Street Technical Standards, of the Technical Standards Manual.
7.10.   ALLEYS
   Alleys are public ways used primarily for the placement of utilities and
refuse collection. Alleys are not required for new development not located in a
subdivision . Alleys are required in new subdivisions only for the purposes of
completing existing alley systems or providing turning radii for vehicles
within existing alley systems that abut the proposed subdivision .
7.10.1.   When alleys are required or are provided by the developer, they may
be not less than 16 feet wide where there is residential development  or
residential zoning on both sides of the alley  and not less than 20 feet wide
where there is nonresidential development  or nonresidential zoning on at least
one side.
7.10.2.   Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be avoided,
but if necessary, corners will be designed with a radius spandrel in accordance
with City Engineering standards as provided in Section
10-01.0.0, Street Technical Standards, of the Technical Standards Manual to
permit safe vehicular movement. Spandrels of lesser dimensions may be approved
by the City Engineer or designee where determined that safe circulation and
public services will not be impeded.
7.10.3.   Alleys must be designed in accordance with the standard street
design requirements as they pertain to pavement and base materials and
thicknesses. Additionally, the design must meet minimum and maximum cross
slopes  requirements in accordance with Section
10-01.0.0, Street Technical Standards, of the Technical Standards Manual.
7.10.4.   Alleys must be designed to operate as water conveyance systems. The
design must improve drainage conditions, or at least not worsen them.
7.10.5.   The use of alleys for vehicular maneuvering or loading is prohibited,
unless specifically permitted by Section
7.4.6.K, Use of Street or Alley for Maneuvering Area, or another section of
this article.
7.11.   DETENTION AND RETENTION BASINS
7.11.1.   Detention and retention basins shall be:
   A.   Located in a common area, outside the boundaries of a residential lot ;
   B.   Owned and maintained by the homeowners organization or management
organization established by the developer;
   C.   Located within the perimeter wall, fence, or screening surrounding the
FLD project site boundaries, if provided; and,
   D.   Designed and constructed in compliance with the Stormwater Detention/
Retention Manual.
7.11.2.   Slopes should be no steeper than four to one where water depths
exceed two feet within a detention or retention basin so that a safety barrier
is not required.
7.12.   EASEMENTS REQUIRED
   Easements shall be provided for utilities , vehicular and pedestrian access,
drainage, and other purposes as required by the appropriate utility agency,
review agency, or City department.
7.13.   EXCAVATING AND GRADING
   Excavating and grading must be conducted in accordance with Section
2-01.0.0, Excavating and Grading, of the Technical Standards Manual.
7.14.   HYDROLOGY
   All subdivisions , new development and expansions of existing development
must comply with the following when applicable:
7.14.1.   City of Tucson’s Floodplain Ordinance regulations, Tucson Code
Chapter 26;
7.14.2.   Watercourse Amenities, Safety, and Habitat, Tucson Code Chapter 29
Article VIII;
7.14.3.   Stormwater Detention/Retention Manual;
7.14.4.   City of Tucson Standards Manual for Drainage Design and Floodplain
Management in Tucson, Arizona; and,
7.14.5.   Commercial Water Harvesting, Section
4-01.0.0 of the Technical Standards Manual.
7.15.   SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING DISPOSAL, COLLECTION, AND STORAGE
   All subdivisions , new development , and expansions of existing development
must comply with the applicable standards of Section
8-01.0.0, Solid Waste and Recycling Disposal, Collection, and Storage
Standards, of the Technical Standards Manual.
7.16.   UTILITIES
   The abandonment of utilities shall be processed in accordance with Section
11-01.0.0, Abandonment of Easements, of the Technical Standards Manual.
ARTICLE 7A: SIGN STANDARDS
Section
7A.1.   PURPOSE, INTENT, AND APPLICABILITY
   
7A.1.1.   Purpose
   
7A.1.2.   Applicability
7A.2.   INTERPRETATION, SEVERABILITY, AND NON-COMMERCIAL SPEECH SUBSTITUTION
   
7A.2.1.   Interpretation
   
7A.2.2.   Interpretation of District Boundaries
   
7A.2.3.   Application of Prior Code Sections
   
7A.2.4.   Severability and Non-Commercial Speech Substitution
7A.3.   DEFINITIONS
7A.4.   PERMITS, INSPECTIONS, AND FEES
   
7A.4.1.   Permits
   
7A.4.2.   Issuance
   
7A.4.3.   Effect of Issuance
   
7A.4.4.   Inspections
   
7A.4.5.   Special Inspector Required
   
7A.4.6.   Fees
   
7A.4.7.   Maintenance
7A.5.   VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT, PENALTIES
   
7A.5.1.   Indemnification of City
   
7A.5.2.   Liability Insurance Required
7A.6.   MEASUREMENTS, LOCATION, AND GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
   
7A.6.1.   Sign Area
   
7A.6.2.   Maximum Sign Area
   
7A.6.3.   Change of Copy
   
7A.6.4.   Sign Copy
   
7A.6.5.   Sign Height Measurement
   
7A.6.6.   Clearance
   
7A.6.7.   Setback
   
7A.6.8.   Signs Near Residences
   
7A.6.9.   Street and Building Frontages
   
7A.6.10.   Signs In or Over Public Rights-Of-Way
   
7A.6.11.   Premise
   
7A.6.12.   Illumination
7A.7.   SIGN DESIGN OPTIONS
   
7A.7.1.   Master Sign Program - Permanent Signs
   
7A.7.2.   Master Sign Program - Portable Signs
   
7A.7.3.   Singular Sign Design Option
   
7A.7.4.   Notification
7A.8.   EXEMPT AND PROHIBITED SIGNS
   
7A.8.1.   Exempt Signs
   
7A.8.2.   Prohibited Signs
   
7A.8.3.   Signs Creating Traffic Hazards
   
7A.8.4.   Signs in Public Areas
7A.9.   NONCONFORMING SIGNS AND CHANGE OF USE
   
7A.9.1.   Signs for Legal Nonconforming Uses
   
7A.9.2.   Change of Use
7A.10.   SIGN TYPES AND GENERAL STANDARDS
   
7A.10.1.   Generally Permitted Signs
   
7A.10.2.   Permanent Signs
   
7A.10.3.   Portable Signs
   
7A.10.4.   Temporary Signs
   
7A.10.5.   Heritage Landmark Signs (HLS)
7A.11.   SPECIAL DISTRICTS
   
7A.11.1.   Historic District
   
7A.11.2.   Pedestrian Business District
   
7A.11.3.   Scenic Corridor Zone (SCZ) District
   
7A.11.4.   Planned Area Development (PAD) District
7A.12.   APPEALS
7A.13.   SIGN DESIGN REVIEW COMMITTEE
7A.1.   PURPOSE, INTENT, AND APPLICABILITY
7A.1.1.   PURPOSE
   The purpose of the sign  standards is to:
   A.   Accommodate the rights of individuals to freedom of speech, promote
equity among businesses, and other typical sign users, and enable the fair and
consistent enforcement of sign  standards;
   B.   Recognize the legitimate signage needs of businesses and other
interests to communicate messages, provide identification, and enable
wayfinding throughout the City for tourists and residents;
   C.   Ensure that signage contributes to the maintenance of an aesthetically
pleasing visual environment by exercising reasonable regulations over type,
size, number, appearance, and location;
   D.   Respect Tucson's unique natural environment of surrounding mountain
ranges and dark night skies by regulating sign illumination and height;
   E.   Protect property values by minimizing the possible adverse effect of
signs on nearby public and private property;
   F.   Promote public safety by ensuring that signs are properly constructed
and maintained to protect the general public from property damage and personal
injury;
   G.   Facilitate traffic flow and safety of pedestrians, bicyclists, and
motorists through enforcement of sight lines and other appropriate sign
placement regulation; and,
   H.   Support retention of local businesses and further the economic
development goals of the City .
7A.1.2.   APPLICABILITY
   The regulations in this article are applicable to all signs in the City ,
except as noted in Section
7A.8.1 Exemptions unless otherwise stated. The City of Tucson shall follow its
own sign  standards and be in compliance with Section 1.07-6 of the City of
Tucson Administrative Directives.
(Ord. 11508, 12/5/2017)
7A.2.   INTERPRETATION, SEVERABILITY, AND NON-COMMERCIAL SPEECH SUBSTITUTION
7A.2.1.   INTERPRETATION
   The zoning administrator shall interpret and apply the sign  standards.
Where there is a conflict between provisions of the sign  standards and other
provisions of the Unified Development Code , the more restrictive provisions
shall prevail.
7A.2.2.   INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
   A.   Zones and special sign districts are determined by adopted maps. The
pedestrian business district , historic district and scenic corridor zone
 district are specifically mapped districts that supersede the underlying
zoning classifications for purpose of determining the sign regulations. Please
reference Section
7A.11 Special Districts for maps showing locations of special districts. The
scenic corridor zone  district  is determined based upon the mapped scenic
corridors of the Major Streets and Routes Plan .
   B.   The effectuation of a change of zoning for a property will also
effectuate a change in the sign  standards.
   C.   Interpretation of a special sign  district shall be made by the zoning
administrator.
7A.2.3.   APPLICATION OF PRIOR CODE SECTIONS
   Chapter 3 of the Tucson Code as adopted and amended prior to the adoption of
the sign  standards is repealed except that the same is continued in full force
and effect as necessary to the final determination and disposition of the
prosecution or litigation of any claim or complaint that has been made or may
be made in the future alleging a violation of any prior provision of Chapter 3
based upon acts occurring prior to the repeal of any such provision.
7A.2.4.   SEVERABILITY AND NON-COMMERCIAL SPEECH SUBSTITUTION
   
Article 7A is subject to Section
1.8 Severability. Any provision of the sign  standards that imposes a
limitation on freedom of speech shall be construed in a manner that is
viewpoint neutral and treats expressive speech either the same as or less
restrictive than commercial speech. Any provision of the sign  standards that
is found to be an unconstitutional limitation on freedom of speech by any court
shall be severed from the sign  standards in a manner that preserves the
standards and protects freedom of speech.
(Ord. 11508, 12/5/2017)
7A.3.   DEFINITIONS
   A.   The terms used in the sign  standards shall have the meanings as noted
in
Article 11 Definitions, unless the context otherwise requires.
   B.    Residential Use: For the purposes of this Article, residential use
shall mean single family residential and multi-family residential.
(Ord. 11508, 12/5/2017; Am. Ord. 11803, 12/8/2020)
7A.4.   PERMITS, INSPECTIONS, AND FEES
7A.4.1.   PERMITS
   A.   All signs shall be erected, reinstalled, altered, repaired, relocated,
permitted and inspected in compliance with Section
3.3 Zoning Compliance Review, Section
4 Development Review Fee Schedule of the Administrative Manual, and the most
recently adopted Unified Building Codes, as well as other applicable City
codes.
      1.   It shall be a civil infraction for any person to erect, reinstall,
alter , change the copy of, repair or relocate a sign , or cause the same to be
done, without first obtaining a permit or permits from the Planning and
Development Services Department, as required by the sign  standards.
      2.   It shall be a civil infraction for any person to use, maintain, or
otherwise allow the continued existence of any sign for which the required
permit was not obtained, and each day such violation shall continue shall
constitute a separate offense.
      3.   A permit shall be issued to the owner of the property or the agent
for the owner. When a contractor is required to be licensed by the State of
Arizona, the permit shall only be issued to a licensed contractor.
      4.   Compliance with technical codes. In addition to compliance with the
sign  standards, all signs shall comply with the appropriate detailed
provisions of the adopted Building Code for the City of Tucson and all adopted
technical codes relating to design, structural members, and connections, the
applicable provisions of the Electrical and Fire Codes of the City of Tucson
and the additional construction standards set forth in this jurisdiction.
   B.   Permission of Property Owner
      1.   No person shall erect, construct, or maintain any sign upon any
property or building without the consent of the owner, person entitled to
possession of the property or building , if any, or their authorized
representative.
(Am. Ord. 11803, 12/8/2020)
7A.4.2.   ISSUANCE
   A.   Review and Approval
      The application, plans, specifications, computations and other data filed
by an applicant for permit shall be reviewed by the Planning and Development
Services Department. Such plans may be reviewed by other departments of the
City to verify compliance with any applicable laws under their jurisdiction. If
the Planning and Development Services Department finds that the work described
in an application for a permit and the plans, specifications and other data
filed therewith conform to the requirements of the sign  standards and other
pertinent laws and ordinances, and that the fees specified in the
Administrative Manual have been paid, a permit shall be issued to the
applicant. When the Planning and Development Services Department issues the
permit where plans are required, the plans and specifications shall be endorsed
in writing or stamped "APPROVED." Such approved plans and specifications shall
not be changed, modified or altered without authorization from the Planning and
Development Services Department, and all work shall be done in accordance with
the approved plans.
   B.    Retention of Plans
      One set of approved plans and specifications shall be returned to the
applicant and shall be kept on the job site at all times during which the work
authorized thereby is in progress. One set of approved plans, specifications
and computations shall be retained by the Planning and Development Services
Department.
   C.   Validity of Permit
      The issuance of a permit or approval of plans, specifications and
computations shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any
violation of any of the provisions of the sign  standards or of any other
ordinance of this jurisdiction. No permit presuming to give authority to
violate or cancel the provisions of these Codes shall be valid.
   D.   Expiration
      1.   Every permit issued by the Planning and Development Services
Department under the provisions of the sign  standards shall expire by
limitation and become null and void if the work authorized by such permit is
not commenced within 180 days from the date of such permit, or if the work
authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days
from the date of such permit, or if the work authorized by such permit is
suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days or more at any time after the
work is commenced as evidenced by successive approved inspections. Before such
work may be resumed, a new permit shall first be obtained, and the fee shall be
one-half the amount required for a new permit for such work, provided no
changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications
of such work, and that suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year.
Where a permit has expired for more than one year, a new permit must be
obtained at full fee.
      2.   Any permittee holding an unexpired permit may apply for an extension
of time within which to commence work under that permit when the permittee is
unable to commence work within the time required by this section for good and
satisfactory reasons. The zoning administrator may extend the time for action
by the permittee for a period not exceeding180 days upon written request by the
permittee showing that circumstances beyond the control of the permittee have
prevented action from being taken. No permit shall be extended more than once.
Prior to extending the permit, the zoning administrator may require the plans
to be re-examined and/or on-site inspections to be made, the cost of which will
be paid by the applicant requesting the extension of the permit. The Planning
and Development Services Department director may condition an extension of a
permit on compliance with any amendments to the sign  standards adopted after
issuance of the initial permit.
   E.   Suspension or Revocation
      The Planning and Development Services Department may, in writing, suspend
or revoke a permit under the provisions of the Tucson Code whenever the permit
is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or in
violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of the Tucson
Code.
7A.4.3.   EFFECT OF ISSUANCE
   A.   No permit issued for a sign shall be deemed to constitute permission or
authorization to maintain a public or private nuisance , nor shall any permit
issued constitute a defense in an action to abate a nuisance .
   B.   A fabricator may submit plans for a sign to the zoning administrator
for approval and file as a standard. Thereafter, permits may be obtained for
such signs without filing detailed structural plans. Such signs shall be given
a standard number by the fabricator, and the standard number shall be shown on
each permit application. Standard engineering (such as that currently used by
members of the Arizona Sign Association) may be submitted to the zoning
administrator for approval and filed as a standard. If such standards are
submitted and approved for use by more than one contractor, a list of all
contractors authorized to use that standard must be submitted to the zoning
administrator by the originator(s) of that standard.
7A.4.4.   INSPECTIONS
   A.   General
      1.   All signs for which a permit is required shall be subject to
inspection, and certain types of construction shall have continuous inspection
by special inspectors.
      2.   A survey of the lot may be required by the zoning administrator to
verify that the structure is located in accordance with approved plans. It
shall be the duty of the permit applicant to cause the work to be accessible
and exposed for inspection purposes. The City shall not be liable for expense
entailed in the removal or replacement of any material required to allow
inspection.
   B.   Inspection Requests
      It shall be the duty of the person doing the work authorized by a permit
to notify the Planning and Development Services Department that such work is
ready for inspection. The zoning administrator or chief building official may
require that every request for inspection be filed at least one working day
before such inspection is desired.
   C.   Approval Required
      No work shall be done on any part of the structure beyond the point
indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining the approval of
the zoning administrator. Such approval shall be given only after an inspection
shall have been made of each successive step in the construction as indicated
by each of the inspections required.
   D.   Required Inspections
      1.   A site review inspection is required on all permit applications,
except for portable signs and for temporary signs for which a sign permit is
required.
      2.   At the time of the required site inspection, the inspector will
verify that the site complies with the information contained in the sign permit
application. The inspector will inform the applicant of any discrepancy or
violations found on the site . The requested permit shall not be issued until
the site is brought into compliance with the sign  standards or plans are
modified to conform to the site . At the time of the required site review,
billboard sites must be staked indicating property lines , required zoning
setback , type and size of billboard , and where the leading edge of the
billboard will be. Site address must be on billboard .
      3.   Footing inspections are required on all detached signs that require
an engineering plan.
      4.   The Planning and Development Services Department, upon notification
from the permit holder or his agent, shall make the required inspections and
shall either approve that portion of the construction as completed or shall
notify the permit holder or his agent wherein the same fails to comply with the
sign  standards.
   E.   Re-inspection
      1.   A re-inspection fee may be assessed for each inspection or re-
inspection when such portion of work for which inspection is called is not
complete or when corrections called for are not made. A re-inspection fee may
be assessed when the permit card is not properly posted on the work site , when
the approved plans are not readily available to the inspector, for failure to
provide access on the date for which inspection is requested, or for deviating
from plans requiring the approval of the zoning administrator. This fee must be
paid prior to the acceptance of any further re-inspection requests by the
Planning and Development Services Department and is in addition to any fee due
for a subsequent re-inspection.
      2.   The re-inspection fee shall be charged for the third and subsequent
inspections.
      3.   To obtain a re-inspection, the applicant must pay the re-inspection
fee in accordance with Section
4-01 Development Review Fee Schedule of the Administrative Manual.
      4.   In instances where re-inspection fees have been assessed, no
additional inspection of the work will be performed until the required fees
have been paid.
   F.   Final Inspection
   The person erecting, altering or relocating a sign shall request a final
inspection upon completion of the work for which permits have been issued.
(Am. Ord. 11803, 12/8/2020)
7A.4.5.   SPECIAL INSPECTOR REQUIRED
   A.   The following sign types shall be subject to continuous inspection by
special inspectors as provided in Chapter 1 of the International Building Code.
   B.   All detached sign  structures exceeding 100 square feet in area or 25
feet in overall height.
   C.   All signs attached to a building in excess of 30 feet from the bottom
of the sign to grade, if, in the opinion of the plans examiner , the subject
sign and/or the particular building  structure and/or the method of attachment
constitutes an unusual and/or dangerous structure and/or attachment.
   D.   A record of the special inspections shall be submitted to the Planning
and Development Services Department by the applicant at or prior to final
inspection and retained by the Planning and Development Services Department
with the sign permit application.
7A.4.6.   FEES
   A.   All sign permit fees are set forth in Section
4-01 Development Review Fee Schedule of the Administrative Manual.
7A.4.7.   MAINTENANCE
   A.   Each sign shall be maintained in a safe, presentable and good
condition, including the replacement of defective parts, painting, repainting,
cleaning, and other acts required for the maintenance of said sign , without
altering the basic copy, design or structure of the sign . Any painted sign
that is painted out and repainted exactly as it previously existed is
considered maintenance of a sign . The zoning administrator shall require
compliance or removal of any sign determined by said official to be in
violation of this section.
   B.   In addition to satisfying the requirements of subsection A, any sign
that is constructed of paper, cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard,
wallboard, plastic or other light material, and that is not rigidly and
permanently installed in the ground or permanently attached to a building ,
must be removed or replaced within 100 days after it is installed or erected.
   C.   Dangerous or Defective Signs
      No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained on any premise owned
or controlled by him or her any sign that is in a dangerous or defective
condition. Any such sign shall be promptly removed or repaired by the owner of
the sign or the owner of the premises .
   D.   Removal of Dangerous or Defective Signs
      The zoning administrator shall remove or cause to be removed any
dangerous or defective sign pursuant to the provisions for the unsafe
structures and equipment in the International Building Code.
(Ord. 11508, 12/5/2017)
7A.5.   VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT, PENALTIES
Sign  standards violations , enforcement and penalties provisions shall be in
accordance with
Article 10 Enforcement and the provisions below.
7A.5.1.   INDEMNIFICATION OF CITY
   As a condition to the issuance of a sign permit as required by the sign
 standards, all persons engaged in hanging of signs that involves, in whole or
part, the erection, alteration , relocation, maintenance or other sign work in,
over or immediately adjacent to a public right-of-way or public property so
that a portion of the public right-of-way or public property is used or
encroached upon by the sign hanger in the said sign work, shall agree to hold
harmless and indemnify the City, its officers, agents and employees from any
and all claims of negligence resulting from said erection, alteration ,
relocation, maintenance or other sign work.
7A.5.2.   LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIRED
   As a condition to the issuance of a sign permit as required by the sign
 standards, all sign hangers performing work shall obtain a public liability
insurance policy in the minimum amounts of $230,000.00/500,000.00 for injury or
death to any person in any one accident or for injury or death to two or more
persons in any one accident; and $100,000.00 for destruction of property in any
one accident. The sign hanger shall furnish the City with a certificate of
insurance that shall name the City, its officers, agents, and employees as
additional insured under the policy. The insurance shall provide that the City
shall be notified of any cancellation of the insurance ten days prior to the
date of cancellation.
(Ord. 11508, 12/5/2017)
7A.6.   MEASUREMENTS, LOCATION, AND GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
The sign  standards shall be subject to the additional requirements, conditions
and exceptions specified in this section.
7A.6.1.   SIGN AREA
   The area of a sign shall be determined as follows (see Figure 1: Area of a
Sign ):
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-14729.png]
 
   A.   Single Face Sign
      1.   The entire area within a single continuous perimeter composed of
squares or rectangles that enclose the extreme limits of the advertising
message, announcement, declaration, demonstration, display, illustration,
insignia, surface, or space of a similar nature, together with any frame or
other material, color, or condition that forms an integral part of the display
and is used to differentiate such sign from the wall against which it is
placed, excluding the necessary supports or uprights on which such sign is
placed. In cases where non-useable space is within the measurement rectangle
and the non-useable space is greater than fifty-percent of the area of the
useable sign area, the measurement rectangles may enclose the useable sign area
only.
      2.    Individual Letters
         Where a sign consists only of individual letters, numerals, symbols or
other similar components and is painted on or attached flat against the wall of
a building , and where such individual components are without integrated
background definition and are not within a circumscribed frame area, the total
area of the sign shall be the area of the square or rectangle that
circumscribes the entire message.
   B.   Two or More Faced Sign
      Where a sign has two or more faces, the area of all faces shall be
included in determining the area of the sign , except that only one face of a
double-faced sign shall be considered in determining the sign area when both
faces are parallel and the farthest distance between faces does not exceed five
feet, or when the interior angle of the sign faces does not exceed 45° if the
boards are in a "V" configuration.
7A.6.2.   MAXIMUM SIGN AREA
   A.   Maximum sign area refers to total allowable sign area derived from a
calculation of the length of a premise fronting on a public or private street
multiplied by the allowable sign area ratio in the applicable zone category,
special district , or additional standard. This is not applicable to Section
7A.11.1 Historic Districts.
   B.   Maximum sign area for individual sign types is determined in accordance
with Section
7A.10.2.C Permanent Signs Additional Sign Type Standards.
   C.   The maximum sign area for permanent signs on a premise includes all
lots and tenants within the premise's boundaries unless the sign complies with
the Section
7A.7 Sign Design Option.
   D.   In the case where a street  frontage or portion of street  frontage is
within 250 feet of a freeway , the street  frontage  sign area calculation for
a commercial, office or industrial use is four feet per lineal foot of the
affected street  frontage .
7A.6.3.   CHANGE OF COPY
   Refers to the situation where the message or design of an existing sign face
is modified or changed, but the size, shape, framework or structure of the sign
is not modified or changed. Billboards , marquees, electronic sign copy , and
approved changeable copy signs are not subject to this definition. Where a
change of copy requires a permit, it may be required to be reviewed as a new
sign  structure with appropriate inspections.
7A.6.4.   SIGN COPY
   A.   "Item of information" is used as part of the Section
7A.7 Sign Design Option and refers to a word, logo , picture, symbol or a
separate number or number combination. For example, 123 - 4000 equals two
number combinations. Punctuation marks are not counted as an item of
information.
   B.   Sign copy that is used as part of the Section
7A.7 Sign Design Option and is three inches or less in size is not part of the
calculation of items of information.
   C.   A digital sign is permitted to have a rate of change of sign copy ,
graphic, or information not more than once every one minute. The digital sign
copy shall not have any transitions or animations.
7A.6.5.   SIGN HEIGHT MEASUREMENT
   A.   The sign height is measured as the vertical distance from the average
finished grade beneath the sign to the topmost sign copy of the sign ; except
that if the sign location has an average finished grade lower than or equal to
the adjoining grade of the road, the sign height is measured from the top of
the curb (or highest point of the road nearest the property if no curb exists)
to the highest point of the topmost sign copy on the sign . Average finished
grade refers to the mean average elevation of ground after site preparation at
the bottom of a sign  structure , measured five feet from the bottom of the
sign  structure at its four cardinal points.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-14731.png]
   B.   Freeway Grade
      For freeway signs and billboards , the freeway grade is the elevation of
the outside edge of the freeway  travel lane nearest to the freeway sign or
billboard .
(Am. Ord. 11803, 12/8/2020)
7A.6.6.   CLEARANCE
   See definition in
Article 11 Definitions.
7A.6.7.   SETBACK
   The sign  setback is measured from the leading edge of the sign to the face
of curb or edge of the travel lane where no curb exists. The sign and structure
must be installed on private property and set back at least 20 feet from the
face of the curb, unless otherwise specified in the sign  standards.
7A.6.8.   SIGNS NEAR RESIDENCES
   No off-site sign shall be permitted if such sign faces the front or side
yard of any lot within any residential zone category or multi-family zone
category and is located within 150 feet of such lot line .
(Am. Ord. 11803, 12/8/2020)
7A.6.9.   STREET AND BUILDING FRONTAGES
   A.   Street  frontage is measured as the length of a premise , lot , or
development fronting on a public or private street .
   B.   Building  frontage is the measurement between two straight lines
projecting from the outermost edges of a building or tenant space wall , that
are perpendicular to a straight line running along the ground level or front of
the measured wall .
   C.   Multiple Frontage Lots
      On corner lots and other lots with more than one street  frontage , the
maximum allowable number and square footage of on-site signs are permitted for
each street  frontage . The maximum allowances are only transferable either in
whole or in part from one street  frontage to another if the Zoning
Administrator determines the request will not negatively impact surrounding
properties. The Zoning Administrator may send the request to the Sign Design
Review Committee for review and recommendation.
   D.   Intersection Corner Sign
      1.   When a sign is erected at the street intersection corner of the lot
and is placed in such a manner so as to be readable from both streets or both
frontages, the sign shall not exceed the maximum area allowed for the longest
street  frontage ;
      2.   The sign shall count as one sign for each street  frontage ; and,
      3.   The area of the sign shall be deducted from the allowable sign area
for the longest street  frontage .
   E.   Signs per Street  Frontage
      General rule: For a premise having more than one street  frontage , the
maximum sign area and number of permitted on-site  permanent signs are
permitted for each street  frontage and are only transferable from one street
 frontage to another if the Zoning Administrator determines the request will
not negatively impact surrounding properties. The Zoning Administrator may send
the request to the Sign Design Review Committee for review and recommendation.
In the case of a freestanding sign , the more restrictive standard of the zone
category shall apply.
   F.   Access Regulated
      No sign or its supporting members shall be erected, altered or relocated
so as to interfere with or restrict access to a window or other opening in a
building in such a manner as to unduly limit air circulation or obstruct or
interfere with the free use of a fire escape, exit, standpipe, stairway, door,
ventilator, window or similar opening, provided however that the zoning
administrator may approve another form of sign or its attachment when, in his
or her judgment, that sign will not restrict access to the openings.
(Am. Ord. 11803, 12/8/2020)
7A.6.10.   SIGNS IN OR OVER PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
   A.   Except as provided below, a sign or sign  structure shall not project
over a public right-of-way or public property unless the mayor and council
grant a special license. Signs licensed pursuant to this section may be
displayed for up to 60 days or over an alternate approved time frame. The
licensee may require the removal of the sign within 48 hours after the
advertised event or other temporary occurrence concludes.
   B.   The City Manager may grant a special license for building and curbside
banners and for across-the-street banners that project or extend over a public
right-of-way or over public property. Signs in the right-of-way may be reviewed
and granted under the Department of Transportation's temporary revocable
easement procedure.
   C.   Permits shall be obtained through the Department of Transportation.
   D.   The Mayor and Council and/or City Manager may grant special license for
signage such as on buses, bus benches, bus shelters, and street cars.
   E.   No sign shall be attached to electric wiring or be energized by
electricity.
   F.   No sign shall be placed upon traffic signal posts or signs , and no
sign shall obstruct a motorist's view of traffic signals.
   G.   Any application for a license for a sign attached to utility poles or
lamp poles shall include the written approval of the Department of
Transportation of the City and the authorized official of the public utility
company owning the poles to which the devices would be attached as to the size
and weight of the sign and the manner of attachment to the poles. Building and
curbside banners shall comply with the applicable requirements of
Article 7A. No sign shall be attached to any utility pole carrying primary
circuits or to any wooden pole or public property.
   H.   Signs licensed pursuant to this section may be displayed for up to 60
days . The licensee shall remove the sign within 48 hours after the advertised
event.
   I.   In no event may signs relating to more than one event be attached to
any single pole.
   J.   The license shall state the location where the sign may be placed.
   K.   By accepting any license granted under this section, the licensee and
its heirs, successors and assigns shall agree to indemnify the City and shall
provide proof to the City of liability insurance.
   L.   The City Manager may impose such additional administrative requirements
as may be necessary.
   M.   The time frame for a permanent sign and an A-Frame sign are regulated
separately as part of the temporary revocable easement process.
7A.6.11.   PREMISE
   See definition in
Article 11 Definitions.
7A.6.12.   ILLUMINATION
   Unless otherwise prohibited in the sign  standards, all signs may be
illuminated subject to the provisions of Tucson Code, Chapter 6, Article IV,
Division 2, "Outdoor Lighting Code."
(Ord. 11508, 12/5/2017)
7A.7.   SIGN DESIGN OPTIONS
7A.7.1.   MASTER SIGN PROGRAM - PERMANENT SIGNS
   A.   Purpose
      The purpose of this section is to respond to special permanent sign needs
of a premise as well as provide flexibility, encourage development in
accordance with adopted plans and policies, and promote superior sign design to
implement the purpose of this article.
   B.   Applicability
      The master sign program includes all exterior permanent signs at a
premise and provides a process where the provisions of
Article 7A may be varied subject to the standards and findings listed below.
Billboard  signs may not be proposed as part of the Master Sign Program.
   C.   A master sign program may be submitted before, after, or concurrently
with a rezoning, special exception, planned area development , development
package or site plan . Signs regulated by the program require individual
permits prior to construction. A sign may be ground or wall mounted or designed
into and constructed as part of an integrated architectural feature of a
building . In a case where the sign has mixed elements of ground or wall
mounted or architectural integration into the building , the zoning
administrator will determine what are the most applicable standards.
   D.   Decision
      The Sign Design Review Committee shall review design options and make a
recommendation to the planning and development services director for a final
decision. The director's decision may be to approve, approve with conditions,
or deny the application. The director shall base the decision on compliance
with the purpose statement, findings, and applicable design standards.
      1.   An applicant may appeal the director's decision first to the Board
of Adjustment in accordance with Section
3.10.2 and may then appeal to the Mayor and Council in accordance with Section
3.9.2 (Mayor and Council Appeal Procedure).
      2.   An applicant may apply for an amendment to an approved Master Sign
Program in accordance with the standards set forth in this
Article 7A.7.
   E.   Design Standards
      1.   All Signs
         a.   Illumination shall reduce light trespass and offer protection to
dark skies in compliance with the City's outdoor lighting standards.
         b.   A sign with lists of categories, tenants or organizations, or
similar listed items within panels or separately mounted sign copy , shall have
a unifying and proportional outlining background color behind the copy, i.e.
words, names, numbers or symbols using a specific logo or federally registered
trademark colors.
         c.   For a sign with lists, the sign panels and/or the separately
mounted sign copy , i.e., sign copy mounted without panels on a structure or
wall , shall be mounted or placed so as to be reasonably proportional in size.
      2.   Ground-Mounted Signs
         a.   Sign Copy
            (1)   Signs shall contain legible sign copy . A sign intended to be
seen from a right of way shall contain no more than sixteen items of
information. An equivalent alternative is an eight panel sign .
            (2)   Sign copy shall be applied to the sign  structure in the
following manner: Panels of the same size with a unifying background color as
noted in Section
7A.7.1.E.1.b. Proportional letters, numbers or logos as noted in Section
7A.7.1.E.1.c. Up to fifty (50) percent of the panels may be larger than other
panels or names.
         b.   Sign Height
            (1)   The sign height and sign  structure  setback for a
freestanding sign should be at a height and distance from the right-of-way to
be easily detectable and give a vehicle a reasonable time to adjust to traffic
conditions.
            (2)   The sign height shall be compatible with the surrounding
height profile of the buildings , freestanding signs , and structures on the
property and in the surrounding area. The sign  structure shall not obstruct
significant scenic views from the right of way .
            (3)   The height of the sign copy shall be set so as not to be
obstructed by landscaping or a parked vehicle.
         c.   Sign Design Elements
            (1)   Structural Components
               (i)   A freestanding sign should be comprised of a design such
as two or more components unified by similar materials. A sign blending wall
and ground mounted components may use Section
7A.7.1.F Best Practice Option.
               (ii)   The design of the components shall use the architectural
style of the development being identified. Features to be used in designing the
components include colors, materials, textures and shapes of the development's
architecture. The bottom component shall be designed with a monument-style base
or similar wide-base design.
            (2)   Wayfinding and Identification
               (i)   Freestanding signs shall provide high quality wayfinding
and identification with a common and unifying design theme.
               (ii)   Ground-mounted wayfinding signs that are 20 square feet
or less in sign area are not required to have three components but are required
to be coordinated in architectural style, colors, materials, and textures with
the other larger signs .
            (3)   Visual Environment
               In all cases, to protect the unique visual environment of
Tucson, all flexible standards or use of design guidelines in Section
7A.7.1.F Best Practice Option, must address a consistent and compatible
treatment of the height profile of the buildings  and signs  in the surrounding
area, preserving scenic vistas and vegetation, and dark skies compatible sign
illumination.
            (4)   Landscaping
               Ground-mounted signs shall be incorporated into existing or
proposed landscaping at the site. The materials shall consist of non-
obstructing live and/or inert landscaping materials .
         d.   Freeway Signs
            A freeway sign that is part of the master sign program shall, in
addition to the standards of the master sign program, be constructed in
accordance with the
Article 7A freeway sign  standards and adhere to the items of information
legibility standard noted in this section.
      3.   Wall -Mounted Signs
         a.   Wall -mounted signs intended to be viewed from the right of way
or that exceed twelve square feet in sign area shall be designed to be
proportional to the building  frontage of the tenant space.
         b.   If the sign is intended to provide wayfinding it shall be located
at key identification points.
         c.   Sign copy may include the font, logo, symbol and color of the
business but shall be constructed or mounted to be consistent with the master
sign program.
         d.   For all wall -mounted signs , an organized, proportional
appearance is required among the signs of a building or tenant space.
Disorganized sizes and color arrangements in the signs ' appearance on a
specific building or tenant space are to be avoided.
      4.   Integrated Architecture Sign
         a.   Signs that are not classified as either wall or ground mounted
shall be constructed in a manner to abide by the overall design context of the
architecture of the building and be consistent with the design standards used
to develop the master sign program.
   F.   Best Practice Option
      A variation from the design standards must show a best practice is being
used as an alternative. A best practice may be based on one of the following
sources:
      1.   An already approved permanent sign , master sign program within the
City;
      2.   An award-winning sign design from a national or state sign
organization;
      3.   A document, book, or example endorsed by the American Planning
Association, American Sign Association or American Institute of Architects or
similar organizations, and approved by the PDSD Director ;
      4.   A design guideline based in technical standards including, the
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD), the American Association of
State Highway and Transportation Officials' Guide for the Development of
Bicycle Facilities (AASHTO), the National Association of City Transportation
Officials' Urban Bikeway Design Guide (NACTO), United States Sign Council Model
On-Premise Sign Code, Street Graphics and the Law, the Scenic America
recommended handbook for on-premise  signs or a similar document recommended by
the Design Professional and approved by the PDSD Director ; and,
      5.   A master sign program, sign design, or document recommended by the
Design Professional as being appropriate for the surrounding context of the
affected City streetscape.
   G.   Findings
      1.   The decision shall show the sign program's compliance with the
following findings applicable to the site :
         a.   Meets the purpose of
Article 7A, Section
7A.7.A, the master sign program's purpose, and Section
7A.7.1.E, the master sign program's design standards;
         b.   Creates a clear connection with the shapes, textures, colors and
materials used in the appearance of the buildings of the premise ;
         c.   Creates proportional sizes of signs placed on or integrated into
a building's architecture;
         d.   Improves the legibility of signs ;
         e.   Enhances driver reaction time to the signs ;
         f.   Creates an organized wayfinding and identification, or messaging
program;
         g.   Protects significant scenic views;
         h.   Promotes a well-organized visual environment through appropriate
sizes, number, setbacks , and spacing; and,
         i.   Represents a best practice of the design of dark sky sign
illumination.
(Am. Ord. 11803, 12/8/2020)
7A.7.2.   MASTER SIGN PROGRAM - PORTABLE SIGNS
   A.   Purpose
      1.   The purpose is to respond to special portable sign needs of a
business, organization or user that has either a special need or has
historically required a larger amount of portable signage than permitted by
Article 7A, Sign  Standards.
      2.   In exchange for greater flexibility with dimensions and the amount
of signs , the master sign program for portable signs must show that clutter
management is achieved by ensuring a coordinated design appearance and using
the least amount of signage needed to achieve message display, identification,
and wayfinding objectives.
   B.   Applicability
      1.   The master sign program for portable signs allows a design option
for all portable signs and applies to all portable signs intended to be viewed
from the right of way . The program provides a process where the provisions of
Article 7A may be varied subject to the standards and findings listed below. It
applies to on-site signs that are intended to be viewed from the right-of-way .
If off-site signs are used they must be approved and coordinated with the
Department of Transportation.
   C.   Design Standards
      1.   The number of signs shall be located and spaced or grouped together
to reduce a disorganized appearance at the front of a development .
      2.   Spacing, sign area, height and setback shall be adjusted to ensure a
legible and well-organized appearance along the right of way . Grouping of
signs of different sizes may be used if the visual impact is to improve the
overall appearance of an affected street  frontage .
      3.   Materials should be similar for all or most signs to reduce the
likelihood of a disorganized appearance along the street  frontage .
      4.   In no case may a sign exceed in sign area or sign height a sign that
has been used in previous standards within the City.
      5.   The program may include signs with sign areas exceeding 32 square
feet with multiple messages to reduce the overall number of portable signs
along the public right of way .
      6.   Items of information per sign shall not exceed sixteen items of
information or six equal size panels or similar arrangement.
   D.   The Decision, Findings, and Best Practices of the Master Sign Program
for Permanent Signs applies to the Master Sign Program for Portable Signs .
   E.   Additional Findings Master Sign Program - Portable Signs
      1.   Promotes a well-organized visual environment through appropriate
sizes, number, setbacks , and spacing;
      2.   Legibility is required of all signs ; and,
      3.   Signs are coordinated in materials, color, and design.
7A.7.3.   SINGULAR SIGN DESIGN OPTION
   A.   The purpose of this section is to implement Section
7A.7.1.A Purpose, by promoting a harmonious relationship between buildings ,
signs , and streetscapes through improved legibility and sight lines for moving
vehicles and encouraging best design practices by reducing a disorganized and
confusing visual environment along the City's streetscapes. Billboard  signs
may not be proposed as part of the Singular Sign Design Option.
   B.   The section applies to a new sign or modification or replacement of an
existing sign .
   C.   The proposed design option for an individual ground-mounted or wall -
mounted signs and signs integrated into the architecture of the building shall
follow the decision making, review process, design standards, findings for
permanent signs in Section
7A.7.1 Master Sign Program - Permanent Signs.
   D.   A sign with lists of categories, tenants or organizations or similar
listed items within panels or separately mounted sign copy , shall have a
unifying and proportional outlining background color behind the copy, i.e.
words, names, numbers or symbols using a specific logo or federally registered
trademark colors.
   E.   For a sign with lists, the sign panels and/or the separately mounted
sign copy , i.e., sign copy mounted without panels on a structure or wall ,
shall be mounted or placed so as to be reasonably proportional in size.
7A.7.4.   NOTIFICATION
   A.   Notification for Sign Design Option shall be in accordance with PDSD
departmental policy.
(Ord. 11508, 12/5/2017)
7A.8.   EXEMPT AND PROHIBITED SIGNS
7A.8.1.   EXEMPT SIGNS
   A.   The provisions of the sign  standards, including the requirements for
permits, shall not apply to the following specified signs , nor shall the area
of such signs be included in the area of signs permitted for any parcel or use.
The following signs are permitted in all zones and special districts.
      1.   Non-commercial flags, emblems or insignias;
      2.   Permanent sign  cut into the surface of a façade or building ;
      3.   Non-commercial murals ;
      4.   Commercial murals that are in pedestrian districts; and,
      5.   Manned hot air balloons.
   B.   In the event that an exempt sign listed above is located in a "H"
Historic Preservation Zone, the sign will be subject to review under
5.8.8, Design Review Required.
(Am. Ord. 11803, 12/8/2020)
7A.8.2.   PROHIBITED SIGNS
   A.   No person shall erect, alter , or relocate any sign of the type
specified in this section, unless it is regulated elsewhere such as, signs in
the right-of-way or heritage landmark signs .
   B.   Animated and intensely lighted signs : No sign shall be permitted that
is animated by any means, including flashing, scintillating, blinking, or
traveling lights, or any other means not providing constant illumination,
except as allowed as a heritage landmark sign (HLS).
   C.   No sign shall be permitted that because of its intensity of light
constitutes a nuisance or hazard to vehicular traffic, pedestrians or adjacent
properties.
   D.   Miscellaneous - Commercial
      Miscellaneous signs , posters and satellite disks: The tacking, painting,
pasting or otherwise affixing of signs or posters of a miscellaneous character,
visible from a public way, on the walls of a building , barns or sheds, or on
trees, poles, posts, fences or other structures , is prohibited. No signage of
any type is permitted on satellite dishes or disks.
   E.   Moving Signs
      No sign or any portion thereof shall be permitted that moves or assumes
any other motion constituting a non-stationary or non-fixed condition, except
as allowed as a heritage landmark sign (HLS).
   F.   Roof Signs
      1.   A Roof Sign is a sign that is erected upon, against, or directly
above a roof, or on top of or directly above the parapet of a building .
      2.   Roof Sign Exceptions
         a.   Canopy sign is not considered a roof sign .
         b.   Signs placed upon the face of a parapet or architectural feature
are considered a wall sign .
         c.   Heritage landmark sign (HLS) in accordance with Section
7A.10.4.
         d.   On a National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) listed or
eligible to be listed building where the applicant can demonstrate both:
            (1)   That the only wall or building -mounted options available
would damage the building's historic fabric or would have an adverse effect on
qualities that make building eligible for listing in the NRHP, and
            (2)   That use of a roof sign would result in minimal damage to
historic fabric and avoid adverse effects on qualities that make building
eligible for listing in the NRHP.
         d.   Review of roof signs on a NRHP listed or eligible to be listed
building and recommendation to the PDSD Director shall be provided by the
Tucson-Pima County Historic Commission Plans Review Subcommittee (T-PCHC-PRS).
   G.   Sound, Odor or Visible Matter
      Any sign or device that emits audible sound, odor or visible matter.
(Am. Ord. 11803, 12/8/2020)
7A.8.3.   SIGNS CREATING TRAFFIC HAZARDS
   No sign shall be permitted at the intersection of any street in such a
manner as to obstruct free and clear vision of motor vehicle operators. No sign
shall be located at any location where by reason of its position, shape, or
color it may interfere with or be confused with any authorized traffic sign ,
signal or device. No sign may make use of a word, symbol, phrase, shape or
color in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead, or confuse traffic.
7A.8.4.   SIGNS IN PUBLIC AREAS
   No sign shall be permitted on any curb, sidewalk , post, pole, hydrant,
bridge, tree or other surface located on public property or over or across any
street or public thoroughfare, except as expressly authorized by the sign
 standards. Otherwise conforming on-site signs, such as projecting signs, may
be allowed to extend into the public right-of-way, subject to additional
approval by the Tucson Department of Transportation (TDOT) through the
Temporary Revocable Easement process.
(Ord. 11508, 12/5/2017; Am. Ord. 11803, 12/8/2020)
7A.9.   NONCONFORMING SIGNS AND CHANGE OF USE
7A.9.1.   SIGNS FOR LEGAL NONCONFORMING USES
   A.   Subject to the provisions of this section, signs for a legal
nonconforming use , as defined in the Unified Development Code , are allowed.
Such signs shall be allowed only so long as the nonconforming use is allowed. A
final determination by the zoning administrator that a nonconforming use has
been discontinued or abandoned shall also be the final determination of the
nonconforming status of the related sign .
   B.   A sign legally existing on the effective date of the sign  standards
but that does not comply with the regulations of the sign  standards adopted
after the sign was legally permitted shall be deemed to be a nonconforming sign
and shall be subject to the provisions of this article.
   C.   Except for reasonable repairs and alterations , no nonconforming sign
shall be moved, altered, removed and reinstalled, or replaced, unless it is
brought into compliance with the requirements of the sign  standards. The
updating of electrical components for a non-conforming sign may be considered
an approved alteration. The alteration cannot change the sign copy from static
sign copy to digital sign copy.
7A.9.2.   CHANGE OF USE
   A.   Any nonconforming sign may continue to be utilized as long as the
occupancy of the use within the structure remains the same. When a use changes
from one occupancy category to another, all signs shall be brought into
conformance with the provisions of this article.
   B.   Any use not mentioned specifically or about which there is any question
shall be classified by the zoning administrator and included in the group which
its use most nearly resembles.
   C.   Occupancy Categories
      1.   Assembly uses such as theaters, churches, stadiums, review stands
and amusement park structures .
      2.   Educational uses such as nurseries, child-care and other educational
purposes.
      3.   Institutional uses such as hospitals, sanitariums, nursing homes,
mental hospitals and sanitariums, jails, prisons and reformatories.
      4.   Manufacturing and industrial uses such as storage of materials, dry
cleaning plants, paint shops, woodworking, printing plants, ice plants, power
plants and creameries.
      5.   Service facilities such as repair garages, aircraft repair hangers,
gasoline and service stations.
      6.   Wholesale uses.
      7.   Retail uses including personal services.
      8.   Office uses including medical offices and urgent care.
      9.   Restaurant, drinking and dining uses.
      10.   Government uses such as police and fire stations.
      11.   Multi-occupancy dwellings such as hotels, apartment houses,
convents, monasteries and lodging houses.
      12.   Single-family dwellings.
      13.   Parking facilities such as parking garages.
(Ord. 11508, 12/5/2017; Am. Ord. 11803, 12/8/2020)
7A.10.   SIGN TYPES AND GENERAL STANDARDS
This section describes the basic sign types that are either permitted or
prohibited. A sign type that is not permitted in a zone , is prohibited unless
otherwise designated by this article. Any specific regulation of a sign type
for a specific zone supersedes the general requirement for the sign type.
Standards in special districts supersede the regulations for the underlying
zone or the general requirements for the sign type. All the above referenced
districts, zones and provisions are superseded when the sign's area is
regulated by Section
7A.7 Sign Design Options.
7A.10.1.   GENERALLY PERMITTED SIGNS
   The signs contained in this section are permitted throughout the city ,
regardless of zone and sign  district , unless otherwise designated.
   A.   Emergency, warning, and governmental  signs necessary for public safety
or civil defense or other governmental use. Signs shall be easily readable and
if necessary illuminated.
   B.   Interior Signs
      1.   An Interior Sign is an on-site sign , emblem, or decal that is
ground or wall -mounted providing information to the public such as wayfinding,
facilities, services or prohibitions relating to the premises and which is
inside a building , in a courtyard or hallway, or is within a premise's
boundaries but is either not facing or is not readable from the public right-
of-way , does not require zoning review but may require building code review.
      2.   Signs attached to the interior wall of a shopping mall for
identification, advertisement or promotion of the interest of any person,
entity, product or service are required to obtain a sign permit to ensure
compliance with applicable building , fire, electrical, and technical codes but
are not otherwise subject to the sign standards. For purposes of the sign
standards these signs are considered interior signs.
      3.   Interior Sign Exception: A wall-mounted permanent or portable sign ,
or ground-mounted permanent or portable sign , that is within a premise's
boundaries, outside a building or enclosed area, viewable from the public
right-of-way , and has a sign area greater than twelve square feet, is counted
as part of the applicable sign type's maximum sign area. All signs intended to
be readable from the public right-of-way are counted as part of the applicable
sign type's maximum sign area.
   C.   Vehicle Signs
      Signs mounted upon, painted upon, or otherwise erected on trucks, cars,
boats, trailers, or other motorized vehicles or equipment are prohibited,
except as specifically provided below. Vehicle signs are allowed only where all
of the following conditions are met:
      1.   The primary purpose of such vehicle or equipment is not the display
of signs ;
      2.   Signs are painted upon or applied directly to an integral part of
the vehicle or equipment, do not extend beyond the horizontal or vertical
profile of the vehicle, and are not mounted on the truck bed;
      3.   Vehicle/equipment is in operating condition, currently registered
and licensed to operate on public streets when applicable, and actively used in
the daily function of the business to which such signs relate;
      4.   Vehicles and equipment are not used primarily as static displays
advertising a product or service, nor utilized as storage, shelter or
distribution points for commercial products or services for the public; and,
      5.   During periods of inactivity exceeding five days , such vehicle/
equipment are not so parked or placed that the signs thereon are displayed to
the public. Vehicles and equipment engaged in active construction projects and
on-premises storage of equipment and vehicles leased or rented to the general
public by a business engaged in vehicle leasing shall not be subject to this
condition.
   D.   Wall Signs , Multipurpose Facility
      1.   Notwithstanding any other limitations and restrictions set forth
elsewhere in the sign  standards, a multipurpose facility is permitted to
include as part of its wall signage one (1) or more light emitting diode (LED)
or other electronic banners and/or video displays that may include continuously
moving words and images. These components shall be used in ticketing areas and
other pedestrian gatherings where, in the opinion of the City engineer, such
signage will not create a traffic hazard and will not be visible or will be
only incidentally visible from public rights-of-way or adjacent properties.
      2.   For purposes of this section, the term "multipurpose facility" has
the meaning set forth in the definition found at A.R.S. § 48-4201.
   E.   Window signs are permitted in all zones where wall signs are permitted.
No more than thirty percent of the total window surface may be covered. No
permit is required. Window coverage is also regulated by Section 7-411of the
Tucson City Code.
(Am. Ord. 11803, 12/8/2020)
7A.10.2.   PERMANENT SIGNS
   A.   Permanent Signs - Zone Category Standards
TABLE 1 - ZONES CATEGORIES AND PERMANENT SIGN TYPES
Sign types below may be permitted in the zone categories below with additional
standards.
Individual zones within a zone category or another specified zone may prohibit
a sign type or have more restrictive standards for that individual zone .
                                                  General
          Residential   Multifamily               Business
          Category      Residential   Non-        Category        Industrial
Permanent IR, RH, SR,   Category      residential O-2, O-3, P,    Category
Signs     SH, RX-1, RX- R-2, R-3, MH- Category    RV, NC RVC, C-  P-I, I-1, I-
          2, R-1, MH-   2 zones       O-1 zone    1, -2, -3, OCR- 2 zones
          1 zones                                 1, -2, MU, U
                                                  zones
TABLE 1 - ZONES CATEGORIES AND PERMANENT SIGN TYPES
Sign types below may be permitted in the zone categories below with additional
standards.
Individual zones within a zone category or another specified zone may prohibit
a sign type or have more restrictive standards for that individual zone .
                                                      General
              Residential   Multifamily               Business
              Category      Residential   Non-        Category     Industrial
Permanent     IR, RH, SR,   Category      residential O-2, O-3, P, Category
Signs         SH, RX-1, RX- R-2, R-3, MH- Category    RV, NC RVC,  P-I, I-1, I-
              2, R-1, MH-   2 zones       O-1 zone    C-1, -2, -3, 2 zones
              1 zones                                 OCR-1, -2,
                                                      MU, U zones
Access Point  P, 2          P, 2          P           P            P
Awning        P, 1          P             P           P            P
Billboards   5             5             5           P, 4, 5      P, 4, 5
Canopy                     P, 7          P           P            P
Dwelling Unit P             P                                     
Freestanding               P             P           P            P
Monument
Freestanding
Monument low  P, 3          P             P           P            P
profile
Freestanding                                       P            P
Pole
Freeway                                            P            P
Parking Lot  P             P             P           P            P
Projecting    P, 6          P, 6          P, 6        P, 6         P, 6
Wall          P, 3          P             P           P            P
P = Generally Permitted - See Section
7A.10.2.C for Additional Standards .
1. Restricted to home occupation use in all zones except IR and MH-1
2. Not permitted for home occupation use
3. Restricted to nonresidential use
4. Restricted to C-2, C-3, I-1, I-2, zones
5. Prohibited locations: On property with the following zoning: Rural
Residential zones , Urban Residential zones (all); Office zones (all); “RVC”
Rural Village Center Zone , “NC” Neighborhood Commercial Zone , “C-1",
Commercial Zone , “P” Parking Zone and “RV” Recreational Vehicle  Zone ,
Commercial zones , Mixed Use  Zones (all); “P-1" Park Industrial Zone of
Division 7, Industrial Zones ; Scenic Corridor Zone , Airport Environs Zone
(unless prior approval in writing by Federal Aviation Administration) and
Historic Preservation Zone Overlay zones .
6. Signs shall be permitted only within a Historic or Pedestrian District in
compliance with Section
7A.11.1.I and
2.D respectively.
7. Limited to 20 sq. ft.
 
   B.   Permanent Signs - Maximum Sign Area And Special Zone  Standards Per
Zone Category
MAXIMUM PERMANENT SIGN AREA PER Zone CATEGORY AND SPECIAL Zone STANDARDS
TABLE 2         MAXIMUM SIGN AREA SPECIAL Zone STANDARDS
Zone CATEGORIES
RESIDENTIAL (RX-1, RX-2, R-1 MH-1) AND RURAL ZONES (IR, RH, SR, SH)
MAXIMUM PERMANENT SIGN AREA PER Zone CATEGORY AND SPECIAL Zone STANDARDS
TABLE 2
Zone        MAXIMUM SIGN AREA         SPECIAL Zone STANDARDS
CATEGORIES
RESIDENTIAL (RX-1, RX-2, R-1 MH-1) AND RURAL ZONES (IR, RH, SR, SH)
ALL                                   1. On building having more than one street  frontage , the maximum allowable
PERMANENT                            number and square footage of on-site signs area permitted for each street
SIGNS                                  frontage . The maximum allowance, however, is not transferable either in
                                      whole or in part from one street  frontage to another.
Residential
uses. Non-
residential
uses        20 Sq. Ft.                1. No digital signs are permitted except for non-residential uses.
located on
local
streets .
Non-
residential
uses on     100 Sq. Ft.               1. Permanent freestanding sign's sign area may not exceed 32 square feet
arterial or
collector
streets .
MULTI-FAMILY  (R-2, R-3 AND MH-2 ZONES )
ALL                                   1. Heritage landmark signs (HLS), all types. The first HLS on a premise does
PERMANENT                            not count toward the maximum total sign area.
SIGNS
Residential
uses. Non-
residential
uses        50 Sq. Ft                 1. No digital signs are permitted except for non-residential uses.
located on
local
streets .
Non-
residential
uses on     100 Sq. Ft.               1. Permanent freestanding sign's sign area may not exceed 50 square feet
arterial or
collector
streets .
NON-RESIDENTIAL O-1 ZONE
                                      1. A 20 sq. ft. sign is allowed per tenant in a multi-tenant complex. The
                                      maximum size of any sign is 20 sq. ft. A multi-tenant complex may have no
                                      more than two freestanding signs, which may be a tenant sign or a sign for
                                      the entire complex.
ALL                                   2. Signs on arterial and collector streets shall be illuminated by down
PERMANENT   20 Sq. Ft.                lights only such as low pressure sodium lighting, halo-effect illumination,
SIGNS                                 full cut-off LED lighting or other similar lighting technologies compatible
                                      with the Tucson Outdoor Lighting Code.
                                      3. Signs shall not be illuminated between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00
                                      a.m. Signs located on a local street frontage shall not be illuminated.
                                      4. No digital signs are permitted except for non-residential uses.
GENERAL BUSINESS (O-2, O-3, P, RV, NC, RVC, C-1, C-2, C-3, OCR-1, OCR-2, MU AND U ZONES )
                                      1. If any portion of a parcel is within two hundred fifty (250) feet of a
                                      freeway : Four (4) square feet per foot of street  frontage .
                                      If any portion of a parcel is within two hundred fifty (250) feet of a
                                      freeway : Four (4) square feet per foot of street  frontage .
                                      2. Design review: Within effectuated Urban Overlay Districts (UOD) mapped per
ALL                                   the Unified Development Code (i.e. with "U" zoning), any single sign 50
PERMANENT   3 feet for every lineal   square feet in area or larger, or any site where the total sign area exceeds
SIGNS       foot of street  frontage 50 square feet, shall be reviewed under the design review procedure
                                      established by the specific UOD.
                                      3. Heritage landmark signs (HLS), all types. The first HLS on a premise does
                                      not count toward the maximum total sign area.
                                      4. Property where an approved site plan , development plan, or plat provides
                                      for a multi-family dwelling as the principal use , shall follow the standards
                                      of the Multi-family  Zone Category.
INDUSTRIAL (P-I, I-1, I-2 ZONES )
ALL         4 feet for every lineal   1. Heritage landmark signs (HLS), all types. The first HLS on a premise does
PERMANENT   foot of street  frontage not count toward the maximum total sign area.
SIGNS
 
   C.   Permanent Signs - Additional Sign Type Standards
      The sign types below apply to the sign types in all zones but may have
more restrictive standards by individual zones or zone categories.
      1.   Sign Types A through E
         a.   Access Point Sign
            An on-site sign located at or near the access point or other
wayfinding location. This sign type is permitted in the residential category
for non-residential uses, in a multi-family residential or non-residential
category for non-residential uses and multi-family uses and is not permitted in
the historic district .
            (1)   Size and Height allowed
               Up to 3 ft. tall and up to 6 sq. ft in area, unless section (3)
below is met.
            (2)   Site Visibility Triangle (SVT)
               An access point sign must be outside of the SVT. The required
minimum setback is 10 feet.
            (3)   Additional allowance
               If the Access Point Sign is located on a premise that has a
street frontage of 125 feet or greater, or that has an area of one acre or
greater, the Access Point Sign may be up to 4 ft. tall and 12 sq. ft.
         b.   Awning Signs
            (1)   General Standard
               A sign shall be constructed of cloth, plastic, or metal and
permanently affixed to a structure intended to provide shade.
            (2)   Zone Category Standard
               Residential Zone Category (RH, SR, SH, RX-1, RX-2, R-1) For home
occupation uses only. All other zones and zone categories permitted. See
Section
7A.10.2 Table 1 for additional standards.
         c.   Billboards
            (1)   Permitted Locations
               On undeveloped property in the C-2, C-3, I-1, and I-2 zoned
property and only within the general business zone category and the industrial
zone category.
            (2)   Maximum Area Per Face, Including Embellishments
               (i)   Generally: Six feet by 12 feet.
               (ii)   Within 250 feet of a freeway : 378 square feet.
            (3)   Limitations
               (i)   No more than two faces per sign .
               (ii)   Vertical or horizontal stacking is not permitted.
            (4)   Maximum Height
               (i)   Generally: 16 feet.
               (ii)   Within 250 feet of freeway : 35 feet from freeway grade
to top of sign .
            (5)   Minimum Clearance
               4 feet from grade to bottom edge of sign .
            (6)   Minimum Separation
               (i)   Generally: The minimum distance between a billboard and an
existing billboard shall be 660 feet, measured in all directions and regardless
of jurisdiction.
               (ii)   Within 250 feet of a freeway : The minimum distance
between a billboard located within 250 feet of a freeway and an existing
billboard shall be 1,980 feet measured in all directions and regardless of
jurisdiction.
            (7)   Minimum Setback
               No billboard or part of a billboard shall be located within 200
feet of a residential zone boundary line.
            (8)   Orientation
               Billboard faces shall be oriented perpendicular to the road on
which they are located.
            (9)   Prohibited Locations: See Section
7A.10.2 Table
               (i)   Any developed property. Billboards on undeveloped property
may remain when there is new development as long as the entire site fully
conforms to the Section
4.9.4.G.
               (ii)   Within 400 feet of the future right-of-way of Gateway
Routes as designated in the Major Streets and Routes Plan .
            (10)   Prohibited Sign Copy Display
               Notwithstanding any other provision of the sign  standards,
billboards may not change sign copy by any type of electronic process or by use
of vertical or horizontal rotating panels having two or more sides whereby sign
copy is changed by the rotation of one or more panels.
         d.   Canopy Sign
            (1)   Canopy signs are not allowed to extend above the roofline.
            (2)   Canopy signs are counted as a part of the sign allotment.
         e.   Dwelling Unit Sign
            (1)   Zone Category Standards
               (i)   Residential, and Multi-family Residential Zone Categories
- No more than one sign may be visible from the exterior the property. The sign
shall not exceed one square foot in size.
               (ii)   O-1 Non-residential Zone Categories - No more than one
(1) sign may be visible from the exterior of the property. The sign shall not
exceed one (1) square foot in size. Freestanding signs may be the monument and
low profile types only.
      2.   Sign Types F through O
         a.   Freestanding Signs
            (1)   General Standards
               (i)   Monument type sign , general requirements:
                  (a)   Maximum faces: Four per sign .
                  (b)   Maximum area: 50 feet per face.
                  (c)   Maximum height: Ten feet from grade.
                  (d)   Minimum setback : 20 from curb to leading edge of sign
.
               (ii)   Low profile type sign , general requirements:
                  (a)   Maximum faces: Two per sign .
                  (b)   Maximum area: 60 square feet per face.
                  (c)   Maximum height: Eight feet.
                  (d)   Minimum setback from curb to leading edge of sign : Two
times the height of the sign .
                  (e)   Minimum continuous base (clearance from grade to bottom
of sign ): Two feet.
               (iii)   Freestanding pole sign requirements:
                  (a)   Maximum faces: Two per sign .
                  (b)   Maximum area: 72 square feet per face.
                  (c)   Maximum height: 12 feet.
                  (d)   Minimum setback : 30 feet from curb to leading edge of
sign .
            (2)   Freestanding Signs , All Types
               (i)   One freestanding sign for each street  frontage .
               (ii)   One additional freestanding sign on that street  frontage
for each additional 150 feet of street  frontage in excess of the first 300
feet.
               (iii)   For each sign placed on the frontage of a local street ,
the total allowable number of freestanding signs for the arterial or collector
street  frontage shall be reduced by one.
            (3)   Zone Category Standards
               (i)   Residential Zone Category (RX-1, RX-2, R-1, AND MH-1 ZONES
)
                  (a)   Nonresidential uses may have a freestanding sign .
                  (b)   Monument and low profile only are permitted.
                  (c)   A sign that includes or consist of a three dimensional
representation of a figure or object is prohibited.
               (ii)   Multi-Family  Zone Category (R-2, R-3, AND MH-2 ZONES )
                  (a)   Monument and low profile only.
                  (b)   Low profile maximum area is 50 square feet.
                  (c)   A sign that includes or consist of a three dimensional
representation of a figure or object is prohibited.
               (iii)   Non-residential Zone Category (O-1 ZONE)
                  (a)   Monument and low profile only.
                  (b)   Maximum number: one per site or premise .
                  (c)   Location: On an arterial or collector street only.
                  (d)   Maximum faces: two per sign , back to back
configuration only.
                  (e)   Maximum area: twelve square feet per face.
                  (f)   Maximum height: four feet.
                  (g)   Minimum setback : Twelve feet.
                  (h)   A sign that includes or consist of a three dimensional
representation of a figure or object is prohibited.
               (iv)   Industrial Zone Category (P-I, I-1, AND I-2 ZONES )
                  (a)   Freestanding signs , all types.
                     i.   One per street  frontage ; except, where a developed
parcel has in excess of 300 feet of street  frontage , one additional
freestanding sign may be erected for each additional 150 feet of street
 frontage in excess of the first 300 feet of street  frontage  abutting the
developed portion of said parcel .
                  (b)   Freestanding pole sign
                     i.   Allowed only in the general business zone category
and industrial zone category.
                     ii.   Minimum setback : 30 feet from curb to leading edge
of sign .
                     iii.   Pole cover : The sign  structure configuration must
be equipped with pole covers or architectural embellishments that hide or
conceal all structural components or braces (such as pipes, angles, iron,
cables, internal back framing, bracing, etc.). Minimum requirement is 18 inches
by six inches. The Pole cover or architectural embellishment shall require a
plan check for construction specifications in accordance with applicable
technical codes.
                     iv.   When allowed: Allowed only when there is a minimum
of 225 feet of street  frontage , or 125 feet of street  frontage and four or
more business addresses.
                     v.   Maximum number: Only one freestanding pole sign
allowed per street  frontage per premises .
         b.   Freeway Sign
            (1)   Permitted only in the general business zone category and the
industrial zone category.
            (2)   Permitted locations: Must be within 250 feet of a freeway
 right-of-way .
            (3)   Maximum area: 360 square feet.
            (4)   Maximum height: 48 feet from freeway grade to top of sign .
            (5)   Minimum clearance : 14 feet from grade to bottom of sign .
            (6)   Maximum number: Within a PAD, one per 1,980 linear feet of
freeway  frontage measured along the freeway center line, not transferable from
one freeway  frontage to another. Within the general business zone category and
the industrial zone category, one per premises .
      3.    Sign Types P through Z
          a.   Parking Lot Sign
            (1)   Sign types: A parking lot sign may be a wall or freestanding
sign .
            (2)   Permitted locations: Parking lot signs are permitted wherever
the sign type of which it is a part is permitted. The sign should follow the
best practices for parking lot sign design.
         b.   Pole Sign - Freestanding
            (1)   Allowed only in the general business zone category and
industrial zone category.
            (2)   Minimum setback: 30 feet from curb to leading edge of sign .
            (3)   Pole cover: The sign structure configuration must be equipped
with pole covers or architectural embellishments that hide or conceal all
structural components or braces (such as pipes, angles, iron, cables, internal
back framing, bracing, etc.). Minimum requirement is 18 inches by six inches.
The Pole cover or architectural embellishment shall require a plan check for
construction specifications in accordance with applicable technical codes.
            (4)   When allowed: Allowed only when there is a minimum of 225
feet of street frontage , or 125 feet of street frontage and four or more
business addresses.
            (5)   Maximum number: Only one freestanding pole sign allowed per
street frontage per premises.
         c.   Projecting Sign
            (1)   Signs shall be permitted only within a Historic or Pedestrian
District and in compliance with Section
7A.11.1.I and 2.D respectively.
            (2)   Signs protruding in the right of way shall be approved by the
Department of Transportation.
         d.   Wall Sign
            (1)   Residential Zone Category
               Non-residential only. Not allowed for residential uses except as
allowed as home occupation and multi-family residential.
            (2)   General Business Zone Category
               Maximum size:
               (i)   Generally: No more than 30% of the area of each wall may
be utilized for wall signs .
               (ii)   A wall sign within 250 feet of a freeway shall be no more
than 40% of the area of each wall .
            (3)   Industrial Zone Category
               Maximum size: no more than 40% of the area of each wall .
            (4)   Wall Sign General Standards
               (i)   May not extend above the top of the facade , eaves,
firewall or roofline of a building or structure .
               (ii)   25% additional area of each wall over and above the
allowable sign area may be utilized if no other sign types are used or if
nonconforming signs are voluntarily removed.
               (iii)   Signs placed upon the face of a parapet or architectural
feature are considered wall signs .
(Am. Ord. 11803, 12/8/2020)
7A.10.3   PORTABLE SIGNS
   A.   Portable Signs - Maximum Sign Area Allotment
      1.   The following zones may have portable signs . Additional standards
may apply to individual sign types.
 
Zones                            Local Street Collector Street Arterial Street
IR, RH, SR, SH, RX-1, RX-2, R-    16 sq. ft.   32 sq. ft.       64 sq. ft.
1 MH-1 R-2, R-3 MH-2, O-1
O-2, O-3, P, RV, NC RVC, C-1, -2,
-3, OCR-1, -2, MU, U, PI, I-1, I- 32 sq. ft.   64 sq. ft.       128 sq. ft.
2
Table 4 - Portable Maximum Sign Area Allotment
   B.   Portable Signs - General Standards
      1.   Ground and Wall Mounted General Standards
         These standards apply to ground mounted and wall -mounted portable
signs for a premise . The signs may be attached by cords to posts and other
supports and include posters, banners , A-frames , and other similar portable
signs types. Ground-mounted includes affixed to the ground, placed on the
ground, or attached to a perimeter wall or fence that faces the street .
      2.   No illumination is permitted.
      3.   Ground-Mounted General Standards
         Maximum area per sign in a residential zone is 16 square feet and in a
non-residential zone 32 square feet unless otherwise regulated by another
portable sign type standard.
         a.   Maximum Height: Ten feet.
         b.   Minimum Setback : Ten feet.
         c.   Maximum Number on a Street  Frontage : No more than four signs
shall be allowed for the first 300 feet of street  frontage . An additional
sign may be allowed for each additional 75 feet of a street  frontage but not
to exceed a total of eight signs for a street  frontage .
         d.   Materials: A ground-mounted portable sign shall be made of
similar materials such as non-pliable or taut materials. A sign shall not be a
ground-mounted banner made of a pliable fabric such as cloth with multiple
supports unless stated otherwise in
Article 7A.
         e.   Spacing of ground-mounted portable signs at a premise shall
consist of the following:
            (1)   Lots with a street  frontage of 150 feet or greater may have
up to four 32 square foot  signs per each 150 feet with at least a minimum of a
30 foot distance between the individual signs . Two of the four signs whose
sign areas combined do not exceed 32 square feet may have a distance between
each other that is closer than 30 feet. An individual sign under 32 square feet
in sign area and not grouped with another sign must be at a minimum a distance
of 15 feet from another sign .
            (2)   Lots with a street  frontage less than 150 feet but greater
or equal to 75 feet may have up to two 32 square foot  signs with a 30 foot
distance between the signs . If the two signs combined sign area does not
exceed 32 square feet the signs may be placed at a distance between each other
that is closer than 30 feet. An individual sign under 32 square feet in sign
area and not grouped with another sign must be at a minimum a distance of 15
feet from another sign .
            (3)   Lots with a street  frontage less than 75 feet may have one
sign up to 32 square feet in sign area.
      4.   Wall -Mounted General Sign  Standards
         A wall -mounted portable sign may not exceed 32 square feet on an
arterial street , 16 square feet on a collector street or eight square feet on
a local street . Wall -mounted banners are not allowed on a dwelling unit.
   C.   Portable Sign - Additional Standards
      1.   A-frame  Signs
         a.   An A-frame  sign is an on-site non-illuminated sign temporarily
authorized for one year used to advertise the location, goods or services
offered on the premises . The A-frame  sign must be made of a durable, rigid
material such as, but not limited to, wood, plastic or metal.
         b.   A-Frame  signs are prohibited from any form of illumination,
animation, movement and miscellaneous attachments including, but not limited
to, balloons, ribbons, speakers etc.
         c.   A-frame  signs are not permitted in the public right-of-way
except where a temporary revocable easement has been granted for their
placement.
         d.   Maximum Height and Width
            The A-frame  sign when placed in an open position must not exceed a
height of 30 inches from ground level to the top of the sign and be no more
than 30 inches wide.
         e.   Maximum Number
            One per business. The A-frame  sign must be removed from the street
at the close of business.
         f.   Districts
            A-frames  signs are regulated by district : they are permitted in
the commercial and industrial zones , planned area development  district ,
pedestrian business district and historic district subject to subsection below.
Subject to the other restrictions under this section, A-frames  signs are
allowed in all districts to advertise those businesses immediately adjacent to
and affected by road or water construction.
         g.   Historic District
            An A-frame  sign may be permitted in a historic district after
review and approval by the planning and development services director , the
applicable historic district advisory board and the Tucson Pima County
Historical Commission.
         h.   Decal Required
            A decal issued by the City for placement of any A-frame  sign shall
be displayed on the upper right hand corner of each visible advertising face.
An A-frame  sign authorized to be located in the City's public right-of-way
shall display a decal of a different color than signs not authorized to be in
the public right-of-way .
         i.   Permission Required
            The permission of the property owner for use of the sign is also
required.
         j.   Sign Maintenance
            The A-frame shall be properly maintained.
         k.   Application Process
            By signing and submitting the application the applicant verifies
the following:
            (1)   The property owner or management company is in compliance
with their current lease agreement in regard to the permissibility of A-frame
 signs ; and,
            (2)   The applicant is responsible to research and verify right-of-
way information to ensure that the proposed location of the A-frame is on
private property and is not located in the City's public right-of-way .
         l.   Site Inspection
            A site inspection is not required as part of the application and
permit process for A-frame  signs that are not located in the public right-of-
way . For A-frame  signs located in the public right-of-way , the zoning
administrator may require site inspection or additional inspections of the sign
 standards to ensure proper placement.
         m.   Refunds
            No refunds of application or annual permit fees will be given under
any circumstance.
         n.   Placement
            The A-frame  sign must be located at least two feet back from the
face of the curb. No A-frame  sign shall be located in a median, driving lane,
parking aisles or spaces. An A-frame  sign is not permitted in the City's
public right-of-way without a temporary revocable easement. An A-frame  sign
shall be placed so that a minimum four feet is left clear for pedestrian
passage on all sidewalks and walkways. An A-frame  sign shall only be placed at
grade level and shall not be placed on walls, boulders, planters, vehicles,
other signs or any other type of structure .
         o.   Temporary Revocable Easement
            (1)   A license to permit the placement of a temporary A-frame
 sign in the public right-of-way may be granted administratively by the zoning
administrator upon the written terms and conditions as are required by the
zoning administrator and contained in the written license agreement. The
applicant will submit a written application upon a form to be supplied by the
office of the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator will then approve
or deny such application. A license to permit an A-frame  sign in the public
right-of-way shall not be granted until all other applicable permit
requirements contained in this Code are met.
            (2)   If at any time after a license is granted, any portion of the
public right-of-way occupied and used by the licensee may be needed or required
by the City or the licensee fails to maintain the permitted sign so as to block
pedestrian traffic, site visibility, or as described by such specific terms and
conditions set forth by the zoning administrator, any license granted pursuant
to this section may be revoked by the City and all rights there under are
terminated. The licensee shall and will promptly remove all property belonging
to the licensee from the public right-of-way area upon receipt of written
notice of revocation. If removal is not accomplished by the licensee within the
time specified in the notice, the City will cause the sign to be removed and
stored and the cost thereof shall be charged to the licensee. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, any A-frame  sign placed in violation of the provisions of this
section is deemed to be a public nuisance and subject to removal by the City.
         p.   Removal of Sign
            In addition to the penalties described below, the zoning
administrator may remove any A-frame  sign that is placed in violation of the
sign  standards . The zoning administrator may immediately remove, without
prior notice, any A-frame  sign illegally placed in the right-of-way or site
visibility triangle, or that for any reason presents an immediate hazard. For
any A-frame  sign otherwise illegally placed, the zoning administrator may
remove the sign after providing reasonable notice to the responsible party  
      2.   Commercial Flags, Feather Banners , and Banner Flags
         In commercial and industrial zones , in lieu of the Portable Sign area
allotment, an applicant may use four commercial flags, feather banners , or
banner flags using two colors with one additional portable sign .
(Am. Ord. 11803, 12/8/2020)
7A.10.4   TEMPORARY SIGNS
   A.   Temporary Signs
      The following sign types are permitted for a limited period of time and
are not calculated as part of the portable sign area allotment.
      1.   A Fixed balloon sign is permitted as a temporary sign under the
following standards :
         a.   One balloon sign 2' in diameter or larger is permitted per
establishment. Balloons smaller than 2' in diameter are considered small fixed
balloons and are regulated by Section
7A.10.4.A.3;
         b.   A fixed balloon sign is prohibited from having mechanical or
electronic movement or animation of any kind;
         c.   A permit for a fixed balloon will be issued for a period of 90
days.
         d.   The permitted fixed balloon may be displayed for up to 10
consecutive days at a time.
         e.   A fixed balloon is allowed in commercial and industrial zones
only.
      2.   Temporary Banner
         A wall -mounted banner may be permitted under the following standards
:
         a.   Maximum number: One banner per street  frontage .
         b.   Size: 90 sq. ft. maximum.
         c.   Allowed in a commercial and industrial zone only.
         d.   A temporary wall -mounted banner is not calculated as part of the
portable sign area allotment for a premise or building on a premise.
         e.   All corners must be attached to the building  wall or facade or a
temporary construction structure during periods of remodeling or road
construction.
         f.    Allowed in 90-day increments. This banner cannot be used for
more than a cumulative total of 90 days in any calendar year, except that if
this banner is used to temporarily advertise business activities during the
course of construction, permit may be renewed until construction has been
completed.
         g.   The temporary banner is subject to Section
7A.2 Non-commercial Speech Substitution.
         h.   Removal: Upon completion of construction or as stated on the
permit for installation of the banner.
      3.   Propellers, Hula Strips, Small Fixed Balloons, and Pennants
         Propellers, hula strips, small fixed balloons, and pennants may be
permitted under the following standards:
         a.   Allowed in 90-day increments. The propellers, hula strips, small
fixed balloons, and pennants cannot be used for more than a cumulative total of
180 days in any calendar year.
         b.   Propellers, hula strips , small fixed balloons, and pennants are
subject to Section
7A.2  Non-commercial Speech Substitution.
      4.   Political Election Signs
         Shall comply with A.R.S. § 16-1019.
         a.   Maximum area: 32 square feet in commercial and industrial zones
and 16 square feet in rural and residential zones .
(Am. Ord. 11803, 12/8/2020)
7A.10.5   HERITAGE LANDMARK SIGNS (HLS)
   A.   Definitions
      1.   Heritage landmark sign (HLS). A sign that has conditional or final
designation as a heritage landmark sign . HLS are listed on the City of Tucson
Heritage landmark Sign Registry. There are three types of HLS: classic,
transitional, and replica.
      2.   Classic HLS. A heritage landmark sign originally installed prior to
1961.
      3.   Transitional HLS. A heritage landmark sign originally installed
between 1961 and 1974 inclusive.
      4.   Replica HLS. An accurate reconstruction of an original sign that no
longer exists. The sign to be replicated must have been originally installed
prior to 1961.
      5.   Heritage landmark sign (HLS) character defining features. Physical
features of an HLS such as materials, technologies, structure , colors, shapes,
symbols, text, font/typography and/or art that have cultural and historical
significance and are integral to overall sign design.
      6.   Heritage landmark sign (HLS) concentration. A minimum of three
previously designated HLS, or signs meeting the criteria for designation,
within 2,640 linear feet (1/2 mile) as measured along the center line of a
street , including turning in any direction at the intersection of a street to
connect with another designated HLS or sign meeting the criteria for
designation, together with an additional 440 linear feet (1/16 mile) beyond the
terminus HLS. A replica HLS cannot be used as part of the number of HLS in the
calculation of a HLS concentration.
      7.   Heritage landmark sign (HLS) registry. The official list of
designated historic landmark  signs within the City of Tucson.
      8.   Heritage landmark sign (HLS) treatment plan. A detailed description
of an HLS including its character defining features, condition, location, and
maintenance, and, as applicable, proposed restoration, adaptive reuse,
relocation, and, replication.
   B.   Purpose
      1.   The Heritage landmark Sign regulations are intended to provide for
the preservation of the City of Tucson's unique character, history, and
identity, as reflected in its historic and iconic signs , and
      2.   To restore the sense of place that existed within the central
business district and in areas of the City with concentrations of surviving
historic signs , and
      3.   To protect the community from inappropriate reuse of nonconforming
and/or illegal signs .
   C.   Heritage Landmark Sign (HLS) Designation
      1.   Requests for HLS designation shall be initiated by the sign owner
and supported by an HLS treatment plan.
      2.   "As is" HLS designation. An existing sign which will not be
restored/repaired, adaptively reused, or relocated, and retains sufficient
integrity and character-defining historic features, is in working order, and
has an acceptable appearance, may obtain HLS designation "as is", upon approval
of the treatment plan.
      3.   Conditional HLS Designation
         a.   The decision to approve or deny an HLS treatment plan that meets
each of the HLS designation guidelines is rendered per the administrative
process herein.
         b.   The decision to approve or deny an HLS treatment plan that does
not meet each of the HLS designation guidelines is rendered per the legislative
process herein.
         c.   Approval of an HLS treatment plan shall constitute conditional
HLS designation.
      4.   Final HLS Designation
         Final HLS designation shall be contingent upon issuance of a sign
permit in compliance with an approved HLS treatment plan, and final inspection
of the sign within five years of conditional HLS designation. Issuance of a
permit is not required for "as is" designation.
      5.   All signs designated (conditional or final) as heritage landmark
signs shall be listed in the City of Tucson Heritage landmark Sign Registry.
   D.   HLS Designation Guidelines
      Classic, transitional, and replica HLS shall be reviewed for compliance
with the following guidelines:
      1.   Technical guidelines:
         a.   The sign shall include or have once included exposed integral
incandescent lighting, or exposed neon lighting.
         b.   The sign shall use materials and technology representative of its
period of construction.
         c.   The sign shall be non-rectangular or non-planar.
         d.   The sign shall be a permanent sign , including but not limited to
a detached, projecting, wall , or roof sign .
         e.   The sign is structurally safe or can be made safe without
substantially altering its historical appearance.
      2.   Cultural/historical/design guidelines:
         a.   The sign shall exemplify the cultural, economic, and historic
heritage of Tucson.
         b.   The sign shall exhibit extraordinary aesthetic quality,
creativity, and innovation.
         c.   The sign is unique; or was originally associated with a chain or
franchise business that is either a local or regional chain or franchise only
found in Tucson or the southwestern United States; or there is scholarly
documentation to support its preservation; or it is a rare surviving example of
a once common type.
         d.   The sign shall retain the majority of its character defining
features. If character-defining features have been altered or removed, the
majority are potentially restorable to their historic function and appearance.
   E.   HLS Performance Requirements
      Classic, transitional, and replica HLS shall comply with the following
requirements as applicable:
      1.   Restoration/repair
         a.   Restoration/repair of a classic HLS shall be consistent with a
documented appearance that existed prior to 1961.
         b.   Restoration/repair of a transitional HLS shall be consistent with
a documented appearance that existed between 1961 and 1974 inclusive.
         c.   Restoration/repair of a replica HLS shall be consistent with a
documented appearance that existed prior to 1961.
         d.   Restoration/repair shall not add typographical or other elements
which result in an increase in the size of the restored/repaired sign .
      2.   Adaptive Reuse (Change of Copy)
         a.   Adaptive reuse of a replica HLS is prohibited.
         b.   Text changes shall not result in changes to character defining
text.
         c.   Text changes shall match or be compatible with existing text in
material(s), letter size, font/typography, and color.
      3.   Relocation
         a.   When relocated, detached HLS shall be setback at least 20 feet
from the back of curb (edge of pavement if there is no curb), no more than 40
feet from the future right-of-way line of the street , and a distance at least
two times the height of the sign from any property with a non-commercial use.
         b.   If relocated to another premise , the HLS shall display
conspicuous text or a plaque, using a template provided by the City of Tucson,
that indicates that the sign has been relocated, the date of relocation, and
the original location.
         c.   The scale and design of the sign to be relocated shall be
compatible with existing HLS in the vicinity of the proposed location.
      4.   Replica HLS
         a.   A replica HLS shall be consistent with a documented appearance
that existed prior to 1961.
         b.   A replica HLS may only be installed on the premises where it
originally existed.
         c.   A replica HLS shall display conspicuous text or a plaque, using a
template provided by the City of Tucson, that indicates the sign is a
contemporary reproduction, and the date of reproduction.
         d.   A replica HLS shall utilize historical materials and
technologies, or visually matching contemporary materials and technologies.
         e.   A replica HLS shall not replicate an existing sign .
      5.   The sign shall not be an off-site sign as defined in the sign
 standards .
      6.   The sign shall not have been previously, altered, removed and
reinstalled or replaced pursuant to Section
7A.9 Non-conforming Signs.
   F.   Content of HLS Treatment Plan
      An HLS treatment plan shall include the following:
      1.   Completed application form.
      2.   Existing and proposed elevation of the proposed HLS showing height
and area of the sign .
      3.   Description and age of construction materials and type of
illumination.
      4.   Dimensioned site plan , with the existing and proposed land use ,
graphically showing existing and proposed location and setbacks for the
proposed HLS and any other existing or proposed signs on the premises ,
existing and proposed site  improvements , and adjacent  streets .
      5.   Photographs of the existing sign and photo simulation(s) of the
completed sign as viewed from the street and other significant vantage points
as appropriate, together with photographs of the existing site conditions.
Photographs must be sufficient to demonstrate the sign's dimensions,
construction materials used including electrical and any types of illumination
which is or was used.
      6.   Date of original construction and installation, and the address
where the proposed HLS was first installed.
      7.   List of character defining features.
      8.   Documentation of the authenticity of the proposed HLS including
approved permits, site plans , elevations, and dated photographs, and age of
existing materials, as available.
      9.   A narrative describing compliance with each of the HLS designation
guidelines and all applicable HLS performance requirements.
      10.   Maintenance program.
      11.   List of parts and materials to be replaced.
      12.   Mitigation measures to reduce the impact on residential uses within
300 feet of the proposed HLS.
   G.   Review of HLS Treatment Plan
      HLS treatment plans shall be submitted to the Planning and Development
Services Department for review.
      1.   Pre-submittal conference. Prior to submitting an HLS treatment plan,
an applicant may, but is not required to meet with City staff responsible for
administration of the HLS program. Comments supplied by City staff during the
conference are advisory and do not constitute approval of any proposed
application.
      2.   Neighborhood meeting. A neighborhood meeting is encouraged for a
proposed HLS relocation, or for a proposed construction of a HLS replica sign .
      3.   Initial review. Initial review of an HLS treatment plan or revised
treatment plan will be for completeness, compliance with HLS designation
guidelines, and compliance with applicable HLS performance requirements. No
later than ten days after submittal, the zoning administrator will issue a
determination as to whether the request meets each of the HLS technical
designation guidelines.
      4.   Where an applicant produces physical evidence or documentation
sufficient to prove that a proposed HLS included intermittent lighting features
(e.g. flashing, blinking, chasing or sequentially lit elements which create the
appearance of movement) or moving parts, such sign elements may be repaired or
restored conditioned upon a determination by Tucson Department of
Transportation (TDOT) that no negative safety issues will result.
      5.   If the subject property is within a historic preservation zone
(HPZ), the treatment plan shall be forwarded to the HPZ advisory board for
review and recommendation prior to being forwarded to the Tucson-Pima County
Historical Commission (T-PCHC) Plans Review Subcommittee .
      6.   Review of the treatment plan shall include an analysis of applicable
policies of the Tucson general plan .
      7.   The treatment plan shall be forwarded to the T-PCHC Plans Review
Subcommittee for review of the treatment plan for compliance with HLS Cultural/
historic/design designation guidelines and applicable HLS performance
requirements. Notice of the treatment plan and subcommittee meeting shall also
be provided to the registered neighborhood association in which the proposed
sign would be located; to property owners immediately adjacent to the proposed
location; and to any persons who have submitted a written request to the
director to be notified of HLS applications.
      8.   The T-PCHC shall forward a recommended list of character defining
features, including all character defining text, and a recommendation to
approve or deny the treatment plan, to the Planning and Development Services
Department.
      9.   Decision
         a.   Administrative: The planning and development services director
will prepare a written decision to approve or deny the treatment plan within
ten days of receiving the T-PCHC Plans Review Subcommittee recommendation.
         b.   Legislative: An appeal from the Planning and Development Services
Director's decision shall be conducted in accordance with Section
3.9.2, Mayor and Council Appeal Procedure. In granting approval, the mayor and
council must find that preservation of the sign will contribute to Tucson's
unique character, history, and identity.
   H.   Review of Permits for HLS
      All permits for the installation, repair /restoration, adaptive reuse,
relocation, or replication of HLS shall be consistent with an approved HLS
treatment plan.
   I.   Maintenance
      All maintenance activities relating to HLS shall be consistent with an
approved HLS treatment plan.
   J.   Demolition
      Demolition of HLS shall be consistent with an approved treatment plan for
relocation or subject to a maximum 30 day waiting period to facilitate salvage
of the sign . The sign owner shall allow reasonable access to the sign to
facilitate documentation and salvage activities.
(Ord. 11508, 12/5/2017; Am. Ord. 11803, 12/8/2020)
7A.11.   SPECIAL DISTRICTS
The sign  standards in historic, pedestrian and scenic corridor districts take
precedence over the sign  standards listed above in Section
7A.10 Sign Types and General Standards. All the below referenced districts,
zones  and provisions are superseded when the sign is regulated by Section
7A.7 Sign Design Options.
7A.11.1.   HISTORIC DISTRICT
   A.   Location
      Historic districts include property established as historic preservation
zones pursuant to Section
5.8 Historic Preservation Zone  and designated with the preface "H" which is
added to the assigned residential, office, commercial, or industrial zone
designation, i.e., R-1 becomes HR-1. For purposes of the sign  standards ,
historic districts are treated as specific mapped districts and are not treated
as overlay zones . Note: historic preservation zone  maps are located on the
official City of Tucson's zoning maps .
   B.   Regulation of Signs
      All signs located in a "H" Historic Preservation Zone are regulated under
Section
5.8.9.M, Signs, and subject to review under 5.8.8, Design Review Required.
   C.   Maximum Area of Any Sign
      Eight square feet in a residential zone ; 40 square feet in a commercial
zone . The sign shall be appropriately sized, result in minimal damage to
historic fabric, and avoid adverse effects on qualities that make a building
eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places.
   D.   Historic District Advisory Board Approval
      All sign permit applications must be approved by the appropriate historic
district advisory board.
   E.   No signs may extend above the top of the nearest facade , eaves or
firewall of a building or structure .
   F.   Illumination
      Signs within the historic district may be illuminated by remote light
sources that are shielded from adjacent properties.
   G.   Prohibited Features
      Visible bulbs, neon tubing, luminous paints, and plastics are prohibited,
except as provided in Section
5.8.9  HPZ Design Standards  and approved in accordance with Section
5.8.8 Design Review Required.
   H.   Permitted Signs
      1.   Signs generally permitted and sign types listed in Section
7A.10, except as modified by this subsection for this district , and signs
exempt under Section
7A.8 Exempt and Prohibited Signs.
      2.   Awning signs .
      3.   Banners , building and curbside.
      4.   Freestanding signs , monument and low profile only.
         a.   Maximum number: One per premises .
         b.   Freestanding signs that include or consist of a three-dimensional
representation of a figure or object are prohibited.
      5.   Portable signs .
         a.   May be permitted in this district only after review and approval
by the planning and development services director , the applicable historic
district advisory board and the Tucson Pima County Historical Commission.
         b.   Use is subject to the provisions of Section
7A.10.3 Sign Types and General Standards.
      6.   Projecting signs .
         a.   Allowed use: Limited to commercial uses only.
         b.   Maximum height: 20 feet from grade (pedestrian surface) to top of
sign or two feet below the parapet , whichever is more restrictive.
         c.   Minimum clearance : Eight feet between grade and bottom of sign .
         d.   Maximum projection from building : Five feet.
      7.   Temporary signs .
      8.   Wall signs .
      9.   Canopy signs , limited to properties zoned HO-2, HO-3, HNC, HC-1,
HC-2, HC-3, HOCR-1 and HOCR-2.
      10.   Historic landmark  signs (HLS), all types. The first HLS on a
premise does not count toward the maximum total sign area.
(Am. Ord. 11803, 12/8/2020)
7A.11.2 .   PEDESTRIAN BUSINESS DISTRICT
   A.    Location
      The pedestrian business district includes property as shown in Figure 1:
Pedestrian Business District Downtown; Figure 2: Pedestrian Business District
Fourth Avenue; Figure 3: Pedestrian Business District Park Avenue; and Figure
4: Pedestrian Business District Mercado.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-14733.png]
Figure 1: Pedestrian Business District Downtown
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-14735.png]
Figure 2: Pedestrian Business District Fourth Avenue
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-14737.png]
Figure 3: Pedestrian Business District Park Avenue
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-14739.png]
Figure 4: Pedestrian Business District Mercado
   B.   Intent
      Signs in the pedestrian business district should provide clear and
understandable identification for buildings , businesses, and parking. Signs on
historic buildings should be carefully designed and located to respect the
visual integrity of the historic architecture, including building scale,
proportions, surface texture and decorative ornamentation.
   C.   Maximum Total Sign Area
      Three square feet per foot of street  frontage .
   D.   Permitted Signs
      1.   Signs generally permitted and sign types listed in Section
7A.10, except as modified by this subsection for this district , and signs
exempt under Section
7A.8 Exempt and Prohibited Signs.
      2.   Awning signs .
      3.   Banners , building and curbside.
      4.   Freestanding signs , low profile and monument type only.
         a.   Maximum number: One per building per street  frontage where a
building  facade is set back at least ten feet from a public right-of-way , or
one per street  frontage for a surface parking lot where parking is the primary
use of the property.
         b.   Maximum area: 20 square feet per sign .
         c.   Parking lots: Where used to identify a commercial parking
facility, each freestanding sign must display the standard Parking I.D. symbol.
         d.   Maximum height: 12 feet above grade.
      5.   Parking lot signs .
      6.   Projecting signs .
         a.   Allowed for commercial uses only.
         b.   Maximum area: 20 square feet.
         c.   Maximum height: 20 feet from grade (pedestrian surface) to top of
sign or two feet below the parapet , whichever is more restrictive.
         d.   Minimum clearance : Eight feet between grade and bottom of sign .
         e.   Maximum projection from building : Five feet.
      7.   Portable signs .
      8.   Temporary signs .
      9.   Access point signs .
      10.   Wall signs . Maximum size: 30% of the area of each wall .
      11.   Heritage landmark signs (HLS), all types. The first HLS on a
premise does not count toward the maximum total sign area.
      12.   Canopy signs .
(Am. Ord. 11803, 12/8/2020)
7A.11.3.   SCENIC CORRIDOR ZONE (SCZ) DISTRICT
   A.   Location
      The scenic corridor zone (SCZ) district includes any portion of property
or parcels within 400 feet, measured in any direction, of the future right-of-
way lines of a scenic route , as designated on the Major Streets and Routes
(MS&R) Plan map. If any portion of a development is within the SCZ district ,
the entire development will be treated, for sign purposes only, as though it
were entirely within the SCZ district .
   B.   Maximum Total Attached Sign Area
      1.   For commercial or industrial uses: 1.25 square feet per foot of
building  frontage with a minimum allowance of not less than 25 square feet and
a maximum of 250 square feet per tenant . Signs must be oriented toward a
scenic route , arterial street , collector street , or the interior of the
premises .
      2.   For multifamily complexes: 20 square feet per street  frontage .
   C.   Unified Development Code Compliance
      All signs in this District shall comply with applicable provisions of the
Unified Development Code and must be approved through the applicable review
process.
   D.   Colors
      All signs shall use colors that are predominant within the surrounding
landscape, such as desert and earth tones, as required in the scenic corridor
zone provisions of the Unified Development Code .
   E.   Permitted Signs
      1.   Signs generally permitted and sign types listed in Section
7A.10, except as modified by this subsection for this district , and signs
exempt under Section
7A.8 Exempt and Prohibited Signs.
      2.   Awning signs .
      3.   Freestanding signs , monument and low profile only.
         a.   Maximum number per premises :
            (1)   Scenic route : One for the first 450 feet of scenic route
street frontage . A second sign is permitted for a street frontage from 451
feet to 850 feet. A third sign is permitted for a street  frontage from 851
feet to 1250 feet. This rule applies for each subsequent 400 feet of scenic
route  street  frontage .
            (2)   Arterial street : One for the first 450 feet of arterial
street  frontage . A second sign is permitted for a street  frontage of 451
feet to 700 feet. A third sign is permitted for a street  frontage of 701 feet
to 950 feet. This rule applies for each subsequent 250 feet of arterial street
 frontage .
            (3)   Collector Street : One for the first 450 feet of collector
street  frontage . A second sign is permitted for a street  frontage of 451
feet to 700 feet. A third sign is permitted for a street  frontage of 701 feet
to 950 feet. This rule applies for each subsequent 250 feet of collector street
 frontage .
         b.   Maximum area:
            (1)   Multifamily residential uses: 20 square feet per street
 frontage .
            (2)   Commercial or industrial uses: 35 square feet per sign if
located within the SCZ buffer, 50 square feet per sign if located outside the
SCZ buffer.
         c.   Maximum height: Ten feet.
         d.   Location:
            (1)   Scenic route : Maximum height signs shall be located no less
than 7.5 feet behind the leading edge of the SCZ buffer and within 50 feet of
the right-of-way line. Signs may be located one foot closer to the leading edge
of the SCZ buffer for each foot (below the maximum) they are reduced in height.
            (2)   All other streets : Within 20 feet of the right-of-way line
and at least 150 feet from the centerline of the scenic route .
         e.   Freestanding signs that include or consist of a three-dimensional
representation of a figure or object are prohibited.
         f.   Lighting: Sign panels shall be opaque . Light shall be emitted
through individual translucent letters and/or symbols only, or individual
letters and/or symbols may be halo illuminated. Unused tenant panels shall be
opaque and designed to match the rest of the sign .
         g.   Within SCZ buffer digital sign copy and exposed neon signs are
prohibited.
      4.   Access point sign (medical uses).
         a.   Maximum area: Eight square feet.
         b.   Maximum height: Four feet to top of sign .
         c.   Permitted: Only if no frontage on collector or arterial street .
      5.   Portable signs .
      6.   Access point sign .
         a.   Within the scenic corridor 30 foot landscape buffer the following
shall apply:
            (1)   Minimum site area : Ten acres.
            (2)   Maximum area: Three square feet; tenant identification or
logo not to exceed one square foot .
            (3)   Maximum number: One per vehicular entrance.
            (4)   Location: Within 20 feet of the entrance.
      7.   Wall signs .
      8.   Canopy signs .
(Am. Ord. 11803, 12/8/2020)
7A.11.4.   PLANNED AREA DEVELOPMENT (PAD) DISTRICT
   A property owner within a PAD district shall use the sign  standards of the
zone upon which the PAD regulation is modeled or may submit a master sign
program. Billboards are prohibited in a PAD district .
(Ord. 11508, 12/5/2017)
7A.12.   APPEALS
All appeals shall be heard in accordance with Section
3.10 Board of Adjustment Appeals and Variances. The applicant may appeal a
Board of Adjustment decision to the Mayor and Council per Section
3.9.2 Mayor and Council Appeals Procedure or to the Superior Court.
(Ord. 11508, 12/5/2017; Am. Ord. 11803, 12/8/2020)
7A.13.   SIGN DESIGN REVIEW COMMITTEE
A sign design review committee is hereby created to assist the planning
commission by reviewing and recommending amendments to the sign  standards and
recommending design options in compliance with Section
7A.7 Sign Design Options to the planning and development services director .
The committee's authority and organization shall be in accordance with Section
2.2.12 Sign Design Review Committee.
(Ord. 11508, 12/5/2017)
ARTICLE 8: LAND DIVISION, LAND SPLIT , AND SUBDIVISION STANDARDS
Section
8.1.   PURPOSE
8.2.   APPLICABILITY
8.3.   LAND DIVISION
   
8.3.1.   Land Split
8.4.   SUBDIVISIONS
   
8.4.1.   Block Plat
   
8.4.2.   Residential and Non-Residential Condominium and Condominium Conversion
 Plat
   
8.4.3.   Minor Subdivision
   
8.4.4.   Tentative Plat
   
8.4.5.   Final Plat
8.5.   EXPIRATION DATES
   
8.5.1.   Tentative Plat
   
8.5.2.   Final Plat
8.6.   GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR SUBDIVISIONS
   
8.6.1.   General Provisions
   
8.6.2.   Subdivision Improvements and Assurances
   
8.6.3.   Survey Monuments Required
   
8.6.4.   Permits for Model Homes
   
8.6.5.   Land Clearing and Grading
   
8.6.6.   Plat  Abandonment
8.7.   SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS
   
8.7.1.   Parks, Recreational Facilities, Fire Stations, and School Sites
   
8.7.2.   Phased Subdivisions
   
8.7.3.   Flexible Lot Development (FLD)
8.1.   PURPOSE
   The purpose of this article is to:
8.1.1.   Assure that all land divisions, land spits, and subdivisions are in
conformance  with the City ’s regulations regarding land development ;
8.1.2.   Assure a coordinated vehicular and pedestrian circulation system;
8.1.3.   Establish minimum standards for land divisions and subdivisions ;
8.1.4.   Assure that all lots  or parcels  are provided with infrastructure
 improvements ;
8.1.5.   Provide an expedient and consistent review process;
8.1.6.   Obtain accurate survey and permanent public record of the boundaries
of lots  created by the division of lands and subdivision  plats ;
8.1.7.   Facilitate the conveyance of land by reference to an accurate legal
description by means of a recorded subdivision  plat ; and,
8.1.8.   Provide a convenient method of describing property being conveyed.
8.2.   APPLICABILITY
   This article applies to all proposed land divisions, land spits, and
subdivisions of land as defined in this code, with the following exceptions:
8.2.1.   The sale or exchange of parcels  of land to or between adjoining
property owners if such sale or exchange does not create additional lots ;
8.2.2.   The partitioning of land in accordance with other statutes regulating
the partitioning of land held in common ownership;
8.2.3.   The leasing of apartments, offices, stores, or similar space within a
building  or mobile home/RV park, or mineral, oil, or gas leases;
8.2.4.   Land divisions for defining cemetery plots or columbarium units; and,
8.2.5.   Although exempt from this article, these types of land divisions may
still require review and approval by the PDSD staff and outside review agencies
in accordance with other articles of the UDC .
8.3.   LAND DIVISION
8.3.1.   LAND SPLIT
   A.   Purpose
   According to A.R.S. §9-463.01(T), the City may regulate a land split as
defined in Section
11.4.13 within its jurisdictional limits. The state law gives the City
authority to determine the division lines, area, and shapes of the parcels .
Neither a tentative plat nor a final plat is required but the resulting tracts
or parcels shall conform to applicable zoning requirements and other government
codes and ordinances. The purpose of this section is to establish a review
process for land splits . This review:
      1.   Assures that newly created tracts or parcels are of sufficient size
to be developed and meet the requirements of applicable zoning classification;
      2.   Assures that the newly created tracts or parcels have locations for
building pads that are protected from flood and erosion hazards as defined in
the Floodplain Ordinance (Tucson Code Chapter 26) and Standards Manual for
Drainage Design and Floodplain Management in Tucson, Arizona; and,
      3.   Assures that all tracts or parcels resulting from a land split shall
have adequate access as specified by Section
7.8, Access, of the UDC , Sections
7-01.0.0, Pedestrian Access, and
10-01.0.0, Street Technical Standard, of the Technical Standards Manual and
City of Tucson Drainage Manuals.
   B.   Applicability
   A proposed land split shall be submitted to PDSD for review and approval as
provided in this section.
   C.   Pre-application Conference Recommended
   A pre-application conference is encouraged, but not required.
   D.   Application Required
   Submittal of an application to the PDSD is required in order to process the
request. The application must be in accordance with Section
2-08.0.0, Land Split Applications, of the Administrative Manual. Applications
are reviewed for completeness in accordance with Section
3.2.3, Application Requirements.
   E.   Review
   Land splits are reviewed by the PDSD for compliance with the following
requirements:
      1.   Does not constitute a subdivision as defined in Section
11.4.20 which would require compliance with platting requirements of Section
8.4;
      2.   Results in tracts or parcels which conform to the minimum lot size
requirements of the property’s zone ;
      3.   Provides access to the proposed tracts or parcels in accordance with
Section
7.8, Access, of the UDC , Sections
7-01.0.0, Pedestrian Access, and
10-01.0.0, Street Technical Standard, of the Technical Standards Manual, and
the City of Tucson Floodplain Ordinance and Drainage Manuals;
      4.   Results in all existing buildings complying with the perimeter yard
requirements of the property’s zone ; and,
      5.   Results in tracts or parcels of at least the minimum size required
to build in accordance with the applicable zoning including any natural,
environmental and floodplain requirements in accordance with the City of Tucson
Floodplain Ordinance and Drainage Manuals.
   F.   Decision
      1.   The PDSD Director decides whether to approve or deny an application.
      2.   The PDSD will notify the applicant if the land split has been
approved.
   G.   Recordation Required
   After approval, the deeds for the land split shall be recorded at the Pima
County Recorder’s Office by the applicant/owner or his designated agent.
8.4.   SUBDIVISIONS
8.4.1.   BLOCK PLAT
   A.   Purpose
   The block plat process allows a subdivider to divide a parcel of land into
ten or fewer lots without the necessity of a tentative plat, subject to the
requirements of this section as allowed for by A.R.S. §9-463.01(U). A block
plat may be used to abandon a previously recorded plat. Although a tentative
plat is not required, additional information shall be submitted as needed, to
review the project for compliance with all governmental regulations and good
engineering practices. Additional information that may need to be provided
include a geotechnical report, grading plan, drainage report, phasing plan,
title report, or other documents that the City deems necessary to review for
compliance with all applicable standards.
   B.   Applicability
   Any proposed block plat , as defined in Section
11.4.3, shall be submitted to PDSD for review and decision as provided below.
   C.   Pre-application Conference Required
   A pre-application conference in accordance with Section
3.2.1 is required.
   D.   Application, Review, Decision, and Recordation
      1.   Block plats shall be prepared, reviewed for compliance with Section
8.4.1.E, Criteria, and considered for approval in accordance with Section
8.4.5, Final Plat, with the exception that a pre-application is required.
      2.   After approval of the block plat by the Mayor and Council, the block
plat must be recorded with the Office of the Pima County Recorder.
   E.   Criteria
   Block plats must:
      1.   Result in ten or fewer lots;
      2.   Result in lots /blocks that conform to the minimum lot size
requirements of the property’s zone ;
      3.   Provide access to the proposed lots in compliance with Section
7.8, Access, of the UDC  and Sections
7-01.0.0, Pedestrian Access, and
10-01.0.0, Street Technical Standard, of the Technical Standards Manual;
      4.   Results in all existing buildings complying with the perimeter yard
requirements of the property’s zone ;
      5.   Conform to all City , state , and federal drainage requirements;
      6.   Result in lots of at least the minimum size required to build in
conformance with the applicable zoning including any natural, environmental and
floodplain requirements;
      7.   Not be for a Flexible Lot Development; and,
      8.   When used to abandon a plat, the disposition of the public right-of-
way and utility easements created by the abandoned plat is provided.
(Am. Ord. 11070, 5/14/2013)
8.4.2.   RESIDENTIAL AND NON-RESIDENTIAL CONDOMINIUM AND CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION
 PLAT
   A.   Purpose
   The purpose of this section is to establish procedures and requirements for
proposed condominium  projects and the conversion of existing structure(s) into
condominiums as allowed by A.R.S. Title 33, Chapter 9.
   B.   Applicability
   A proposed condominium  project or condominium conversion that meets the
definition of a subdivision , as defined in Section
11.4.20, shall be submitted to the PDSD for review and decision as provided
below.
   C.   Application, Review, Decision, and Recordation
      1.   Under Arizona Revised Statutes, A.R.S. § 9-463.02(A), a subdivision
 plat is required when a condominium or similar project contains four or more
parcels .
      2.   A tentative and final plat is required; however, the approved site
plan for the existing structure/development may serve as the tentative plat if
approved by the Director .
      3.   Tentative plats of a proposed condominium are prepared, reviewed,
and considered for approval in accordance with Section
8.4.4, Tentative Plat.
      4.   Final plats of the proposed condominium or condominium conversion n
are prepared, reviewed, and considered for approval in accordance with Section
8.4.5, Final Plat.
      5.   A final plat may be submitted concurrent with the tentative plat in
accordance with Section
3.2.3.B, Sequential or Concurrent Review Procedure.
      6.   After approval by the Mayor and Council, the final condominium or
condominium conversion  plat must be recorded with the Office of the Pima
County Recorder.
(Am. Ord. 11200, 9/23/2014)
8.4.3.   MINOR SUBDIVISION
   A.   Purpose
   A minor subdivision may be accomplished with less documentation and it
provides a more streamlined process than required for subdivisions. Although a
tentative plat is not required, additional information shall be submitted, as
needed, to review the project for compliance with all governmental regulations
and good engineering practices. Additional information that may need to be
provided include a geotechnical report, grading plan, drainage report, phasing
plan, title report, or other documents that the City deems necessary to review
for compliance with all applicable standards. The purpose of this section is to
establish procedures and requirements for minor subdivision  plats .
   B.   Applicability
   A subdivision meeting the following criteria is considered a minor
subdivision :
      1.   The number of proposed lots is ten or less;
      2.   All utility services are available at the subdivision  site
boundary;
      3.   All proposed lots have street  frontage or perpetual access
easements of a minimum width and maximum length complying with requirements
established by Section
7.8, Access, of the UDC  and Section
10-01.0.0, Street Technical Standards, of the Technical Standards Manual;
      4.   All streets forming the boundary of the subdivision are fully
improved, except for sidewalks that may be improved as part of the project ;
      5.   The subdivision has no special topographic conditions, such as
slopes greater than 10%;
      6.   The property is not located within a 100-year regulatory floodplain
area or erosion hazard setback ;
      7.   The property has all weather access in accordance with the City of
Tucson Floodplain Ordinance and Design Manuals, or Section
10-02.4.4, Street Drainage, of the Technical Standards Manual;
      8.   The proposed subdivision  site does not have special development
requirements, or special requirements have been reviewed and special
development requirements have been determined. These special development
requirements may include, but are not limited to, the Hillside Development Zone
(HDZ); the Environmental Resource Zone (ERZ); the Scenic Corridor Zone (SCZ);
and the Watercourse Amenities, Safety, and Habitat (WASH) ordinance; and,
      9.   The minor subdivision cannot be used for the creation of Flexible
Lot Development (FLD).
   C.   General Provisions
      1.   Minor subdivisions shall conform to the design standards provided in
Section
8.6 , General Requirements for Subdivisions, and Sections
8.7.1 and
.2 of the Subdivision Design Standards.
      2.   Up to two single-family model homes may be authorized for
construction prior to recordation of the final plat, provided:
         a.   Sale of a lot or occupancy of an individual structure as a
residence does not occur until after recordation of the final plat and the City
’s release of assurances for improvements , and
         b.   The location of each structure is based on the minor subdivision
 lot configuration approval for final plat recording.
   D.   Pre-application Conference Required
   A pre-application conference in accordance with Section
3.2.1 is required.
   E.   Application, Review, Decision, and Recordation
      1.   Minor subdivisions are prepared, reviewed for compliance with all
applicable requirements, and considered for approval in accordance with Section
8.4.5, Final Plat, with the exception that a pre-application is required;
      2.   Any reviews that are normally conducted during the tentative plat
process, such as those involving drainage statements or reports, shall instead
be conducted as part of the final plat process; and,
      3.   After approval by the Mayor and Council, the minor subdivision must
be recorded with the Office of the Pima County Recorder.
8.4.4.   TENTATIVE PLAT
   A.   Purpose
   The tentative plat sets forth the technical mapping of the project including
its density , intensity, land uses , pedestrian and bicycle ways, trails,
parks, open space , and future lots , streets , and drainage patterns
established for the site . The purpose of this section is to establish
procedures and requirements for tentative plats . If the subdivision proposed
is a Flexible Lot Development, the subdivision shall additionally comply with
Section
8.7.3.
   B.   Applicability
   Any proposed subdivision , as defined in Section
11.4.20, shall be submitted to PDSD for review and decision as provided in this
section.
   C.   Pre-application Conference Recommended
   A pre-application conference in accordance with Section
3.2.1 is recommended, but not required.
   D.   Neighborhood Meeting Required for Flexible Lot Developments Only
   For Flexible Lot Development Project tentative plats only, the applicant is
required to conduct a neighborhood meeting and provide notice of the meeting in
accordance with Section
3.2.2, Neighborhood Meeting.
   E.   Application Required
      1.   Submittal of an application to the PDSD is required in order to
process the request. The application must be in accordance with Section
2-06.0.0, Development Package, of the Administrative Manual. Applications are
reviewed for completeness in accordance with Section
3.2.3, Application Requirements.
      2.   A final plat may be submitted concurrent with the tentative plat in
accordance with Section
3.2.3.B, Sequential or Concurrent Review Procedure.
      3.   For Flexible Lot Development Projec t tentative plats only, a mailed
notice of application is required in accordance with Section
3.2.4.B, Mailed Notice.
   F.   Review
      1.   PDSD shall coordinate the formal technical review of all tentative
plats to ensure the plats are prepared in accordance with the applicable codes,
ordinances, and standards.
      2.   On receipt of the application, PDSD shall distribute copies of the
tentative plat to CDRC members for review and comment.
      3.   CDRC shall review the tentative plat for compliance with all
pertinent codes and legal requirements, including, but not limited to, codes
regulating streets , sidewalks and public transportation access, zoning,
floodplain and drainage, grading , fire, water, environmental services, Pima
County wastewater, and utility company regulations.
      4.   If CDRC finds that the tentative plat requires revisions then:
         a.   The plat will be returned to the subdivider with a letter listing
specific deficiencies and required revisions;
         b.   The subdivider shall resubmit a revised tentative plat and a
letter which responds to each deficiency in detail and explains any revisions
made by the subdivider to the plat;
         c.   The subdivider continues to resubmit the tentative plat until
such time as the CDRC recommends approval of the tentative plat and it is
forwarded to the PDSD Director ; and,
         d.   Any necessary resubmittals will not change or extend the
expiration times commencing at acceptance of a tentative plat, as provided in
this article.
      5.   The zoning of the property shall permit the proposed use, and any
changes to zoning shall have been adopted prior to the approval of the
tentative plat.
   G.   Decision
      1.   If the requirements for tentative plats have been met, then the CDRC
, by its designated representative, shall send a letter to the applicant
notifying the applicant that the plat has been forwarded to the PDSD Director
with a recommendation for approval.
      2.   The PDSD Director , or designee, shall approve the tentative plat
once all the final documents, as detailed in the CDRC decision letter, are
submitted for his or her signature.
   H.   Significance of Tentative Plat Approval
   Approval of the tentative plat shall constitute authorization for the
subdivider to proceed with the preparation of the final plat.
      1.   Once a tentative plat is approved, the layout and design under which
approval of the tentative plat is granted shall not be changed without
concurrence of both the reviewing departments and agencies and subdivider prior
to the expiration date of the tentative plat.
      2.   Approval of a tentative plat does not guarantee final acceptance of
streets for dedication.
   I.   Tentative Plats Approved Prior to the Effective Date of the UDC
   A final plat application for which a tentative plat was approved prior to
the effective date of this UDC may be processed in accordance with the
tentative plat approval and applicable terms of the ordinance in place at the
time of tentative plat approval, even if the application does not comply with
one or more standards set forth in this UDC . Tentative plat approvals granted
prior to the effective date of this UDC may be extended no more than once, and
for no longer than one year.
8.4.5.   FINAL PLAT
   A.   Applicability
      1.   Proposed subdivisions, including minor subdivisions , block plats ,
and condominium  plats , require the review and approval of a final plat.
      2.   The subdivider shall construct all required subdivision improvements
, at no expense to the City , prior to recordation of the final plat, or the
subdivider may post assurances as detailed in Section
8.6.2, Subdivision Improvements and Assurances.
   B.   Application Required
      1.   Submittal of an application to the PDSD is required in order to
process the request. The application must be in accordance with Section
2-07.0.0, Final Plat , Block Plat , Minor Subdivision , and Condominium  Plat,
of the Administrative Manual. Applications are reviewed for completeness in
accordance with Section
3.2.3.
      2.   The final plat shall substantially conform to the approved tentative
plat.
      3.   Assurances in accordance with Section
8.6.2, Subdivision Improvements and Assurances, is also required, when
applicable, for review and consideration for approval by the PDSD Engineering
Administrator.
      4.   A final plat may be submitted concurrent with the tentative plat in
accordance with Section
3.2.3.B, Sequential or Concurrent Review Procedure.
   C.   Review
      1.   The CDRC reviews the final plat for compliance with all pertinent
codes and legal requirements, including, but not limited to, codes regulating
streets , sidewalks and public transportation access, zoning, floodplain and
drainage, fire, water, environmental services, Pima County wastewater, and
utility company regulations. Additionally, the PDSD Engineering Administrator
reviews the assurances in accordance with Section
8.6.2, Subdivision Improvements and Assurances.
      2.   If the CDRC finds that the final plat requires revisions, then:
         a.   The plat will be returned to the subdivider with a letter listing
specific deficiencies and required revisions;
         b.   The subdivider shall resubmit a revised final plat and a letter
which responds to each deficiency in detail and explains any revisions made by
the subdivider to the plat;
         c.   The subdivider continues to resubmit the final plat until such
time as the CDRC recommends approval of the final plat and it is forwarded to
the PDSD Director ; and,
         d.   Any necessary resubmittals will not change or extend the
expiration times commencing at acceptance of a final plat, as provided in this
article.
      3.   Upon completing their review, the CDRC shall forward a
recommendation whether to approve the final plat.
   D.   Decision
      1.   Recommendation and Scheduling with the Mayor and Council
         a.   Upon recommendation of approval by the CDRC and submission of all
required items as detailed in the CDRC approval letter, the PDSD Director shall
forward the final plat to Mayor and Council for consideration;
         b.   Pursuant to Section
8.6.2.A.3, assurances must be approved by the PDSD Engineering Administrator
prior to the Mayor and Council’s consideration of the final plat; and,
         c.   If the plat is dependent on the adoption of a rezoning ordinance,
the Mayor and Council’s consideration of the plat shall be scheduled for the
same agenda as, or on an agenda following, the Mayor and Council consideration
of the rezoning ordinance.
      2.   Mayor and Council Decision and Notice of Decision
      Upon a recommendation by the PDSD Director that the final plat meets all
applicable requirements, the Mayor and Council shall decide whether to approve
or deny the application in a public meeting. The City Clerk shall provide a
notice of the Mayor and Council’s decision to the applicant and any party
requesting such notice.
      3.   Recordation
         a.   When a subdivider has opted not to post assurances and in
accordance with Section
8.6.2.A, a subdivider shall construct all required subdivision improvements at
no expense to the City prior to the recordation of the final plat.
         b.   The City Clerk’s Office shall forward the final plat documents to
the Office of the Pima County Recorder for recordation after approval of the
final plat by Mayor and Council. If the use of the property proposed through
the plat is dependent on the adoption of a rezoning ordinance, the recordation
shall occur after the effective date of any change in zoning.
8.5.   EXPIRATION DATES
8.5.1.   TENTATIVE PLAT
   A.   Tentative Plat Expiration
      1.   The tentative plat approval expires three years from the date of
approval if a final plat has not been approved and recorded within this period.
      2.   When a tentative plat is approved with phases, all phases except
phase one expire four years from the date of approval. A final plat for phase
one must be approved and recorded within three years of tentative plat
approval. A final plat for all other phases must be approved and recorded
within four years of tentative plat approval.
      3.   If the subdivider fails to develop the platted lots or subdivision
 infrastructure and intervening UDC changes make the lots unbuildable (i.e.,
nonconforming), then the subdivider is required to file an amended, conforming
plat.
   B.   Tentative Plat Approval Extension
   A subdivider may request an extension of the tentative plat approval period.
The extension may be granted based on the following:
      1.   For non-phased subdivisions, up to a one-year time extension may be
granted provided there have been no changes in City regulations applicable to
the proposed subdivision since the approval of the tentative plat; or,
      2.   For phased subdivisions, up to a one-year time extension for each
phase of a tentative plat being platted and recorded in phases, provided there
have been no changes in City regulations applicable to the proposed subdivision
since the approval of the tentative plat phase under consideration.
8.5.2.   FINAL PLAT
   A.   Final Plat Approval Period
   A final plat shall be approved and recorded within three years of the
tentative plat approval date. A final plat is subject only to the ordinances in
effect at the time of the tentative plat application except where an ordinance
specifically states that it applies to pending applications.
8.6.   GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR SUBDIVISIONS
8.6.1.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
   The following requirements apply to all subdivisions.
8.6.2.   SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS AND ASSURANCES
   Assurances are required when the assurable infrastructure is not completed
at the time a final plat is recorded. Assurances provide security that the
subdivider will complete necessary improvements . The following requirements
also apply to the subdivider (s) or developers when acceptable substitutions of
assurances are used.
   A.   Requirement
      1.   A subdivider shall construct all required subdivision improvements
at no expense to the City prior to the recordation of the final plat.
      2.   If a subdivider posts assurances to guarantee the completion of the
required assurable infrastructure , the form and the amount of the assurance
shall conform to the requirements of this section and the Administrative Manual
and is satisfactory to the City Attorney’s Office as to form, sufficiency, and
manner of execution.
      3.   Assurances that all required assurable infrastructure will be
completed as approved by the City shall be provided by the subdivider in
accordance with Section
2-09.0.0, Assurances, of the Administrative Manual before a final plat is
forwarded to the Mayor and Council for approval. The PDSD Engineering
Administrator is authorized to execute on behalf of the Mayor and Council
agreements with the subdivider  to ensure that subdivision  assurances  are
provided by the subdivider  in accordance with Section
2-09.0.0 , Assurances, of the Administrative Manual. The PDSD Director  is
authorized to release assurances  when appropriate.
   B.   Acceptable Forms of Assurances
   The following are acceptable forms of assurances . For phased subdivisions,
assurances may be provided separately for the improvements necessary for each
phase.
      1.   Completion/Performance Bond
      A subdivider may post a completion/performance bond for financial
assurances executed by a surety company licensed to do business in the State of
Arizona in an amount approved by the PDSD Engineering Administrator. The PDSD
Engineering Administrator may sign the bond instrument on behalf of the City ,
and the City Attorney shall approve same as to form.
      2.   Escrow Account
      A subdivider may establish an escrow account with the City or a bank or
similar financial institution acceptable to the City .
      3.   Letter of Credit
      A subdivider may provide an irrevocable letter of credit in a sum
approved by the PDSD Engineering Administrator from a bank or other financial
institution or person acceptable to the City . The PDSD Engineering
Administrator is authorized to sign the agreement on behalf of the City , and
the City Attorney’s Office shall approve same as to form.
      4.   Third Party Land Trust
      A subdivider may vest ownership of the property constituting the
subdivision in a Third Party Trustee, with direction that the property in trust
will not be released for sale by the Trustee unless and until the City agrees
to the release. The City will thereafter agree to a full or partial release of
trust property as provided in this section and Section
2-09.0.0, Assurances, of the Administrative Manual. The PDSD Engineering
Administrator is authorized to sign the agreement on behalf of the City  and
the City Attorney shall approve same as to form. The Mayor and Council approval
of the third party  land trust is required if the subdivider  deviates from the
City -approved third party  land trust documents.
      5.   Alternative Forms of Assurances
      The PDSD Director or designee may accept alternate methods to assure the
completion of subdivision improvements where acceptable to the PDSD Director
and the City Attorney’s Office in form and substance. Personal checks are not
accepted. Mayor and Council approval of the alternate assurance method,
agreement, or form(s) is required prior to the approval of the final plat.
   C.   Amount of Assurances
   Except for third party land trust agreements, the PDSD Director or designee
may require a monetary amount for assurance of subdivision improvements not to
exceed one and two- tenths times the estimated cost of construction of the
required improvements .
   D.   Inspection and Acceptance of Improvements for Partial and Final
Releases
      1.   The PDSD Director or designee shall provide for inspection of
required improvements .
      2.   If the PDSD Director or designee finds upon inspection that any of
the required improvements have not been constructed per City approved
documents, or have not been constructed in accordance with the City ’s
construction standards and specifications, the subdivider shall be responsible
for completing or replacing such improvements in accordance with the list of
deficiencies, the City accepted specifications, and approved plans, as outlined
in this article and Section
2-09.0.0, Assurances, of the Administrative Manual.
      3.   Project completion documentation is required to be submitted for
final release as outlined in the PDSD Engineering established procedures in
Section
2-09.0.0, Assurances, of the Administrative Manual.
      4.   The City will not accept the required improvements or release or
reduce any assurance for a subdivided project requiring sewer, water, or
transportation improvements , until the PDSD Director or designee has received
statements from the Director or designee of Tucson Water or other water company
serving the property, the Tucson Department of Transportation, and the Pima
County Regional Wastewater Reclamation Department that such improvements have
been satisfactorily completed. Upon such approval and recommendation by the
City Manager, the Mayor and Council shall accept the improvements for
dedication in accordance with established procedure.
   E.   Partial Release of Assurance
      1.   Partial Release of Subdivision Improvements for Third Party Land
Trust
      Where a Third Party Land Trust is provided as assurance for completion of
improvements , a partial release of a portion of the subdivision may occur,
prior to the completion of all improvements , provided the partial release is
proportional to the level of completion of improvements . Requests for release,
inspections, and approvals shall be in accordance with Section
2-09.0.0, Assurances, of the Administrative Manual.
         a.   Partial Release of Residential Subdivision  Assurances for Third
Party Land Trust
         Up to 75% of the lots held in a third party trust in any particular
phase may be released prior to completion and acceptance of the common-element
improvements (e.g., basins, drainage facilities, sewer lines, water lines,
street  improvements , etc.). Any lot (s) released shall be served by the
completed common-element improvements . Once the common-element improvements
have been accepted, partial releases greater than 75% or a final release may be
granted only when all of the assurable subdivision improvements have been
completed, inspected, accepted by the appropriate agency, and the project
closure documents have been submitted and accepted by the PDSD Engineering
Administrator.
         b.   Commercial Subdivisions for Third Party Land Trust Release
         Up to 60% of the lots in any particular phase may be released prior to
the completion and acceptance of the common-element improvements (e.g., basins,
drainage facilities, sewer lines, water lines, street  improvements , etc.).
Any lot (s) released shall be served by the completed common-element
improvements . Once the common-element improvements have been accepted, partial
releases greater than 60% or a final release may be granted only when all of
the assurable subdivision improvements have been completed, inspected, accepted
by the appropriate agency, and the project closure documents have been
submitted and accepted by the PDSD Engineering Administrator.
      2.   Reduction or Partial Release of Monetary Assurances
      Where a bond, letter of credit, or other monetary assurance is provided
the amount of the assurance may be reduced upon partial completion of
construction or actual dedication of one or more improvements , but, only in a
ratio that the dedicated improvement(s) bears to the total improvements
indicated on the plat. Where a subdivider completes and offers to dedicate the
required improvements for a portion of the final plat, monetary assurances for
such improvements may be reduced only where the improvements can be used and
maintained independently of remaining improvements required for the entire
plat. For example, temporary cul-de-sacs should be provided for incomplete
streets ; water, sewer, and electric facilities should be capable of
independent operation; and adequate access for public safety vehicles shall be
provided. In no case may more than 75%, or 65% for commercial projects , of the
total monetary value of assurances be released prior to completion of all
improvements .
   F.   Substitution of Assurances
   Where a Third Party Land Trust is provided as assurance for completion of
improvements , a substitute assurance may be submitted for review. The
substitute trust shall include those portions of the subdivision to be covered.
Additional substitute assurances may be needed to be in place so that all of
the assurable infrastructure that needs completion is covered. The Third Party
Trust or other types of assurances may be entirely substituted by another form
of assurance using cost estimate procedures based on the remaining improvements
with contingency and mobility costs. Acceptance of substitute assurances is
solely at the discretion of the PDSD Director . The number of substitutes for
any given subdivision may be limited as determined by the PDSD Director .
   G.   Full Release of Assurable Infrastructure
   A final release may be granted only when all of the assurable subdivision
improvements have been completed, inspected, accepted by the appropriate
agency, and the project closure documents have been submitted and accepted by
the PDSD Engineering Administrator.
   H.   Additional Assurances
   Notwithstanding assurances provided, if the PDSD Director , in his sole
discretion reasonably determines that grounds exist that could result in
commercial insecurity that the required improvements will be completed, he or
she may demand additional financial assurances . The neglect or refusal of the
subdivider to provide such additional assurances within 30 days shall result in
the immediate suspension of the issuance of any permits or further permits
unless and until further assurance is provided.
   I.   Expiration or Lapse of Assurances
   If an assurance expires, the PDSD Director shall suspend the issuance of any
permit(s) until such time when assurances have been provided. If the PDSD
Director determines that any applicable assurances have lapsed, become subject
to a bankruptcy or otherwise become ineffective, the PDSD Director reserves the
right to issue a stop work order, stop release of additional lots , and utilize
the financial assurances to complete the assurable items, or apply monetary
penalties as prescribed by law.
8.6.3.   SURVEY MONUMENTS REQUIRED
   The subdivider shall place survey monuments of appropriate type and design
delineating the external boundary of the parcel being subdivided, public
streets , and all public street intersections within or adjacent to the
subdivision , installed in accordance with established practices of the City .
   A.   For subdivisions with tentative plats , the survey monuments shall be
installed after the tentative plat approval and before final plat recordation,
unless the subdivider has posted assurances with the City to assure the
installation of all monuments after recordation.
   B.   Prior to recordation, the minor subdivision documents shall be
submitted to identify all monuments (interior and exterior), which an Arizona
registered land surveyor has set to show compliance with the approved minor
subdivision documents.
8.6.4.   PERMITS FOR MODEL HOMES
   Upon approval of the tentative plat, up to five single-family model homes
may be authorized for construction prior to recordation of the final plat,
provided:
   A.   Sale or occupancy of an individual unit as a residence does not occur
until after recordation of the final plat and the City ’s release of assurances
for improvements ; and,
   B.   The location of each unit is based on the lot configuration approved
for the tentative plat at one unit per proposed lot .
8.6.5.   LAND CLEARING AND SUBDIVISION  GRADING
   A.   Land clearing or grading may begin after grading plans are approved,
provided the plans are prepared in compliance with an approved tentative plat
and such tentative plat is in conformance with the underlying zoning. Mass
graded subdivisions include grading of all the platted lots and other
subdivision improvements by the developer. Custom graded lot  subdivisions
include the road improvements that guarantee access to each lot , and other
subdivision improvements where access to a future building pad is feasible for
each lot .
   B.   Grading plans may be submitted for review prior to approval of the
tentative plat in accordance with Section
2-06.4.9.M, Grading Plan, of the Administrative Manual and Section
2-01.0.0, Excavating and Grading, of the Technical Standards Manual, but cannot
be approved until after the tentative plat has been approved.
   C.   Concurrent review of a grading plan and a tentative plat may be
permitted when submitting a development package in accordance with Section
2-06.0.0 of the Administrative Manual.
   D.   When applicable, phased grading information shall be provided on the
tentative plat and grading plan.
8.6.6.   PLAT  ABANDONMENT
   A recorded plat that is filed for the purpose of abandoning the plat,
meaning reverting to the configuration of land previously subdivided, or
vacating streets or easements previously dedicated to the public; or vacating
or redescribing lot or parcel boundaries previously recorded may be replatted
in accordance with Section
8.4.1, Block Plats, if all other criteria of Section
8.4.1.E, Criteria, are met. Otherwise, the plat shall be replatted in
accordance with Sections
8.4.4, Tentative Plat, and
8.4.5, Final Plats.
8.7.   SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS
8.7.1.   PARKS, RECREATIONAL FACILITIES, FIRE STATIONS, AND SCHOOL SITES
   Where, in accordance with an adopted plan, it is determined that there are
inadequate parks and recreational facilities, fire stations, or school sites,
the Mayor and Council may require that land area within the subdivision be
reserved for one or more of those uses. Such requirement shall be in accordance
with state  subdivision statutes regulating reservation of parks, recreational
facilities, fire stations, and school sites.
(Am. Ord. 11070, 5/14/2013)
8.7.2.   PHASED SUBDIVISIONS
   All plats for subdivisions platted in phases shall comply with this Article
and all other relevant City regulations and standards.
8.7.3.   FLEXIBLE LOT DEVELOPMENT (FLD)
   A.   Purpose
   The purpose of the Flexible Lot Development (FLD) is to provide greater
flexibility and creativity in the design of residential development by:
      1.   Providing incentives to achieve community goals, such as historic
and archaeological preservation, preservation of native vegetation ,
development within low-income areas , and in-fill housing projects ;
      2.   Implementing the goals and objectives of the General Plan , Area
Plans, and Neighborhood Plans;
      3.   Providing open space that is usable and includes suitably located
active and passive recreational amenities, such as trails, walking paths,
picnic areas, and playgrounds;
      4.   Providing for visual, and where achievable, physical connections to
open space areas on adjacent properties;
      5.   Efficiently using land and public facilities by means of a more
economical arrangement of buildings , circulation systems, land uses , and
utilities ;
      6.   Preserving to the greatest extent possible existing Natural
Undisturbed Open Space , environmentally sensitive areas, and landscape
features and amenities, such as significant topography, protected peaks and
ridges , natural vegetation, washes, riparian areas, and floodplains, and
integrating such features with structures and other improvements ;
      7.   Coordinating architectural styles, building forms, and building
relationships within the development and with surrounding land development ;
      8.   Providing high-quality sustainable development within the City that
incorporates “green building ” techniques such as water harvesting, solar
access , and passive solar orientation;
      9.   Mitigating the urban heat island effect by requiring such measures
as canopy trees throughout the FLD project and other acceptable mitigation
efforts; and,
      10.   Creating incentives for appropriate urban infill development on
lots with site constraints.
   B.   Applicability
   FLDs may be developed in the following zones :
      1.   Single-family detached residential development in the SR, SH, RX-1,
and RX-2 zones ;
      2.   Single-family residential development , attached or detached, in the
R-1, MH-1, and MH-2 zones ; and,
      3.   Single-family attached or detached, and multifamily residential
development in the R-2, R-3, O-1, O-2, O-3, C-1, C-2, and C-3 zones .
   C.   General Development Criteria
      1.   Conformance with the General Plan and other Applicable Plans
      An FLD shall be in conformance with the General Plan and any of its
components, including any applicable adopted area and neighborhood plans.
      2.   Applicability of General UDC and Technical Standards Manual
Requirements
      Except as provided in this section, all applicable standards of the UDC
and the Technical Standards Manual apply to FLDs.
      3.   Development Alternatives
      FLDs shall be developed using one of the following alternatives:
         a.   Standard FLD
         Standard FLD projects shall not exceed the dimensional standards for
Development Alternative A in Section
8.7.3.D, Regulations for FLD Projects.
         b.   Maximum Density Option
         FLD projects that meet at least one of the following development
options may develop to the dimensional standards for the Development
Alternative B in Section
8.7.3.D, Regulations for FLD Projects.
            (1)   Low Income Housing
            A minimum of 10% of the project ’s total number of units or minimum
of two units, whichever is greater, are constructed and used for low-income
housing .
            (2)   Housing for the Elderly
            The entire project is designed and constructed only for the
elderly. A covenant shall be recorded for the project site stating that the
housing is restricted for use by the elderly. Residents of an FLD for elderly
shall be at minimum 62 years old.
            (3)   Historic Preservation
            The project includes preservation of a historic site , structure ,
or landmark or leads to the preservation or scientific study and archaeological
documentation of prehistoric or historic buildings or sites, in accordance with
Section
3-01.2.0, Historic Preservation Requirements, of the Technical Standards
Manual. Features eligible for use of this option are those identified in the
required archaeological study as meeting the criteria in the Technical
Standards Manual. A recorded covenant preserving the historical site is
required.
            (4)   Additional Functional Open Space
            The project preserves at least 20% more Functional Open Space than
is required by Section
8.7.3.F.1, Functional Open Space Requirements. The additional open space  shall
be usable for passive or active recreational uses, such as trails, walking
paths, picnic areas, and playgrounds.
            (5)   Additional Open Space within an FLD Greater than 5 Acres
            The project preserves features in a natural state at least 15% more
area than is required by other sections of the UDC , including, but not limited
to: Sections
5.2, Hillside Development Zone;
5.7, Environmental Resource Zone; or
7.7, Native Plant Preservation. These natural features include, but are not
limited to, vegetation, washes, riparian  floodplain, and hillsides.
            (6)   Proximity to an Arterial Street
            The project is located in the City ’s Central Core (as defined in
the City of Tucson’s General Plan ) and is on a designated arterial street near
transit facilities to promote the use of transit and reduce vehicle trips. The
project  density does not conflict with any applicable area or neighborhood
plan.
            (7)   Trail or Wildlife Corridor Dedication
            The FLD provides for dedication of trails or wildlife corridors, or
both, that connect to offsite trails and wildlife corridors as approved by the
Parks and Recreation Department.
            (8)   Green Building
            The project is designed and located to comply with the energy
efficiency requirements listed Section
3-01.3.0, Green Building Requirements, of the Technical Standards Manual.
   D.   Regulations for FLD Projects
   The following regulations are required of all FLD projects :
      1.   Development Alternative A is for standard FLDs.
      2.   Development Alternative B is for Maximum Density Option FLDs in
accordance with Section
8.7.3.C.3.b, Maximum Density Option.
TABLE 8.7.3-1: Dimensional Standards for FLDs
Zone Development Site Coverage (max %) Allowable Density  Building Height (ft)
     Alternative                       (max)
TABLE 8.7.3-1: Dimensional Standards for FLDs
Zone           Development Site Coverage  Allowable Density  Building Height
               Alternative (max %)        (max)              (ft)
SR             A           8              0.25               30
RX-1           A           33             1.00               30
RX-2 & SH      A           33             2.25               25
R-1 &          A           50             5.14               25
MH-1           B           70             6.25               25
MH-2           A           62             8.00               25
               B           75             15.00              25
R-2            A           62             8.71               25
               B           75             22.00              25
R-3            A           70             36.00              40
               B           75             44.00              40
O-1, O-2 & O-3 A           75             22.00              25
C-1            A           75             36.00              25
C-2 & C-3      A           75             44.00              40
 
      3.   Site coverage , which is calculated differently than lot coverage ,
is calculated in accordance with Section
6.4.3, Lot Coverage and Site Coverage.
      4.   Residential density in Flexible Lot Development projects is based on
the developable area (as defined in Section
11.4.5, Definitions – D) of the site .
   E.   Minimum Lot Size
   There is no minimum lot size within an FLD, except as follows.
      1.   Lots in the SR and RX-1 zones shall be at least 18,000 square feet.
      2.   Lots in the RX-2 zone shall be at least 12,000 square feet.
      3.   All lots developed with a septic system shall be at least one acre .
   F.   Open Space Requirements
      1.   Functional Open Space Area Requirements
         a.   Functional open space shall be provided as shown in the following
table:
 
TABLE 8.7.3-2: Functional Open Space Standards
Project Size      Functional Open Space Requirement
5 acres  or less  Less than 13 DU/AC* = 109 SF**/unit
                  13 DU/AC or more = 161 SF/unit
More than 5 acres 269 SF/unit
*DU/AC = Dwelling units per acre
**SF = square feet
 
         b.   Functional open space shall be for an active recreational,
passive recreational or scenic purpose.
         c.   An FLD shall provide functional open space amenities appropriate
for the mix of residents for which the FLD project is designed.
         d.   A homeowners’ association or management organization shall be
established by the developer to be responsible for the ownership, permanent
care, and maintenance of functional open space areas.
         e.   Any portion of the FLD project site that has been dedicated to
and accepted by a public entity for public use as a functional open space
amenity may be included in meeting the functional open space area requirements.
Dedications that meet this requirement include, but are not limited to, parks,
trail, and detention and retention basins that incorporate Multiple-Use
Concepts and Aesthetic Design Guidelines described in Chapter IV of the
Stormwater Detention/Retention Manual.
         f.   The portion of the FLD project site that includes all or portion
of a trail located within a natural open space or natural undisturbed open
space may be included in complying with the functional open space area
requirements.
         g.   Exemptions
         The following FLD projects are exempt from functional open space
requirements:
            (1)   An FLD project with 60 lots or fewer located within one-
quarter of a mile of a City community park of at least 15 acres which does not
require crossing an arterial roadway to reach the park; or,
            (2)   An FLD project zoned SR, SH, RX-1 or RX-2.
      2.   Configuration and Location of Functional Open Space within an FLD
Project
         a.   FLD projects five acres and less. Functional open space amenities
should be configured as contiguous areas, but may also be incorporated into the
design of other elements on the site , such as detention/retention basins and
buffers, in order to make those areas functional.
         b.   FLD projects more than five acres . Functional open space may be
divided into smaller areas if they are distributed throughout the project site
and conveniently located for residents of the FLD project .
         c.   Functional open space shall be conveniently located to and usable
by the maximum number of the residential units on the site .
         d.   To the greatest extent possible, functional open space should not
be comprised of remnant areas that are not usable by residents of the FLD
project .
         e.   Where the project is located near a public preserve , or can
provide connections to open space areas or areas of environmentally or
culturally significant features, the open space shall be configured in a manner
to preserve this connectivity.
   G.   Detention and Retention Basins
      1.   To the greatest degree practicable, detention and retention basins
within an FLD shall be designed as Functional Open Space by incorporating the
Multiple-Use Concepts and Aesthetic Design Guidelines described in Chapter IV
of the Stormwater Detention/Retention Manual, the Floodplain Ordinance, and in
accordance with UDC Section
7.6.6.C, Stormwater Runoff. Functional Open Space  amenities within detention
and retention basins may count toward meeting Functional Open Space
requirements; and, developed in accordance with Section
7.11, Detention and Retention Basins.
   H.   Landscaping , Screening and Wall Requirements
      1.   FLD projects shall comply with Section
7.6, Landscaping and Screening Standards, except as otherwise provided by this
section.
      2.   One canopy tree shall be provided every 40 feet of pedestrian
circulation systems, excluding crossings with streets , alleys, and driveways .
If providing canopy trees every 40 feet is not achievable, the applicant shall:
         a.   Provide the equivalent number of trees that would be obtained
using the 40-foot increment measure; and,
         b.   Distribute the trees within the FLD project site along pedestrian
circulation systems and within functional open space areas.
      3.   Landscape plans shall incorporate water-conserving design as defined
in Section
7.6.6, Use of Water, and as described in the Technical Standards Manual.
      4.   Water harvesting techniques shall be incorporated as part of the
landscape design based on the Water Harvesting Guidance Manual prepared for the
City of Tucson Transportation Department Stormwater Section.
      5.   Mechanical equipment, utility boxes, irrigation equipment and
similar elements shall be screened from adjacent  streets exterior to the
project and from adjacent existing residential development . Screening shall be
architecturally integrated with the overall design of the FLD.
      6.   If a perimeter wall is proposed along an existing public right-of-
way , it shall be constructed of, or painted with, graffiti-resistant
materials. The wall shall incorporate one or more of the following decorative
materials:
         a.   Tile;
         b.   Stone;
         c.   Brick;
         d.   Adobe;
         e.   A textured material such as stucco or plaster; or,
         f.   Metal.
   I.   Parking
   Parking shall comply with Section
7.4, Motor Vehicle and Bicycle Parking, applicable sections of Section
7.6.4.B, Landscaping and Screening in Vehicular Use Areas, and the Technical
Standards Manual, applicable regulations related to accessibility, and the
following criteria.
      1.   Streets within the FLD site for which on-street parking is proposed
shall be designed with parking lanes that comply with Section
10-01.0.0, Street Technical Standards, of the Technical Standards Manual.
      2.   An alley  abutting an existing development shall not be used for
parking access.
      3.   Common parking areas shall meet the following requirements:
         a.   No more than 60 parking spaces may be located in any single
outdoor parking area ;
         b.   There shall be a minimum of 30-foot separation between common
parking areas . Common parking areas shall be separated by a building or
landscaping ;
         c.   The same parking area access lane (PAAL) may provide access to
two or more parking areas ; and,
         d.   Curbed areas shall provide openings to allow water to flow into
landscaped areas and water harvesting basins.
   J.   Circulation and Connectivity
      1.   The right-of-way and pavement widths for internal ways, common
parking areas , streets , roads, or other means of vehicular circulation and
for surface drainage serving the FLD shall be in accordance with Section
10-01.2.4, Parking Lanes, of the Technical Standards Manual and Section
7.4.6, Motor Vehicle Use Area Design Criteria, of the UDC .
      2.   All elements of an FLD, including residential units and recreational
amenities, shall be connected by a pedestrian circulation system.
      3.   Interior pedestrian sidewalks shall connect to sidewalks on abutting
 streets and to abutting commercial and recreational facilities with adjacent
property owner’s consent.
      4.   Bus turn-out lanes and bus waiting shelters shall be provided if
requested by the City .
      5.   Barrier free access to functional open space amenities:
         a.   For purposes of this section, barrier free access is defined as
functional access for semiambulatory and nonambulatory persons .
         b.   Barrier free access to functional open space amenities shall be
provided pursuant to the City ’s adopted Building Code Section 1109.14
(Recreational and Sports Facilities). Exception: FLDs using the Housing for the
Elderly maximum development  option [Section
8.7.3.C.3.b(2)] shall provide barrier free access pursuant to the City ’s
adopted Building Code Section 1109.14 (Recreational and Sports Facilities) or
50%, but not less than one, of each type of functional open space amenity,
whichever is greater.
      6.   Trails that have current or future linkages to other trails, open
space areas or recreation areas shall be provided as determined by the City’s
Parks and Recreation Department.
         a.   Trails shall be constructed in compliance with the design
criteria established for trails by the City of Tucson Parks Department and Pima
County Parks Department.
         b.   Hard and soft surface paths, when required, shall have an average
separation of at least five feet to allow for landscaping that does not
interfere with the paths, except where a reduced width is allowed by the City’s
Parks and Recreation Department.
   K.   Perimeter Yards Along FLD Project Site Boundaries
      1.   Perimeter yards along FLD project site boundaries are required in
accordance the site ’s underlying zone as provided in Section
6.3.4, Dimensional Standards and Exceptions Tables.
      2.   Street  perimeter yards along FLD project site boundaries are
required in accordance with Section
6.4.5.C, Street  Perimeter Yards, unless special zoning requirements dictate a
greater distance or different point of measurement.
   L.   Perimeter Yards on Interior Lots
      1.   The perimeter yard requirements of Section
6.3.4, Dimensional Standards and Exceptions Tables, may be reduced for setbacks
along interior lot lines  to the extent permitted by the City ’s adopted
Building Codes.
      2.   Along interior street lot lines , street  perimeter yards are
required, in accordance with Section
6.4.5.C, Street  Perimeter Yards. The street  setback  may be administratively
reduced by the PDSD Director  based on a finding that the reduced setback
enhances the architectural design or the vehicular circulation in the FLD and a
transportation statement is approved by the City’s Traffic Engineering
division. A street  perimeter yard  reduction request is considered for
approval concurrent with the processing of the plat or site plan , whichever is
applicable.
      3.   Along parking area access lanes (PAALs) , setbacks are required in
accordance with Section
7.4.6.F.2, Setbacks from Access Lanes and PAALs.
   M.   Design Criteria
      1.   Architectural Variation
         a.   Purpose
         To provide architectural diversity, visual interest, and to avoid
monotony in architectural design by requiring variations in such architectural
treatments as color, finished materials, massing and rooflines, orientation of
units, garages and porches.
         b.   Applicability
         The requirements of this section apply to projects meeting the
following criteria:
            (1)   Projects with 20 or more single-family detached residential
units except when residential units are on lots larger than 10,000 square feet
or, where dwelling units are separated by 30 feet or more; or,
            (2)   Elevations of single-family detached units abutting a public
street designated as a collector or arterial street in the Major Streets and
Routes Plan ; or, a private or public street designed and/or designated as a
residential collector street .
         c.   Requirements
            (1)   The same architectural elevation shall not be repeated more
often than every fourth lot .
            (2)   Architectural variation may be accomplished by incorporating
a minimum of two of the following design features into the affected elevations:
different building footprint orientation, building elevation, garage placement,
roof type, ornamentation, or architectural style. The applicant shall work with
the City’s Design Professional to ensure that adequate variation is achieved.
            (3)   Garage Placement. For FLD projects with over 20 or more
single-family detached residential units, no more than 50% of detached
residential units throughout the FLD shall be designed with garages that
protrude from or are flush with the front wall of the living area or front
porch of the house.
         d.   Architectural Variation Plan Required
            (1)   An Architectural Variation Plan (AVP) demonstrating
compliance with the requirements of this section shall be prepared in
accordance with the Section
2-06.5.3.E, Architectural Variation Plan, of the Administrative Manual.
            (2)   The AVP shall be included with the subdivision  plat, site
plan , or building permit submittal.
            (3)   An AVP is reviewed and considered for approval as part of the
subdivision  plat, site plan , or building permit review procedure, whichever
is applicable, with the Design Professional included as the reviewer of the
AVP. The Design Professional will review AVPs for compliance with this Section
and forward his or her findings and recommendation in writing to the PDSD
Director for consideration of approval.
            (4)   The PDSD Director ’s decision may be appealed in accordance
with Section
3.9.1, Design Review Board Appeal Procedure.
            (5)   Conditions of the approved AVP shall be included as notes on
the approved plat or site plan , whichever applies, and the building plan.
            (6)   An AVP shall be approved prior to issuance of a building
permit.
      2.   Transition Edge Treatment and Mitigation for Adjacent Properties
         a.   Transition Edge Treatment
         Where a single-family attached or multi-family FLD project is adjacent
to existing single-family residential development , the FLD shall provide
buffering in order to preserve the privacy of the existing residential
development . Examples of buffering include, but are not limited to,
landscaping , a fence, or a wall. The proposed buffering shall be included as
conditions on the approved subdivision  plat or site plan .
         b.   Privacy Mitigation
            (1)   Applicability
            Privacy mitigation as required by this section is required when
multistory residences are proposed adjacent to existing single story residences
and the existing residences are zoned R-2 or more restrictive.
            (2)   Prohibited Improvements
            Balconies, windows (except for clerestory and translucent windows),
or any other feature on an upper floor that overlook the rear and side yards of
an adjacent residence are prohibited.
            (3)   Privacy Mitigation Plan
            A Privacy Mitigation Plan (PMP) is required demonstrating
compliance with this section.
            (a)   PMPs shall be prepared in accordance with Section
2-06.5.3.F, Privacy Mitigation Plan, of the Administrative Manual.
            (b)   PMPs shall demonstrate that adequate measures, such as
screening, setbacks , building mass, solar access , air circulation, and light
access are incorporated into the design of the project to preserve the existing
residents’ privacy.
            (c)   PMPs shall be included with submittal of the tentative plat
or site plan , whichever is applicable.
            (d)   A PMP is reviewed and considered for approval as part of the
subdivision  plat, site plan , or building permit review procedure, whichever
is applicable, with the Design Professional included as the reviewer of the
AVP. The Design Professional will review the PMP for compliance with this
section and forward his or her findings and recommendation in writing to the
PDSD Director for consideration of approval.
            (e)   The PDSD Director ’s decision may be appealed in accordance
with Section
3.9.1, Design Review Board Appeal Procedure.
            (f)   Conditions of the approved PMP, including a description of
the required mitigation and for which units the mitigation applies, shall be
included as notes on the plat or site plan , whichever applies, and the
building plan.
            (g)   A PMP shall be approved prior to issuance of a building
permit.
      3.   Solar Access and Passive Solar
         a.   Solar Access
         Dwelling units should be configured to allow solar access to adjacent
 structures in accordance with Section
7.3, Solar Considerations.
         b.   Passive Solar
         FLD projects should incorporate passive solar design when practicable.
      4.   Alternative Compliance.
      Alternative Compliance requests may be considered for projects requiring
compliance with Section
8.7.3.M.1. These requests shall be made per Administrative Manual Section
2-06.5.3.E, Architectural Variation Plan.
         a.    Design Professional Review Required
         The Design Professional shall review the request for compliance with
the criteria listed below:
            (1)   meets the purpose of the FLD (Sec.
8.7.3.M.1);
            (2)   does not create a safety hazard on an adjacent property;
            (3)   does not create a drainage problem on an adjacent property;
            (4)   reduces garage dominance in the overall subdivision design
proposal; and,
            (5)   is found to be a best practice.
         b.    The Design Professional shall submit findings and
recommendations to the PDSD Director in writing.
         c.    Best Practices
         For purposes of this section a best practice refers to:
            (1)   design criteria used by a comparable jurisdiction;
            (2)   a study or design standard used by the City ;
            (3)   a report, book, or study prepared by an expert with
residential architecture or subdivision design expertise;
            (4)   endorsed methods by a professional organization such as the
American Institute of Architects (AIA); or,
            (5)   a comparable study or design concept recommended by the
City's Design Professional.
         d.   PDSD Director Approval
         The PDSD Director may approve Alternative Compliance proposals upon
making a finding in accordance with Section
8.7.3.M.1.
   N.   Management of Common Properties
   The subdivision  plat will provide for the ownership, control, maintenance,
and liability of all common areas through the homeowner’s association or joint
and several liability of all property owners.
   O.   FLD Phasing Requirements
   An FLD may be phased for construction and development ; however, the FLD
shall be considered a single project for purposes of allowable densities, open
space , common areas, hydrology, and grading , provided that all of the
following conditions are met.
      1.   The entire FLD shall be platted as one project , as setbacks and
other FLD requirements are based on the entire FLD site . If the FLD is platted
by phase, then each phase shall comply with requirements as a separate project
, including the following:
         a.   Homeowners’ association documentation shall allow for the
annexation of future phases if designed to work as one project ; and,
         b.   If access to future phases is designed to be through the phase
being platted, right-of-way easements or other acceptable legal instruments
shall be provided on/with the plats and homeowners’ association documents.
      2.   If the FLD contains common areas, the entire FLD shall be subject to
an overall set of comprehensive conditions, covenants, and restrictions which
establish the character of the development and create an overall homeowners’
association . If the documentation for the overall homeowners’ association does
not indicate responsibility for each phase within the FLD, then the excluded
phase shall have its own homeowners’ association which will be responsible for
owning and maintaining any common area, open space , natural area, or
recreation area within the phase.
      3.   The developer shall submit a document to show how the project
amenities and site  improvements will be developed in proportion to the number
of residential units developed. The site  improvements shall be designed to
function independently for each phase and as each new phase is added. Such
project amenities and site  improvements shall be located adjacent to or within
developed or developing phases and on property that is abutting or physically
connected to the residential development in order to provide access between the
amenity and the development it serves.
      4.   At no time during the construction of the FLD shall the number of
constructed residential units per acre of developed land exceed the overall
density for the land area in each phase and as approved by the recorded plat
   P.   FLD Submittal, Review, and Decision
   An FLD shall be prepared, processed, and have a tentative and final plat or
site plan , whichever is applicable, approved prior to issuance of a building
permit with the following exception. Model homes may be authorized for
construction prior to recordation of the final plat in accordance with Section
8.6.4, Permits for Model Homes.
      1.   Tentative Plat
         a.   A tentative plat for an FLD shall be prepared in accordance with
Section
2-06.0.0, Development Package, of the Administrative Manual, including Section
2-06.5.0, Flexible Lot Development - Additional Requirements, of the
Administrative Manual.
         b.   A tentative plat for an FLD is processed and considered for
approval in accordance with Section
8.4.4, Tentative Plat, with the following exceptions:
            (1)   An applicant shall hold a neighborhood meeting in accordance
with Section
3.2.2.C.1.b prior to submitting a FLD application.
            (2)   Notice of the submittal of an FLD application shall be sent
to the applicant, property owners within 400 feet of the project site , and
neighborhood associations within one mile of the project site .
      2.   Final Plat
         a.   A final subdivision  plat for an FLD shall be prepared in
accordance with Sections
2-07.0.0, Final Plat , Block Plats , Minor Subdivisions , and Condominium
 Plats, and 2-06.5.0, Flexible Lot Development - Additional Requirements, of
the Administrative Manual.
         b.   A final subdivision  plat for an FLD is processed and considered
for approval in accordance with Section
8.4.5, Final Plat.
      3.   Site Plan
         a.   A site plan is required only if a subdivision  plat is not
required.
         b.   A site plan for an FLD shall be prepared in accordance with
Section
2-06.0.0, Development Package, of the Administrative Manual, including Section
2-06.5.0, Flexible Lot Development - Additional Requirements, of the
Administrative Manual.
         c.   An FLD site plan is reviewed and considered for approval in
accordance with Section
3.3.3, PDSD Director Approval Procedure.
(Am. Ord. 11171, 5/20/2014; Am. Ord. 11320, 11/17/2015; Am. Ord. 11732, 2/19/
2020)
ARTICLE 9: NONCONFORMING USES , BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
Section
9.1.   GENERAL
   
9.1.1.   Introduction
   
9.1.2.   Applicability
   
9.1.3.   Continuation Permitted
   
9.1.4.   Determination of Nonconforming Status
   
9.1.5.   Repairs and Maintenance
   
9.1.6.   Restoring Unsafe Structures
   
9.1.7.   Tenancy and Ownership
9.2.   NONCONFORMING USE
   
9.2.1.   Discontinuance of Nonconforming Use
   
9.2.2.   Expansion of a Nonconforming Use
   
9.2.3.   Substitution With a Use Within the Same Land Use Class
   
9.2.4.   Substitution With a Use From a Different Land Use Class
   
9.2.5.   Change in Nonconforming Status
9.3.   NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE
   
9.3.1.   Reconstruction
   
9.3.2.   Expansion
   
9.3.3.   Loss of Nonconforming Status
   
9.3.4.   Nonconforming Parking Areas
9.1.   GENERAL
9.1.1.   INTRODUCTION
   Uses, buildings , or structures that came into existence legally but that do
not comply with one or more requirements of the Unified Development Code (UDC)
may continue to operate or be used as provided below. A nonconforming use may
be discontinued, resumed, expanded, or substituted with another nonconforming
use , and nonconforming structures may be reconstructed or expanded as provided
below, except for advertising and outdoor signs, which are regulated by the
Sign Code,
Article 7A, Sign Standards.
(Am. Ord. 11508, 12/5/2017)
9.1.2.   APPLICABILITY
   This Article applies to nonconforming uses , buildings , or structures
created by initial adoption of or amendments to the UDC . It also applies to
nonconforming uses , buildings , or structures that were legal nonconforming
under previously applicable ordinances and nonconforming created by the
adoption of original City zoning for a newly annexed areas, even if the type or
extent of nonconformity is different.
9.1.3.   CONTINUATION PERMITTED
   Any nonconforming use , building , or structure that legally existed on
January 2, 2013, or that becomes nonconforming upon the adoption of any
amendment to the UDC or original City zoning may be continued in accordance
with the provisions of this article.
(Am. Ord. 11070, 5/14/2013)
9.1.4.   DETERMINATION OF NONCONFORMING STATUS
   The burden of establishing that a nonconforming use , building , or
structure is a legal nonconformity, in all cases, is solely upon the owner of
such nonconformity. Application requirements are established by the Planning
and Development Services Department (PDSD) Director .
9.1.5.   REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE
   Incidental repairs and normal maintenance of nonconforming buildings or
structures are permitted unless such repairs increase the extent of
nonconformity or are otherwise expressly prohibited by the UDC . Nothing in
this article shall be construed to prevent structures from being structurally
strengthened or restored to a safe condition to conform to the City ’s adopted
Building or Fire Code.
9.1.6.   RESTORING UNSAFE STRUCTURES
   Nothing in this UDC shall prevent the strengthening, restoration, or
upgrading of a structure to conform to the City ’s adopted Building or Fire
Code.
9.1.7.   TENANCY AND OWNERSHIP
   The status of a nonconformity is not affected by changes of tenancy,
ownership, or management.
9.2.   NONCONFORMING USE
   A nonconforming use may be discontinued, resumed, expanded, or substituted
with another nonconforming use as provided below.
9.2.1.   DISCONTINUANCE OF A NONCONFORMING USE
   A nonconforming use may be resumed if thenonconforming use activity has been
discontinued for less than six months.
   A.   A discontinued nonconforming use may be substituted with another
nonconforming use , as provided by Section
9.2.3, Substitution with a Use within the Same Land Use Class, and Section
9.2.4, Substitution with a Use from a Different Land Use Class, provided such
nonconforming use  is substituted within the six-month period.
   B.   The right to resume a nonconforming use is lost if the discontinuance
is for six months or more or if a change to a conforming use occurs.
Determination of discontinuance is based upon a consideration of relevant
activities and records, including, but not limited to, business license records
and/or utility records and the continued maintenance of the property which
indicates the intent to continue or discontinue such use. Property left in
disrepair or in an unkempt condition is considered in the discontinuance of the
use.
9.2.2.   EXPANSION OF A NONCONFORMING USE
   A nonconforming use may be expanded within an existing or new structure or
in land area subject to approval by the Zoning Examiner in accordance with
Section
3.4.3, Zoning Examiner Special Exception Procedure, and provided such expansion
complies with the following standards:
   A.   The expansion is being undertaken within five years of the time the use
became nonconforming;
   B.   The expansion complies with the UDC standards. These standards include,
but are not limited to, setbacks applicable to the use itself or for new
construction, bicycle and motor vehicle parking standards, and landscaping and
screening standards;
   C.   The expansion is for the principal use or for a use that is accessory
and incidental to the operation of the existing nonconforming use ;
   D.   The amount of expansion does not exceed 50% of the floor area of the
existing building or land area devoted to the existing nonconforming use .
Incremental expansions, cumulatively, shall not exceed the 50% provision;
   E.   The expansion area adjoins the land area, within the same lot , which
houses the nonconforming use ; and,
   F.   The expansion must comply with the development standards listed for the
Land Use Class of the nonconforming use in the most restrictive zone in which
the nonconforming use is permitted as of right.
9.2.3.   SUBSTITUTION WITH A USE WITHIN THE SAME LAND USE CLASS
   An existing nonconforming use may be substituted with the same use or
another use from the same Land Use Class without affecting the nonconforming
status of the use or structures on the property. The substitution may be
approved in accordance with Section
3.3.3, PDSD Director Approval Procedure, if the substitute use complies with
Section
9.2.4.B, .C, and .D.
9.2.4.   SUBSTITUTION WITH A USE FROM A DIFFERENT LAND USE CLASS
   A nonconforming use may be substituted with a use from a Land Use Class that
is different from the one to which the existing nonconforming use belongs,
provided it is approved in accordance with Section
3.4.3, Zoning Examiner Special Exception Procedure, and provided the use
complies with the following standards before and after the substitute use is in
operation:
   A.   The substitute use is a use permitted in the most restrictive zoning
classification in which the existing nonconforming use is permitted as of
right;
   B.   The substitute use does not generate additional traffic or noise, have
longer hours of operation, have additional outside lighting, or cause other
negative impacts on adjoining properties greater than those associated with the
existing nonconforming use ;
   C.   The substitute use provides parking as required by the UDC . A
modification to the parking standards may be requested in accordance with
Section
7.4.10, Parking Design Modification Request, or Sections
3.10.1 and 2.10.3, Board of Adjustment Variance Procedure; and,
   D.   The substitute use does not propose an extension or enlargement of the
structure or of the areas occupied by the nonconforming use , except as
provided for expansion in Section
9.2.2, Expansion of a Nonconforming Use.
9.2.5.   CHANGE IN NONCONFORMING STATUS
   When a substitute use is allowed in a zoning district that is a more
restrictive zone than the zoning district in which the existing nonconforming
use is first allowed, the nonconforming status for that parcel changes to the
more restrictive  zoning district .
9.3.   NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE
   A nonconforming structure may be reconstructed or expanded as provided
below.
9.3.1.   RECONSTRUCTION
   A.   Any nonconforming structure or groups of nonconforming structures
damaged by natural causes, such as, but not limited to, fire, flood, and
lightning, may be reconstructed and used as before with the following
limitations.
      1.   Permits to reconstruct the structure must be issued within 12 months
of the occurrence.
      2.   The reconstruction of the structure may not exceed the original
footprint or square footage as it existed at the time of the occurrence.
   B.   Except as set forth in Section
9.2.1, Discontinuance of a Nonconforming Use, a nonconforming structure  that
is demolished loses its nonconforming status.
9.3.2.   EXPANSION
   Nonconforming structures may continue to be utilized as they existed at the
time such structures became nonconforming; however, any expansions made to
nonconforming structures after the date of the creation of the nonconformity
must be in compliance with current standards. The proposed expansion of a
nonconforming building or structure to rebuild any part of a building damaged
or demolished due to a government act, such as right-of-way condemnation, does
not count toward the 50% expansion standards of Section
9.2.2, Expansion of a Nonconforming Use; however, any new construction must
comply with the UDC .
9.3.3.   LOSS OF NONCONFORMING STATUS
   When a building or structure is altered to comply with applicable
development standards of the underlying zoning, the nonconforming status of
that building or structure is terminated.
9.3.4.   NONCONFORMING PARKING AREAS
   Nonconforming parking areas may be reconstructed, repaved, restriped, or
improved with landscaping , additional buffers, lighting, or similar
modifications, including the redesign of the parking area layout. The proposed
modifications are processed in accordance with Section
3.3.3, PDSD Director Approval Procedure, if the modifications meet the
following standards:
   A.   The modifications are in the interest of public health and safety;
   B.   The modifications do not increase the intensity of the nonconforming
use of the parking lot ; and,
   C.   There is a reduction, or no change, in the adverse impact of the
nonconforming parking lot on adjacent residentially zoned properties.
ARTICLE 10: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
Section
10.1.   PURPOSE
10.2.   ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY
   
10.2.1.   Compliance Review, Proposed Development
   
10.2.2.   Compliance Review, During Construction
   
10.2.3.   Compliance Review, Existing Development
   
10.2.4.   Compliance Certification, Existing Premises
   
10.2.5.   Continued Compliance for Approved Site Plans
   
10.2.6.   Revocation of Zoning Compliance Approval
10.3.   VIOLATIONS
   
10.3.1.   Violation Declared Civil Infraction
   
10.3.2.   Violation of a Board of Adjustment (B/A) Decision
   
10.3.3.   Violation of Rezoning Condition
   
10.3.4.   Violation of Conditions of Approval
   
10.3.5.   Violation of a Site Plan
   
10.3.6.   Violation of Plat Condition
   
10.3.7.   Sign Violations , Enforcement, Penalties
10.4.   PENALTIES AND REMEDIES
   
10.4.1.   Actions by the Zoning Administrator
   
10.4.2.   Action by the City Attorney
   
10.4.3.   Action by the PDSD Director
   
10.4.4.   Additional Penalties for Unauthorized Demolition of Historic
Structures
   
10.4.5.   Penalties for Violation of Native Plant Preservation Standards
10.1.   PURPOSE
   This article is established to provide a clear division of authority in the
enforcement of the Unified Development Code (UDC) and to establish procedures
to enforce compliance with the UDC .
10.2.   ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY
   Enforcement of UDC provisions is the responsibility of the Zoning
Administrator as provided by state law. The Zoning Administrator is assisted by
the Planning and Development Services Department (PDSD), the Housing and
Community Development Department (HCDD), and other City departments in
enforcement as provided by this article. Enforcement is ensured as follows:
10.2.1.   COMPLIANCE REVIEW, PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT
   No land may be used or occupied; no site improvement, modification, or
construction started; no existing use or structure expanded, reconstructed,
changed, or otherwise altered; and no land may be divided into multiple parcels
until compliance with the provisions of the UDC has been certified through a
zoning review process by PDSD. No City agency may issue a permit for excavation
, grubbing, grading , paving, demolition, or construction of any sort before
certification of compliance with provisions of the UDC has been determined by
PDSD. In the event a zoning regulation requires interpretation, such
interpretation shall be issued by the Zoning Administrator in accordance with
Sections
1.5, Interpretations of the Unified Development Code.
10.2.2.   COMPLIANCE REVIEW, DURING CONSTRUCTION
   Monitoring of construction for compliance with plans approved through the
zoning review process as required in Section
10.2.1, Compliance Review, Proposed Development, is the responsibility of PDSD.
The PDSD shall monitor the implementation of the proposed development to ensure
compliance with the plans approved for zoning compliance. PDSD has the
authority to suspend construction when construction does not conform with the
plans approved for zoning compliance.
10.2.3.   COMPLIANCE REVIEW, EXISTING DEVELOPMENT
   Any land used or occupied; any site improvement, modification, or
construction started; any existing use or structure expanded, reconstructed,
changed, or otherwise altered; and any land divided into multiple parcels
without certification of compliance with the provisions of the UDC through a
zoning review process is considered a violation of the UDC . Enforcement of
violations shall be in accordance with Section
10.4, Penalties and Remedies.
10.2.4.   COMPLIANCE CERTIFICATION, EXISTING PREMISES
   The Zoning Administrator, upon written request, shall issue a written
determination on whether an existing use or building was legally established in
compliance with zoning regulations at the time the use was established or the
structure was constructed, in accordance with Section
1.5, Interpretations of the Unified Development Code.
10.2.5.   CONTINUED COMPLIANCE FOR APPROVED SITE PLANS
   Once a site plan is completed, the approved site plan remains as part of the
public record and runs continuously with the land, regardless of ownership.
Change of use , removal or modification of improvements (including landscaping
, screening, and parking) shown on the plan, or additions made without going
through the site plan process for approval for a change in the approved site
plan constitute a zoning violation .
10.2.6.   REVOCATION OF ZONING COMPLIANCE APPROVAL
   Continued operation of a land use activity for which a zoning compliance
certificate or approval has been revoked constitutes a violation of the UDC and
shall be pursued in accordance with Section
10.4, Penalties and Remedies.
10.3.   VIOLATIONS
   The Zoning Administrator is responsible for assuring that violations of the
provisions of the UDC are mitigated, with assistance from the PDSD, the City
Attorney’s Office, the HCDD, and other City departments as provided by the City
Manager and the Mayor and Council.
10.3.1.   VIOLATION DECLARED CIVIL INFRACTION
   It is a civil infraction for any person , firm, or corporation to violate,
disobey, omit, neglect, refuse to comply with, or to resist the enforcement of
any of the provisions of the UDC . Each day that such violation constitutes a
separate infraction.
10.3.2.   VIOLATION OF A BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT (B/A) DECISION
   Failure to comply with the requirements or conditions of approval from the
B/A shall constitute a violation of the UDC .
10.3.3.   VIOLATION OF REZONING CONDITION
   Failure to comply with the requirements or conditions of approval on a
rezoning ordinance adopted by the Mayor and Council constitutes a violation of
the UDC .
10.3.4.   VIOLATION OF CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL
   Failure to comply with the requirements or conditions of approval on any of
the various zoning compliance procedures as provided by the UDC , such as, but
not limited to, Special Exception, Design Development Option, Temporary Use, or
Home Occupation procedures, constitutes a violation of the UDC .
10.3.5.   VIOLATION OF A SITE PLAN
   Failure to comply with conditions placed on an approved site plan shall
constitute a violation of the UDC .
10.3.6.   VIOLATION OF PLAT CONDITION
   Failure to comply with the UDC conditions and requirements of a tentative or
final plat, as approved, shall constitute a violation of the UDC .
10.3.7.   SIGN VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT, PENALTIES
   A.   Violation a Public Nuisance
      If any person erects, alters, relocates or maintains a sign in violation
of the provisions of the sign standards , it is declared a public nuisance ,
and the City Attorney is authorized to bring an action in a court of competent
jurisdiction to enjoin such person from continuing the violation .
   B.   Violation Declared a Civil Infraction
      It shall be a civil infraction for any person to violate any of the
provisions of the sign standards .
   C.   Abandoned and Discontinued Signs; Obsolete Sign Copy
      1.   Nonconforming Signs
         Any nonconforming sign or nonconforming sign structure that is either
discontinued for a period of six months or abandoned shall be removed by the
owner of the sign or owner of the premises.
      2.   Obsolete Sign Copy
         Obsolete sign copy on either a nonconforming or conforming sign shall
be removed by the owner of the sign or owner of the premises. Obsolete sign
copy shall be removed by replacing the sign face with a blank face, replacing
the obsolete sign copy with copy that is not obsolete, or removing the sign
structure .
      3.   Determination of Discontinuance
         Recording of determination of discontinued nonconforming sign. The
zoning administrator or designee may send notice by certified or registered
mail or hand delivery to the record owner or occupier of the property to abate
a violation of this section, directing abatement within 30 days from the date
the notice was mailed or delivered. In making a determination that a sign or
sign structure is either abandoned or discontinued, or that sign copy is
obsolete, the zoning administrator may consider:
         a.   Whether the property on which the sign is located is vacant or
unoccupied;
         b.   The length of time the property is vacant or unoccupied;
         c.   The condition of the property;
         d.   The status of any business licenses, permits, or certificates of
occupancy;
         e.   Utility records for the property;
         f.   Any acts taken by any person with respect to the property; and
         g.   Any other factor the zoning administrator considers relevant to
this determination.
      4.   Temporary Signs
         Temporary signs shall be deemed discontinued when the time, event or
purpose to which the sign pertains has passed or otherwise no longer applies,
and shall be removed as directed in a written notification by the zoning
administrator.
   D.   Illegal Signs
      Illegal signs are those that do not meet the requirements of the sign
standards and that have not received nonconforming status.
   E.   Removal of Abandoned, Prohibited and Illegal Signs by the Zoning
Administrator
      The zoning administrator shall enforce the sign standards in accordance
with one or more of the following procedures:
      1.   Administrative Enforcement
         a.   For an abandoned or discontinued sign, the zoning administrator
or designee may send notice by certified or registered mail or hand delivery to
the record owner or occupier of the property to abate the nuisance within 30
days from the date the notice was mailed or delivered.
         b.   For a prohibited or illegal sign, the zoning administrator or
designee may send notice by certified or registered mail or hand delivery to
the record owner or occupier of the property to abate the nuisance within five
days from the date the notice was mailed or delivered.
         c.   The zoning administrator shall specify in the notice the nature
of the complaint and penalties and abatement remedies for the violation .
Abatement remedies shall consist of one or both of the following remedies:
            (1)   Removal of the sign; or
            (2)   Obtaining the required permits and bringing the sign into
compliance with the sign standards .
      2.   Summary Abatement
         The zoning administrator or designee may immediately remove any
dangerous sign or sign that creates an imminent threat to public safety. The
zoning administrator may immediately remove any prohibited sign or illegal sign
that is located within the public right-of-way . Illegal signs located within
the public right-of-way are hereby determined to create an imminent threat to
public safety.
      3.    Civil Citation
         The zoning administrator or designee may issue or cause to be issued a
civil citation or civil complaint to any person violating the provisions of the
sign standards .
   F.   Administrative Appeal
      Review of decisions of the zoning administrator may be taken in the
following ways:
      1.   Appeal of decisions of the zoning administrator relating to the sign
standards and requests for variances shall be made pursuant to Unified
Development Code .
      2.   Proceedings involving the removal of illegal, abandoned or
prohibited signs shall be conducted pursuant to this article.
      3.   In all other cases and whenever a violation of any of the technical
codes or this article is determined, whether during the construction or plan
review stage, and the applicant wishes to appeal the decision of the staff
because of code interpretations, unreasonable hardship or other acceptable
reasons, an appeal may be made to the zoning administrator pursuant to the
provisions of the applicable code.
   G.   Penalty
      1.   Any person  found responsible for a violation  of the sign standards
shall be guilty of a civil infraction and punished in accordance with the
provisions outlined in Chapter 8 of the Tucson Code (City Court). If there is
any conflict between the procedures of this section and the general procedures
of Chapter 8, this section is controlling.
      2.   Upon a finding of responsibility, the magistrate shall impose the
penalties (fine and abatement) provided under the Chapter 8 of the Tucson Code
(City Court - Penalties). Upon expiration of the abatement time, the magistrate
shall order the City to abate the violation  in accordance with the provisions
set forth in section below.
      3.   Except where prohibited by law, each day the violation continues
shall constitute a separate offense.
   H.   Abatement by the City After Court Order
      1.   Pursuant to the summary abatement provisions or after entry of a
court order directing removal of an offending sign, the City or its agents may
enter upon the property and cause the offending sign to be removed at the
expense of the owner, tenant, lessee or occupant either jointly or severally.
      2.   A verified statement of the costs or expense shall be sent by
certified or registered mail to the last known address of the record owner and
to the lessee, tenant or occupant. The record owner or the lessee shall be
liable jointly or severally for the payment of said cost or expense.
      3.   The payment for costs or expenses shall be in addition to any civil
penalty imposed pursuant to Chapter 8 of the Tucson Code (City Court).
(Ord. 11508, 12/5/2017)
10.4.   PENALTIES AND REMEDIES
10.4.1.   ACTIONS BY THE ZONING ADMINISTRATOR
   The Zoning Administrator with assistance from the HCDD may take any of the
following actions to ensure enforcement of the UDC and any condition placed on
development of a property due to an administrative or legislative decision or
action by a City Review Authority described in Article 2 of the UDC :
   A.   Conduct an investigation of any site with the express permission of the
owner or tenant. If the owner or tenant refuses permission to conduct the
investigation, the Zoning Administrator shall issue a citation pursuant to
Chapter 11, Art. VI of the Tucson Code, based on the testimony of the
complainant;
   B.   Serve written notice upon the owner, agent, or tenant of the property,
who is the subject of the violation , requiring cessation or correction of the
violation ;
   C.   Issue a citation pursuant to Chapter 8 of the Tucson Code;
   D.   Report violations to the City Attorney as appropriate;
   E.   Report violations to the Planning and Development Services Department
(PDSD) Director as appropriate; or,
   F.   Take such further action as deemed appropriate to assure compliance.
10.4.2.   ACTION BY THE CITY ATTORNEY
   If any property or improvement thereon is used in violation of the
provisions of the UDC , the City Attorney, in addition to other remedies, may
institute any appropriate action or proceeding to:
   A.   Restrain, correct, or abate such violation ;
   B.   Prevent the occupancy of such building , structure, or land; or,
   C.   Prevent any additional violation arising from further conduct,
business, or use, in or about such premises.
10.4.3.   ACTION BY THE PDSD DIRECTOR
   The PDSD Director has the authority to disconnect or order utility companies
to disconnect utility services to the premises involved in a violation until
compliance is met, subject to the following:
   A.   No such action by the PDSD Director may be taken until ten days after
receipt by the tenant or by the owner of the premises of written notice of
intent to take action;
   B.   If a written request for review of the matter is received within ten
days of receipt of the notice of intent, the action by the PDSD Director is
stayed until a hearing thereon by the Board of Adjustment (B/A) or hearing as
required by Chapter 8 of the Tucson Code is held; and,
   C.   This provision does not preclude the use of any other enforcement
method provided in the Tucson Code or the Arizona Revised Statutes.
10.4.4.   ADDITIONAL PENALTIES FOR UNAUTHORIZED DEMOLITION OF HISTORIC
STRUCTURES
   Penalties for the unauthorized demolition of historic structures are in
accordance with Section
5.8.10.E.9.
10.4.5.   PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION OF NATIVE PLANT PRESERVATION STANDARDS
   In addition to the general remedies authorized by Sections
10.4.1 through
10.4.3, any violation  of Section
7.7, Native Plant Preservation, is subject to the following enforcement,
penalties, fines, and other remedies:
   A.   Fines
   Any person who, individually or through the acts of another person ,
intentionally or negligently damages, destroys, or removes from the site any
protected native plant , except as authorized by an approved Native Plant
Preservation Plan , is subject to the following:
      1.   A fine as determined for the damage, destruction, or removal from
the site of each protected native plant based upon the following schedule:
         a.   For each viable Saguaro: a minimum of $200 per foot of main trunk
and $200 per foot of each arm with a maximum not to exceed $2,500 per Saguaro;
         b.   For each viable protected native tree or shrub: a minimum of $300
per caliper inch measured at six inches for single-trunked specimens and 12
inches for multi-trunked specimens above grade level at the base of the tree
with a maximum not to exceed $2,500 per tree or shrub; or,
         c.   For all other viable protected native cacti or succulents: a
minimum of $300 per specimen with a maximum not to exceed $2,500 per cactus.
      2.   A fine of not less than $500 nor more than $2,500 if plant materials
are damaged , destroyed, or removed from the site prior to approval of a Native
Plant Preservation Plan .
   B.   Additional Penalties
   Any person who, individually or through the acts of another person ,
intentionally or negligently damages, destroys, or removes from the site any
protected native plant , except as authorized by an approved Native Plant
Preservation Plan , may be subject to one or more of the following, in addition
to any fines imposed in accordance with Section
10.4.5.A:
      1.   Mitigation in accordance with Section
7.7.5, Plant Preservation Standards, and any supplemental mitigation
determined to be appropriate to restore the natural habitat and plant
communities which have been damaged , destroyed, or removed from the site ;
      2.   Supplemental maintenance and monitoring requirements for protected
native plants following the final inspection performed on the site for a period
not to exceed eight years;
      3.   Revocation of zoning compliance for any building permits which have
been issued for the development ; or,
      4.   Immediate suspension by the PDSD Director of any permits issued by
the City for development of the property. Any such suspension shall remain in
effect until permits expire unless the violation in a manner which is
satisfactory to the PDSD Director . The decision by the PDSD Director to
suspend any permit, or to reject a proposal to provide the mitigation necessary
for the reinstatement of the permits, shall be appealable pursuant to PDSD’s
established procedures.
   C.   Recording of Permit Suspension or Revocation
   Where any permit issued by the City is suspended until its expiration
pursuant to Section
10.4.5.B.4, no new permit may be issued for the property until any fines issued
pursuant to Section
10.4.5.A have been fully paid and all mitigation required pursuant to Section
10.4.5.B.1 has been fully performed. A notice of this requirement for the
issuance of any future development permit on the property shall be recorded on
the property by the PDSD Director with the Pima County Recorder.
ARTICLE 11: DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
Section
11.1.   ARTICLE ORGANIZATION
11.2.   GENERAL RULES FOR CONSTRUCTION OF LANGUAGE
   
11.2.1.   Heading
   
11.2.2.   Illustration
   
11.2.3.   Tenses and Numbers
   
11.2.4.   Conjunctions
   
11.2.5.   Undefined Terms
11.3.   DEFINITIONS OF LAND USE GROUPS, CLASSES, AND TYPES
   
11.3.1.   Purpose and Provisions
   
11.3.2.   Agricultural Use Group
   
11.3.3.   Civic Use Group
   
11.3.4.   Commercial Services Use Group
   
11.3.5.   Industrial Use Group
   
11.3.6.   Recreation Use Group
   
11.3.7.   Residential Use Group
   
11.3.8.   Restricted Adult Activities Use Group
   
11.3.9.   Retail Trade Use Group
   
11.3.10.   Storage Use Group
   
11.3.11.   Utilities Use Group
   
11.3.12.   Wholesaling Use Group
11.4.   OTHER TERMS DEFINED
   
11.4.1.   Purpose
   
11.4.2.   Definitions-A
   
11.4.3.   Definitions-B
   
11.4.4.   Definitions-C
   
11.4.5.   Definitions-D
   
11.4.6.   Definitions-E
   
11.4.7.   Definitions-F
   
11.4.8.   Definitions-G
   
11.4.9.   Definitions-H
   
11.4.10.   Definitions-I
   
11.4.11.   Definitions-J
   
11.4.12.   Definitions-K
   
11.4.13.   Definitions-L
   
11.4.14.   Definitions-M
   
11.4.15.   Definitions-N
   
11.4.16.   Definitions-O
   
11.4.17.   Definitions-P
   
11.4.18.   Definitions-Q
   
11.4.19.   Definitions-R
   
11.4.20.   Definitions-S
   
11.4.21.   Definitions-T
   
11.4.22.   Definitions-U
   
11.4.23.   Definitions-V
   
11.4.24.   Definitions-W
   
11.4.25.   Definitions-X
   
11.4.26.   Definitions-Y
   
11.4.27.   Definitions-Z
11.1.   ARTICLE ORGANIZATION
   This article includes the rules of interpretation, rules of measurement, and
the definitions for terms used in this Unified Development Code (UDC) .
11.1.1.   Section
11.2, General Rules for Construction of Language, establishes the rules related
to word usage and the construction of language used in this Code.
11.1.2.   Section
11.3, Definitions of Land Use Groups and Classes, includes definitions for land
use groups, land use classes, and many land use types.
11.1.3.   Section
11.4, Other Terms Defined, includes the definitions for all other terms used in
this Code.
11.2.   GENERAL RULES FOR CONSTRUCTION OF LANGUAGE
   The following general rules of construction apply to the textual provisions
of the UDC .
11.2.1.    HEADING
   Section and subsection headings do not govern, limit, modify, or in any
manner affect the scope, meaning, or intent of any provision.
11.2.2.    ILLUSTRATION
   In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of any
provision and any illustration, the text shall prevail.
11.2.3.    TENSES AND NUMBERS
   Words used in the present tense include the future, and words used in the
singular include the plural and the plural the singular, unless the context
clearly indicates contrary.
11.2.4.    CONJUNCTIONS
   Unless the context clearly indicates contrary, the following conjunctions
are interpreted as follows.
   A.   “And” indicates that all connected items or provisions apply.
   B.   “Or” indicates that the connected items or provisions may apply
individually or in any combination.
   C.   “Either . . . or” indicates that the connected items or provisions
apply individually but not in combination.
11.2.5.    UNDEFINED TERMS
   Any term not defined herein shall be defined by the Zoning Administrator
using the dictionary and/or planning-related resources.
11.3.   DEFINITIONS OF LAND USE GROUPS, CLASSES, AND TYPES
11.3.1.    PURPOSE AND PROVISIONS
   These provisions classify land uses into categories to identify different
activities within the City . Any activity conducted on a property located
within the City is considered to be a land use. The categories of land use that
refer to a primary activity, such as Residential or Industrial, are called Land
Use Groups. Each Land Use Group is further divided into more specific listings
based on their similarity of functional characteristics, such as Food and
Beverage Sales or Vehicle Rental and Sales. These specific uses are referred to
as Land Use Classes. In some cases, a Land Use Class may be further divided
into more specific land uses called Land Use Types. Land uses listed within a
specific Land Use Group, Class, or Type are not listed in any other Land Use
Group, Class, or Type.
   A.   Typical Headings and Uses
   Typical uses cited in the description of each Land Use Class are not
intended to be exclusive or restrictive. Reference is made to the description
of the Land Use Class in determining whether or not a certain use is included
within a particular Land Use Class.
   B.   Determination of Appropriate Land Use Class
   Where a specific use does not conform to the wording of any Land Use Class
description or conforms to the wording of two or more Land Use Class
descriptions, the Zoning Administrator shall determine the most appropriate
Land Use Class for that use. Such a determination is an administrative
decision.
11.3.2.    AGRICULTURAL USE GROUP
   The Agricultural Use Group includes Land Use Classes that involve the
commercial production of crops and animals . The following Land Use Classes
comprise the Agricultural Use Group.
   A.   Animal Production
   The keeping, grazing, feeding, or breeding of animals by the property owner
or occupant for commercial gain. Typical uses include horse ranches and dairy,
poultry, and rabbit farms.
   B.   Community Garden
   An area of land operated not-for-profit to grow and harvest food crops
primarily for the use of its members who typically cultivate individual garden
plots.
   C.   Crop Production
   The growing and harvesting of agricultural products to provide food, fiber,
or horticultural vegetation for ornamental purposes, or any combination of
these uses. Typical uses include the growing of field crops, fruit and nut
orchards, nurseries, and greenhouse operations.
   D.   General Farming
   Any combination of Animal and Crop Production.
   E.   Stockyard Operation
   The temporary confinement of livestock in conjunction with their transport,
fattening, or auctioning on a wholesale or retail basis. Typical uses include
feedlots and cattle pens.
   F.   Urban Farm
   The growing and harvesting of agricultural products to provide food, fiber,
or horticultural vegetation for ornamental purposes in a non-residential area.
Typical uses include aquaponic farms and hydroponic crop production, nurseries,
greenhouses, and commercial gardens .
(Am. Ord. 11328, 12/8/2015)
11.3.3.    CIVIC USE GROUP
   The Civic Use Group includes Land Use Classes and Land Use Types that
primarily involve public services. The following Land Use Classes and Land Use
Types comprise the Civic Use Group.
   A.   Cemetery
   Land used or dedicated for the interment of the dead.
   B.   Civic Assembly
   An establishment used to hold meetings, conventions or trade fairs,
exhibitions, or other community, social, and multipurpose uses. Typical uses
include convention centers, neighborhood centers, and community centers.
   C.   Correctional Use
   The monitoring and control of the offender population, including persons on
pretrial status, on prerelease status, or persons incarcerated to serve a
sentence. The Correctional Use Land Use Class is divided into the following
three land use types:
      1.   Supervision Facility
      A community-based Correctional Use that provides transitional housing,
assistance with employment, counseling, and other services to offenders who are
placed in a Supervision Facility under terms of probation, parole, or pretrial
status. Offenders assigned to a Supervision Facility are generally allowed to
leave the facility for off-site employment, job training, or other purposes as
permitted by the operators of the facility.
      2.   Custodial Facility
      A community-based Correctional Use that provides a custodial residential
setting, assistance with employment, counseling, or other services for
offenders sentenced to such a facility in lieu of prison or placed in such a
facility as part of a prerelease program. Offenders placed in a Custodial
Facility are generally allowed to leave the facility but are monitored in their
activities by staff. A facility in this subclass is not designed to be a secure
facility.
      3.   Jail or Prison
      A Correctional Use that provides for the incarceration or detention of
offenders serving a sentence as required under the City , county , state , or
federal criminal justice system. A Jail or Prison is a secure place or building
designed for the incarceration of offenders who are sentenced to a period of
time under confinement.
   D.   Cultural Use
   The collection and display of objects having literary, artistic, historic,
natural, historic or scientific value for public appreciation. Typical uses
include museums, libraries, botanical gardens , zoos, nature reserves, and
wildlife refuges.
   E.   Educational Use
   Provides a student with instruction through a course or group of courses.
Educational Uses are divided into the following land use types:
      1.   Elementary and Secondary Schools
      Provides primary and secondary education for grades kindergarten through
12, as required by the Arizona State Board of Education. Typical uses include
elementary, middle, junior high, and high schools.
      2.   Postsecondary Institution
      Provides academic, professional, business, technical, or industrial
education beyond grade 12, leading to a degree or entry into a paid occupation.
Typical uses include community colleges and universities and business, career,
beauty, and trade schools.
      3.   Instructional School
      Provides domestic, recreational, and other types of instruction for all
age groups. Typical uses include dance, cooking, music, martial arts, and
handicraft instruction.
   F.   Membership Organization
   A philanthropic, social, business or fraternal organization. Typical uses
include labor unions, boys’ and girls’ clubs, and veterans’ organizations.
   G.   Postal Service
   Letter and parcel delivery service. Typical uses include postal stations.
   H.   Protective Service
   Provides protection of the public health, safety, and welfare. Typical uses
include police, fire, and ambulance services.
   I.   Religious Use
   Assembly for religious worship. Typical uses include churches, synagogues,
and temples.
(Am. Ord. 11257, 4/21/2015)
11.3.4. COMMERCIAL SERVICES USE GROUP
   The Commercial Services Use Group includes Land Use Classes that permit
facilities for the buying or selling of commodities or services, such as
consulting, technical, transportation, and repair services. The following Land
Use Classes, Land Use Types, and examples comprise the Commercial Services Use
Group.
   A.   Administrative and Professional Office
   Provides administrative, consulting, management, and professional services
to businesses and individuals. Typical uses include legal services, real estate
firms, travel agencies, security and commodity brokers, and employment
services.
   B.   Alcoholic Beverage Service (Bar)
   The retail sale of alcoholic beverages , such as beer, wine, and liquor, for
consumption on the premises. Typical uses include cocktail lounges, taverns,
and bars. Refer to the definition of Food Service to differentiate between an
Alcoholic Beverage Service use (bar) that serves food and a Food Service use
(restaurant) which serves alcoholic beverages .
      1.   Bar, Large
      A bar that encompasses 18,000 square feet or more of total area,
including gross floor area and any outside areas providing service to the
public, such as outdoor seating and recreation areas.
   C.   Animal Service
   The boarding, training, or grooming of animals , including short-term
medical treatment. Typical uses include boarding kennels, dog training
services, pet grooming shops, and veterinary clinics.
   D.   Artisan Residence
   A structure or portion of a structure used as both a residential dwelling
for an artist and any artistic nonresidential use permitted in the zoning
district in which the unit is located. The residential use and the artistic
nonresidential use must be conducted by the same artist. The dwelling unit may
not be separately leased.
   E.   Automotive - Service and Repair
   Servicing and repairing automobiles, motorcycles, or utility vehicles, such
as pickup trucks and vans generally used as personal vehicles.
      1.   Automotive - Minor Service and Repair
      Minor maintenance that involves operations that do not create excessive
noise, such as auto washing, lubrication, and oil changing.
      2.   Automotive - Major Service and Repair
      Major maintenance or repair services. Typical uses include muffler,
brake, tune-up, stereo, alarm, air conditioning, and tire installation shops;
general repair shops; service departments of dealerships; and automotive engine
and transmission rebuilders.
      3.   Automotive Washing - Full Service
      An establishment where personnel are used to wash, dry, polish, or vacuum
an automobile.
      4.   Automotive Washing - Self Service
      An establishment where the washing, drying, polishing, or vacuuming of an
automobile is done by the driver or the occupant.
   F.   Billboard
   An off-site sign relating to a business, activity, use, or service conducted
off the site or a product not sold on the site .
   G.   Building and Grounds Maintenance
   Provides maintenance or custodial services for buildings and properties.
Typical uses include janitorial, landscaping , carpet cleaning, and window
cleaning services.
   H.   Commercial Recreation
   A commercial establishment for use by the general public or a private club
for members only used for participatory recreational activities. Spectator
events at a Commercial Recreation use are incidental . Typical uses include
athletic clubs, gymnasiums, tennis courts, and indoor shooting ranges.
   I.   Communications
   The general transmission or reception of signals as specifically regulated
by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) for the transfer of verbal or
visual information in an analog or digital mode. Typical uses include radio and
television broadcasting stations and telecommunication service centers.
      1.   Communication, Wireless
      A commercial system designed and operated for the transmission and
reception of signals to and from multiple transmitter locations to multiple
reception locations. Typical uses include cellular telephone, personal
communication service (PCS), enhanced specialized mobile radio (ESMR), and
paging services.
   J.   Construction Service
   Provides construction activity to be performed at a construction site and
may include related work being performed on shop premises. Typical uses include
construction companies, carpentry services, and plumbing services.
   K.   Day Care
   A use providing care, supervision, planned activities, or guidance on a
regular basis for periods of less than 24 hours for persons not related to the
operator. This includes adult day care and child care.
      1.   Adult Day Care
      A Day Care for elderly or disabled adults.
      2.   Child Care
      A Day Care for children 14 years old or younger who are not related to
the operator. Typical uses include child care centers, preschools, nursery
schools, and before- and after-school programs.
   L.   Entertainment
   A spectator use for the presentation of the performing arts, including
indoor motion picture theaters, theaters for live performances, or indoor and
outdoor concert halls.
      1.   Large Dance Hall
      A use that is 18,000 square feet or more of total area, including gross
floor area and any outside areas providing service to the public, such as
outdoor seating and recreation areas, that has a dance floor(s) that is over
25% of the area. Dance halls less than 18,000 square feet of total area are
governed by the standards applicable to the Entertainment Use and not those
applicable to Large Dance Halls.
   M.   Financial Service
   The management or exchange of money and assets, or other fiduciary services.
Typical uses include banks, credit unions, and savings and loan associations,
and non-chartered financial institutions , such as check cashing and payday
loan businesses.
   N.   Food Service
   The preparation and sale of food primarily for consumption as a meal on or
off premises. Typical uses include restaurants, coffee shops, cafeterias, and
fast food establishments. To differentiate between a Food Service use
(restaurant) that serves alcoholic beverages and an Alcoholic Beverage Service
use (bar) that serves food, refer to the definition of restaurant.
      1.   Food Court
         A unified establishment which serves food and beverages for
consumption on or off the premises from multiple eateries or vendors. Food
Courts may be developed to include any combination of indoor or outdoor
operations. A commercial kitchen , exclusively for use by the vendors on
location at the food court, is permitted provided it meets all applicable state
and local health and safety standards, as well as all relevant requirements of
the UDC.
      2.   Restaurant
      A commercial establishment in which the principal use is the preparation
and sale of food and beverages. A restaurant by any other name, such as, but
not limited to, coffee shop, cafeteria, fast food restaurant, or diner, is
regulated as a restaurant.
      3.   Soup Kitchen
      A Food Service use that provides free meals for consumption on or off
site .
   O.   Funeral Service
   The preparation of the dead for interment or cremation and the holding of
funeral services. This category includes funeral homes, undertaking
establishments, and crematories.
   P.   Medical Service - Extended Health Care
   Provides lodging, meals , treatment, or personal care on a long-term basis
to individuals who, by reason of advanced age, chronic illness, or infirmity,
are unable to care for themselves. Typical uses include nursing homes and
hospices.
   Q.   Medical Service - Major
   Provides inpatient medical care which may also include outpatient service as
an ancillary activity. Typical uses include hospitals, psychiatric hospitals,
and detoxification centers.
   R.   Medical Service - Outpatient
   Provides outpatient physical or mental health services. Services may be of a
preventive, diagnostic, treatment, therapeutic, rehabilitative, or counseling
nature. Typical uses include medical and dental offices, health clinics,
counseling services, and emergency care centers.
      1.   Blood Donor Center
      A Medical Service that engages in the business or activity of receiving
or taking plasma, blood, or any component thereof from human donors.
   S.   Parking
   A site where the principal use is for the off-street parking of motor
vehicles, whether for compensation, free, or as accommodation to clients or
customers. Typical uses include parking garages and parking lots for
residential or commercial purposes.
   T.   Personal Service
   Provides personal care or appearance services to an individual or provides
the cleaning or repair of personal effects. Typical uses include barber and
beauty shops, tailors, nail salons, shoe repair shops, dry cleaning collection
agencies, laundromats, massage establishments, nail salons, and reducing
salons.
   U.   Research and Product Development
   The conducting of research of a commercial, industrial, or scientific
nature, including analytic, diagnostic, processing, and other types of
laboratory services. Typical uses include assaying, commercial testing, and
engineering laboratories.
   V.   Smoke Shop
   Any establishment in which the area used for sales or display of tobacco
products consists of fifteen (15) percent or more of the total sales area of
the space.
      1.   Tobacco Product
         a.   Any product made or derived from tobacco or that contains
nicotine and is intended for human consumption or is likely to be consumed,
whether smoked, heated, chewed, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, or ingested by
any other means, including cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, chewing tobacco,
shisha, snuff, snus, and liquid nicotine solution; and
         b.   Any component, accessory, instrument, or paraphernalia that is
used in the consumption of a tobacco product or that is solely designed for the
smoking or ingesting of tobacco or shisha, including a hookah, water pipe,
filter, rolling papers, pipe, or electronic smoking device; except that:
         c.   The term "tobacco product" does not include drugs, devices, or
combination products, as those terms are defined in the Federal Food, Drug and
Cosmetic Act, that are authorized for sale by the United States Food and Drug
Administration.
   W.   Technical Service
   Service of a technical nature provided to businesses and individuals.
Typical uses include printing establishments, blueprint companies, photocopy
companies, commercial art studios, recording studios, and computer access
centers.
   X.   Trade Service and Repair, Major
   The maintenance, repair, or reconstruction of heavy equipment, machinery,
large trucks, buses, or other similar vehicles and their component parts. The
fabrication of parts and products on an individual basis is permitted. Typical
uses include farm machinery repair services, body work and painting of
automobiles and similar vehicles, and welding shops.
   Y.   Trade Service and Repair, Minor
   The service or repair of appliances and other similar utility items for
business or personal use. Typical uses include appliance repair, jewelry
repair, reupholstery, locksmith, burglar alarm repair, and stereo and
television repair shops.
   Z.   Transportation Service, Air Carrier
   Involves the landing or taking off of aircraft and may provide for passenger
and freight transportation by air. The use may include associated terminal and
service facilities. Aircraft include airplanes, helicopters, gliders,
dirigibles, blimps, and ultralights. The facilities may be for commercial or
recreational use. Typical uses include private and public airports , heliports
and helipads, gliderports, and ultralight fields.
      1.   Airport Authority
      Provides for aeronautical and multiple associated uses conducted under
the direction and control of a statutorily created airport authority, such as
pursuant to A.R.S. § 28-8423; 28-8424, at a facility not less than 2,000 acres
in size located within an adopted airport environs overlay or a designated
planning area shown in a master plan adopted by the airport authority's board
of directors.
      2.   Ultralight Airpark
      An airport used by the general public or an ultralight flying club for
ultralight aircraft operation.
   AA.   Transportation Service, Land Carrier
   Provides local or regional passenger or freight transportation by bus, rail,
vehicle, or truck with terminal and service facilities. Typical uses include
bus stations, trucking companies, and taxicab services.
   BB.   Travelers’ Accommodation, Campsite
   Provides overnight accommodation for recreational vehicles or tents on a
temporary basis. Typical uses include recreational vehicle parks.
      1.   Recreational Vehicle (R.V.) Park
      A parcel of land under single ownership, where one or more spaces are
rented, leased, or held out for rent or lease to persons for occupancy of
recreational vehicles.
   CC.   Travelers’ Accommodation, Lodging
   Provides rooms for the temporary lodging of travelers. Typical uses include
bed and breakfast inns, hotels, motels, inns, resorts, and guest ranches.
(Am. Ord. 11171, 5/20/2014; Am. Ord. 11577, 8/8/2018; Am. Ord. 12057, 11/14/
2023; Am. Ord. 12060, 11/28/2023)
11.3.5. INDUSTRIAL USE GROUP
   The Industrial Use Group includes Land Use Classes that involve the on-site
production of goods by mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or
substances and packaging. The following Land Use Classes and examples comprise
the Industrial Use Group.
   A.   Craftwork
   Any business establishment that produces on the premises articles for sale
of artistic quality or effect or handmade workmanship. Examples include candle
making, glass blowing, weaving, pottery making, woodworking, sculpting,
painting, and other associated activities.
   B.   Extraction
   The surface or subsurface mining or withdrawal of metallic or nonmetallic
minerals, oil, gas, or other forms of energy and resources.
   C.   General Manufacturing
   The assembling, finishing, or compounding of preprocessed materials into a
finished product or component. Typical uses include the assembly of furniture,
cloth goods, and plastic goods and the compounding of chemicals not otherwise
classified as hazardous materials.
   D.   Hazardous Material Manufacturing
   The synthesis, compounding, or manufacture of explosive, highly combustible,
corrosive, toxic, highly oxidizing, or radioactive substances, either as a
finished product, as part of a process, or as part of the finished product.
Typical uses include the compounding of acid, ammunition manufacturing, the
compounding of pesticides, and the manufacture of explosives and fireworks.
   E.   Heavy Equipment Manufacturing
   The assembling or finishing of heavy machinery or equipment, such as
automobiles, utility vehicles, aircraft, farming equipment, and utility
trailers. Typical uses include auto assembly plants and tractor works.
   F.   Motion Picture Industry
   The production of motion pictures including soundstages, outdoor sets,
incidental storage, and service facilities.
   G.   Perishable Goods Manufacturing
   The processing and packaging of food products and other goods that are
susceptible to spoilage or decay. Typical uses include meat packing operations,
breweries and wineries, canneries, and bottling plants.
      1.   Microbrewery
      A Perishable Goods Manufacturing use that produces beer, in the amount
between 10,000 and 310,000 gallons annually.
   H.   Precision Manufacturing
   The manufacturing, production, or assembly of electronic or precision
instruments and products. Typical uses include the manufacturing of scientific,
medical, measuring, and optical instruments; audio and video equipment;
electronic devices and systems; and watches.
   I.   Primary Manufacturing
   The forging, casting, forming, extruding, or conversion of basic materials
used ultimately in the construction, assembly, or fabrication of final
products. Typical uses include foundries, textile and paper mills, sawmills,
batch plants, and brickyards.
   J.   Processing and Cleaning
   Provides dry cleaning, dyeing, laundering, or rug cleaning services. Typical
uses include dry cleaning plants, diaper services, and linen supply services.
   K.   Refining
   The purifying of a crude substance into a basic material used in
manufacturing processes. Typical uses include the smelting or converting of
ores and petroleum refining.
   L.   Salvaging and Recycling
   The reclamation and recovery of used materials and the processing of
discarded scrap materials for commercial purposes. Typical uses include auto
salvage yards, junkyards, paper salvage operations, and household goods
donation centers.
      1.   Household Goods Donation Center
      A principal use consisting of a staffed facility at which donated
consumer goods are accepted, handled, and temporarily stored before transport
to a resale center. When used in conjunction with a retail store, both uses are
considered principal uses .
11.3.6.    RECREATION USE GROUP
   The Recreation Use Group includes Land Use Classes that involve sports and
activities with emphasis on participant sports and recreation. The following
Land Use Classes comprise the Recreation Use Group.
   A.   Golf Course
   A tract of land for playing golf, improved with tees, greens, fairways, and
hazards.
   B.   Parks and Recreation
   A noncommercial, not-for-profit facility designed for active or passive
recreation uses, such as neighborhood parks, community parks, regional parks,
and special use facilities. Such facilities may include ballfields, swimming
pools, tennis courts, and playground equipment. Commercial amusement
facilities, such as water slides and miniature golf courses, are not considered
to be parks.
      1.   Regional Park
      A park that has at least 15 acres and provides facilities such a pool,
soccer fields, baseball fields, basketball court, recreation center, concert
stage or other such facilities for regional recreational uses.
   C.   Open Space
   Any area of land, essentially unimproved and not occupied by structures or
manmade impervious surfaces, that is set aside, dedicated , or reserved in
perpetuity for public or private enjoyment as a preservation or conservation
area. In addition, open space includes those areas revegetated or restored with
native vegetation in a natural manner consistent with the character of the
Sonoran Desert.
11.3.7.    RESIDENTIAL USE GROUP
   The Residential Use Group includes Land Use Classes and Land Use Types that
are residential on a nontransient basis. The following Land Use Classes, Land
Use Types, and examples constitute the Residential Use Group.
   A.   Family Dwelling
   The occupancy (habitation) of a permanent structure or structures on a lot
or parcel by one or more individuals holding the dwelling unit under common
property rights, living together as a single household , and using common
cooking facilities . Typical uses include attached or detached dwellings and
single-family or multiple-family dwellings.
      1.   Duplex
      A building containing two dwelling units on a single lot or parcel .
      2.   Manufactured Housing
      A multisectional mobile home dwelling manufactured after June 15, 1976,
to standards established by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development that has external dimensions of at least 24 feet by 40 feet and is
installed on a permanent foundation. A manufactured housing unit is considered
equivalent to a single-family dwelling. To be considered a manufactured housing
unit under this UDC , a wall must be installed continuously, except for
ventilation and access, along the entire perimeter of the unit between the unit
and the ground to give it the appearance of a site -built house. The wall must
be of masonry construction or similar material. The tongue, axles, transporting
lights, and towing apparatus must be removed before occupancy.
      3.   Multifamily Development
      Any residential development consisting of three or more dwelling units on
an integrated site or single lot .
      4.   Single-Family Dwelling, Attached
      A dwelling unit attached on a horizontal plane to one or more dwelling
units by structural elements common to the attached units. Each dwelling unit
is located on its own individual lot or separated by a line denoting a separate
ownership of each unit. The structural elements include common wall
construction, roof, or other similar improvement. Elements such as trellises,
beams, and patio walls are not included. The interior perimeter yard between
units in a unified development may be reduced to 0 (zero) feet.
      5.   Single-Family Dwelling, Detached
      A dwelling unit that is not attached to any other dwelling unit by any
structural elements, surrounded by open space and located on its own separate
lot .
         6.   Accessory Dwelling
            A dwelling unit that is either: (a) detached, located on a lot with
a primary single-family dwelling, or (b) attached to a single-family dwelling.
Accessory dwelling units are independent units and may include a kitchen,
bedrooms , bathrooms, and a sitting room.
   B.   Group Dwelling
   The residential occupancy of a permanent structure by five or more unrelated
persons or by one or more individuals where the individual or group of
individuals has the exclusive right of occupancy of a bedroom . Typical uses
include fraternities; sororities; convents; dormitories; college student
rentals; rooming and boarding; boarding houses, not primarily for travelers;
and apartments where individual bedrooms are separately leased. Related persons
include persons related by blood, marriage, domestic partnership as defined in
Tucson City Code Chapter 17, Article IX or a legal custodial relationship.
      1.   Fraternity or Sorority
      A building housing five or more student residents belonging to an
organization created for scholastic, professional, or extracurricular
activities, associated or formally organized for a common purpose. These
organizations are typically recognized by universities as legally chartered
fraternities or sororities.
   C.   Mobile Home Dwelling
   A nonmotorized dwelling, transportable in one or more sections, constructed
on a permanent chassis with wheels, suitable for year-round residential
occupancy and requiring the same method of water supply, waste disposal, and
electrical service as a site -built dwelling. Mobile home does not mean a
recreational vehicle . Manufactured housing units that do not meet the criteria
provided in Section
11.3.7.A.5, Manufactured Housing, and house trailers are considered mobile home
dwellings.
      1.   Mobile Home Park
      A development comprised of three or more mobile homes or manufactured
housing units, or both dwelling types, that are designed to function as a
residential community. The entire development may be owned by a single entity
and rented to individual users or have multiple ownership with each mobile home
space sold to individual property owners. The park may or may not have
commonly-owned facilities.
   D.   Residential Care Services
   Residential facilities that provide lodging, meals , and treatment to
persons who are unable to be cared for as part of a single household . This use
includes group homes and institutional living arrangements with 24 hour care.
Residential Care Services are divided into the following land use types: Adult
Care Service; Physical and Behavioral Health Service; Rehabilitation Service;
and Shelter Care. The land use types are exclusive of each other.
      1.   Adult Care Service
      A Residential Care Service providing lodging, meals , supervision, and
other support services to elderly or physically disabled individuals not
related to the owner/manager of the facility. Typical uses include adult care
homes, adult care facilities, and supervisory care facilities.
      2.   Physical and Behavioral Health Service
      A Residential Care Service providing lodging, meals , treatment,
counseling, and supervision to persons with behavioral disorders or
developmental disabilities or to physically disabled individuals not related to
the owner/manager of the facility. Typical uses include group homes for the
developmentally disabled, group homes for the seriously mentally ill ,
specialized treatment homes, group foster homes, and recovery homes for
substance abusers. This category does not include facilities used for penal or
correctional purposes or for adjudicated delinquents other than status
offenders .
      3.   Rehabilitation Service
      A Residential Care Service providing lodging, meals , counseling,
treatment, and rehabilitation to adjudicated delinquents.
      4.   Shelter Care
      A Residential Care Service providing lodging on a temporary basis, meals
, and counseling to homeless persons , pregnant teenagers, victims of domestic
violence, and children who need full-time supervision, including those who are
neglected, runaways, or status offenders .
(Am. Ord. 11890, 12/7/2021; Am. Ord. 11996, 3/21/2023)
11.3.8.    RESTRICTED ADULT ACTIVITIES USE GROUP
   The Restricted Adult Activities Use Group classifies activities that provide
entertainment and/or goods depicting, describing, or relating to “specified
sexual activities ” or characterized by emphasis on depiction, description, or
relation to “specified anatomical areas .” The following Land Use Classes
comprise the Restricted Adult Activities Use Group.
   A.   Adult Commercial Services
   All Land Use Classes within the Commercial Services Use Group that depict,
describe, or relate to “specified sexual activities ” or are characterized by
emphasis on depiction, description, or relation to “specified anatomical areas
,” as defined in Section
11.4.20, Definitions - S. Typical uses include adult model studios, adult
massage parlors, adult motels, and adult theaters.
   B.   Adult Industrial Uses
   All Land Use Classes within the Industrial Use Group that depict, describe,
or relate to “specified sexual activities ” or are characterized by emphasis on
depiction, description, or relation to “specified anatomical areas ,” defined
in Section
11.4 below. Typical uses include adult motion picture productions.
   C.   Adult Recreation
   All Land Use Classes within the Recreation Use Group that depict, describe,
or relate to “specified sexual activities ” or are characterized by emphasis on
depiction, description, or relation to “specified anatomical areas ,” defined
in Section
11.4 below. Typical uses include adult arcades, body painting studios, and
legally permitted sexual encounter establishments.
   D.   Adult Retail Trade
   All Land Use Classes within the Retail Trade Use Group that depict,
describe, or relate to “specified sexual activities ” or are characterized by
emphasis on depiction, description, or relation to “specified anatomical areas
,” defined in Section
11.4 below. Typical uses include adult bookstores.
11.3.9.    RETAIL TRADE USE GROUP
   The Retail Trade Use Group includes Land Use Classes that involve the
selling, leasing, or renting of merchandise to the general public. The
following Land Use Classes and examples comprise the Retail Trade Use Group.
   A.   Construction Material Sales
   The sale of lumber or other building materials. Typical uses include
lumberyards, fence companies, and brick and block sales.
   B.   Food and Beverage Sales
   The retail sale of food or beverages for consumption off the premises, such
as bakeries, butcher shops, grocery stores, and liquor stores.
      1.   Farmers’ Market
      A public or privately operated open-air establishment that allows the
selling of agricultural products such as fruits, vegetables, mushrooms, herbs,
nuts, flowers, nursery stock, animal food products such as eggs, honey, meat,
milk, cheese, other dairy products and fish, as well as non-edible bee products
and handcrafted items. The predominant sales area must be for food products.
   C.   General Merchandise Sales
   The selling, leasing, or renting of commonly used merchandise for personal
or household use and the providing of services incidental to the selling,
leasing, or renting of goods. Typical uses include department and variety
stores, automotive accessories and new parts stores, fuel and lubricant sales,
apparel stores, drugstores, florists, furniture stores, pet stores, and video
tape rental and sales.
      1.   Home Improvement Center
      A facility of more than 30,000 square feet gross floor areas engaged in
the retail sale of various basic hardware lines, such as tools, builders
hardware, paint and glass, plumbing and electrical supplies, housewares and
household appliances, garden supplies, and cutlery.
      2.   Retail Establishment, Large
      A retail establishment (General Merchandise Sales), a retail grocery
establishment (Food and Beverage Sales), or an establishment with a combination
of both uses, comprised of more than 100,000 square feet of floor area , that
includes gross floor area and any outside area which provides associated
services to the public, such as, but not limited to, outdoor merchandise
display, snack bars, etc. The floor area does not include motor vehicle parking
or loading areas . For the purposes of determining the applicability of the
100,000 square foot  floor area maximum, the aggregate square footage of all
adjacent stores, that share checkstands, management, a controlling ownership
interest, and storage areas, are considered one establishment, e.g., a plant
nursery associated with a general merchandise store, such as a home improvement
store.
      3.   Shopping Center
      A multiple use  development composed of an integrated group of
establishments (stores), planned, constructed, and managed as a unit, utilizing
common or shared facilities, such as buildings , parking, and vehicular and
pedestrian access, where no more than 50% of the floor area is dedicated to
uses with a parking formula of one space per 100 square feet of gross floor
area or a more intense formula. The individual establishments may be owned by a
single entity or by separate entities.
   D.   Heavy Equipment Sales
   The sale, lease, or rental of heavy vehicles, heavy machinery, aircraft,
farming equipment, or utility trailers. Typical uses include the sale of
aircraft, commercial vehicles, and construction equipment.
   E.   Medical Marijuana Designated Caregiver Cultivation Location
   A Medical Marijuana Designated Caregiver Cultivation Location or Cultivation
by a Designated Caregiver refers to cultivation of Medical Marijuana by a
Designated Caregiver and Cardholder whose registration card indicates that the
cardholder has been authorized to cultivate marijuana plants for a qualifying
patient(s)’ medical use pursuant to The Arizona Medical Marijuana Act, A.R.S.
§ 36-2804.04.A.7. (Ord. No. 10850, § 6, 11/23/10)
   F.   Marijuana Dispensary
   A Marijuana Dispensary refers to the following:
      1.   "Nonprofit Medical Marijuana Dispensary" as set forth in The Arizona
Medical Marijuana Act, A.R.S. § 36-2801.11.
      2.   "Dual Licensee" as set forth in The Arizona Smart and Safe Act,
A.R.S. § 36-2850.9.
      3.   "Marijuana Establishment", as set forth in the Arizona Smart and
Safe Act, A.R.S. § 36-2850.21(a).
   G.   Marijuana Dispensary Off-site Cultivation Location
   A Marijuana Dispensary Off Site Cultivation Location means the additional
location, if any, where marijuana may be cultivated for the use of a Marijuana
Dispensary as disclosed pursuant to The Arizona Medical Marijuana Act, A.R.S. §
36-2804.B.1.b.ii and/or The Arizona Smart and Safe Act, A.R.S. § 36-2850.21(a).
   H.   Marijuana Dispensary Off-site Manufacturing Location
   A Marijuana Dispensary Off-site Manufacturing Location is the additional
location, if any, where marijuana may be manufactured for the use of a
Marijuana Dispensary as disclosed pursuant to The Arizona Smart and Safe Act,
A.R.S. § 36-2850.15.
   I.   Medical Marijuana Qualifying Patient Cultivation Location
   A Medical Marijuana Qualifying Patient Cultivation Location shall mean
cultivation of medical marijuana by a qualifying patient pursuant to The
Arizona Medical Marijuana Act, A.R.S. §36-2801.1.a.ii, but shall only include a
Qualifying Patient who is also a Cardholder, authorized to cultivate marijuana
plants pursuant to the provisions of A.R.S. §36-2804.02.A.3.f.
   J.   Swap Meets and Auctions
   Occasional or periodic commercial activities held in an open area or
enclosed  structure where: 1) groups of sellers rent space on a short-term
basis to display, barter, or sell goods to the public and at least 50% of swap
meet space does not occupy the same allotted area on an uninterrupted,
continuous, daily basis for the purpose of display and sale, exchange, or
barter of merchandise, exclusive of occasional craft fairs and benefit sales
held on public property; or 2) one or more sellers bring goods for auctioning
to the public. Typical uses include swap meets, flea markets, and auctions.
   K.   Vehicle Rental and Sales
   The sale, lease, and/or rental of automobiles, motorcycles, noncommercial
trucks, boats, vans, motor homes, trailers, or other recreational vehicles.
Typical uses include automobile and truck dealers and rental agencies.
(Am. Ord. 11328, 12/8/2015; Am. Ord. 11828, 4/6/2021; Am. Ord. 11978, 12/20/
2022)
11.3.10. STORAGE USE GROUP
   The Storage Use Group includes Land Use Classes that involve on-site keeping
of trade and personal goods. The following Land Use Classes constitute the
Storage Use Group.
   A.   Commercial Storage
   The keeping of trade or personal goods by business and industrial
establishments. Typical uses include cold storage plants, warehouses, data
storage facilities, and utility storage yards.
   B.   Hazardous Material Storage
   The keeping of explosive, highly combustible, corrosive, toxic, highly
oxidizing, or radioactive materials . Typical uses include storage for
distribution of petroleum products.
   C.   Personal Storage
   The renting or leasing of space for storage of personal effects. Typical
uses include multiple unit storage facilities or miniwarehouses.
11.3.11. UTILITIES USE GROUP
   The Utilities Use Group includes Land Use Classes that involve the
generation, transmission, and/or distribution of basic services, such as
sanitation, water, gas, and electrical services. The following Land Use Classes
constitute the Utilities Use Group.
   A.   Distribution System
   The dispensing or transforming of basic services, such as gas, electricity,
or water, from one part of an interconnected system to another. Typical uses
include electric substations, gas distribution substations, and water wells.
   B.   Generating System
   A facility that produces energy. Typical uses include electrical generating
plants.
   C.   Renewable Energy Generation
   A principal use producing commercial power from natural resources, such as
sunlight, wind, rain, tides, and geothermal heat, that are renewable (naturally
replenished). Typical uses are solar, geothermal, natural or methane gases, and
wind power.
   D.   Sanitation System
   The collection, disposal, or treatment of waste materials. Typical uses
include sewage pumping stations, sanitary landfills, sewage treatment
facilities, and hazardous material treatment facilities.
   E.   Transmission Lines
   Transportation facilities for the conveyance of commodities other than
petroleum. Utility lines include facilities for the transmission of electrical
energy for sale, including transmission lines for a public utility company.
Also includes telephone, telegraph, cable television and other communications
transmission facilities utilizing direct physical conduits. Does not include
offices, service centers, or distribution substations.
(Am. Ord. 11942, 7/12/2022)
11.3.12. WHOLESALING USE GROUP
   The Wholesaling Use Group includes Land Use Classes that involve the selling
of trade goods, supplies, or equipment to retailers, businesses, or other
wholesalers for their use or resale at retail. The following Land Use Classes
comprise the Wholesaling Use Group.
   A.   Business Supply and Equipment Wholesaling
   The selling of goods, supplies, or equipment to commercial service or retail
trade establishments. Typical uses include wholesale distributors of trade
goods and service products, such as medical and restaurant equipment and
supplies.
   B.   Construction/Heavy Equipment Wholesaling
   The selling of large motor vehicles, equipment, machinery, or construction
materials to other businesses. Typical uses include construction and farm
equipment distributors.
   C.   Food and Beverage Wholesaling
   The selling of food or beverage products to other businesses. Typical uses
include produce companies and beverage distributors.
   D.   Hazardous Material Wholesaling
   The selling to other businesses materials that are explosive, highly
combustible, corrosive, toxic, highly oxidizing, or radioactive. Typical uses
include petroleum supply and distribution of hazardous chemicals.
11.4.   OTHER TERMS DEFINED
11.4.1. PURPOSE
   This section provides definitions for terms that are not land uses and are
not contained in Section
11.3 above. Definitions marked (7A) apply only to
Article 7A, Sign Standards.
(Am. Ord. 11508, 12/5/2017)
11.4.2. DEFINITIONS – A
A-frame sign (7A)
   A type of portable sign.
Abandoned (7A)
   A sign structure that has ceased to be used to display or support a sign and
regarding which the owner has manifested an intention to permanently cease the
use of the sign structure.
Abandonment
   A process whereby easement interests are terminated by a legally recorded
document.
Use, Abandonment of
   The relinquishment of a property, or the cessation of a use or activity by
the owner or tenant for a period of six months, excluding temporary or short
term interruptions for the purpose of remodeling, maintaining, or otherwise
improving or rearranging a facility. A use is deemed abandoned when the use is
suspended as evidenced by the cessation of activities or conditions that
constitute the principal use of the property.
Abutting
   Having a common boundary. Parcels or lots having only a common corner are
not considered abutting.
Access Easement
   Ingress-egress to a parcel provided over some other parcel through an area
dedicated for such perpetual use.
Access Lane
   The area within a vehicular use area serving as a travel lane or the area
providing access to a property. Unlike the Parking Area Access Lane , the
Access Lane does not provide direct ingress and egress to individual parking
spaces.
Access Point Sign (7A)
   An on-site sign located at or near the access point or other wayfinding
location.
Accessory Use or Structure
   A use or a structure subordinate to the principal use or building on a lot
and serving a purpose customarily incidental to the use of the principal
building . An accessory use or structure must be established or built together
with or after the establishment or construction of the principal use or
building .
Acre
   An area equal to 43,560 square feet.
Active Recreation
   Leisure activities, usually performed with others, often requiring equipment
and taking place at prescribed places, sites, or fields. The term "active
recreation" includes but is not limited to swimming, tennis, and other court
games, baseball and other field sports, golf and playground activities.
Adjacent
   Two or more parcels or lots sharing a common boundary or separated by an
alley or other right-of-way 20 feet or less in width. Parcels or lots having
only a common corner are considered adjacent. Within the Infill Incentive
District , Optional Zoning Sub-Districts, Areas and Sub-Areas, the term
"adjacent" or "adjacency" means:
   A.   Two or more parcels or lots sharing a common boundary or separated by
an ally or a local or arterial street 30 feet or less in width. Parcels or lots
having only a common corner are also considered adjacent.
   B.   Where the development parcel is an interior parcel , adjacent lots
includes all residential lots or development on either side of the development
 parcel , those lots fronting on the same street in the same block as the
development  parcel , and all those lots on the opposite side of that street
(See Figure, "Interior Lot ");
   C.   Where the development  parcel is a corner lot , the term "adjacent"
includes all the residential corner lots or developments diagonally opposite
the development  parcel , fronting on the same two streets in the same block ,
and on the opposite sides of those streets as shown in the diagram below (See
Figure, "Corner Lot ");
   D.   Where the development  parcel is adjacent to an HPZ, the term
"adjacent" includes all lots across the street and diagonally across from the
development  parcel .
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11892.png]
 
Adjoining
   Same as abutting .
Adjudicated Delinquent
   A youth who has been found by a judge in juvenile court to have committed a
violation of the criminal law, that is, a delinquent act.
Affordable Housing Unit
   A dwelling unit committed for a minimum term as affordable, through
covenants or restrictions, to households with incomes at 80 percent or less of
the area median income ("AMI") for a family, as defined by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development, for the City; and where housing
costs (rents, mortgages, utilities and condo, homeowners or other association
fees) do not exceed thirty (30) percent of a family's income as verified on an
annual basis.
AICUZ Report (1992)
   A report prepared by the Department of the Air Force that evaluated and
summarized the aircraft operations at U.S. Air Force Bases with respect to the
effects of noise and accident hazards, entitled Air Installation Compatible Use
Zone (AICUZ).
Airport
   Any area of land designed and set for the landing and taking off of
aircraft.
Airport Hazard
   Any structure, use of land, or tree within the Airport Environs Zone (AEZ)
that obstructs the space required for flight of aircraft in taking off and
landing at an airport or is otherwise hazardous to aircraft taking off or
landing. Examples of hazards include, but are not limited to, uses that:
•   Create interference with aircraft navigation by obstructing the use of
radio and other navigational aids, such as generators, motors, or artificial
lighting devices which create excessive static.
•   Obstruct the visibility of aircraft through atmospheric emissions or cause
glare to flyers through direct or indirect illumination, such as from
incinerators, rock crushers, smelters, lights which resemble a layout or the
color of a landing area, search lights, or flash-type advertising signs.
•   Cause any other danger or hazard to the safety of aircraft taking off or
landing, such as towers , poles, smokestacks, advertising balloons, aboveground
bulk storage of petroleum products, landfills, or fireworks manufacturing.
Airstrip
   An airport used solely by the owner of the property, accommodating general
aviation aircraft and ultralight aircraft.
Airport Hazard District
   A specifically designated area of land where uses that constitute hazards to
airport operations are prohibited and heights are limited.
Alcoholic Beverage
   Alcohol, brandy, whiskey, rum, tequila, mescal, gin, wine, porter, ale, beer
and malt liquor, malt beverage, absinthe or compound or mixture of any of them,
or of any of them with any other substance, alcohol bitters, bitters containing
alcohol, and any liquid mixture of preparation, whether patented or otherwise,
which produces intoxication, fruits preserved in ardent spirits, or beverages
containing more than 0.5% of alcohol by volume.
Alley
   Alleys are public ways used for the placement of utilities , refuse
collection, or similar public services, and under certain circumstances as
provided in the UDC , access to individual properties.
Alter (7A)
   To change, modify or vary an existing sign structure without constructing a
totally new sign structure.
Alteration
   Any aesthetic, architectural, mechanical, or structural change to the
exterior surface of any part of an existing structure.
Amenities, Project
   Aesthetic or other characteristics of a development that increase its
desirability to a community or its marketability to the public. Project
amenities include, but are not limited to, open space , natural undisturbed
areas, landscaping , common areas, and recreation facilities.
Anatomical Areas
   Same as Specified Anatomical Areas .
ANCLUC Study
   Airport Noise Control and Land Use  Compatibility Study, a document adopted
by the City of Tucson and Pima County in 1982 that reviewed noise abatement
measures in effect or proposed to be implemented by Tucson International
Airport . The Study also established policies for compatible  land uses for
properties adjacent to the Tucson International Airport .
Animal
   Any fowl , reptile, insect, amphibian or mammal, except human beings.
Animal, Food Producing
   Animals such as miniature goats , fowl such as chickens, ducks, geese and
turkeys, and other similar small food producing animals . Dogs, cats, pigeons,
other non-food producing fowl , and fish are not considered food producing
animals for the purposes of applying the food producing animal standards in the
UDC.
Animal Shelter
   A structure that covers or reasonably protects an animal from the weather
and predators, such as a chicken coop. An animal run area is intended to allow
an animal to move about freely. It may be connected to a shelter and must be
enclosed. The enclosed run area is not subject to location requirements.
Animal Unit
   A unit of measurement to calculate a maximum number of animals on a
property.
Antenna
   One or more panels, rods, reflecting disks, or similar devices used for the
transmission or reception of radio frequency signals.
Apartment Building
   Same as Multifamily Development .
Appearance of Record
   Means either: 1) An oral statement made at a hearing which identifies the
person making the statement or made by the person ’s representative; or 2) A
written statement giving the name and address of the person providing the
statement and signed by the person or representative.
Approach Departure Corridor One (ADC-1)
   A specifically designated area located within 12,000 feet from the northwest
end of the runways at Davis Monthan Air Force Base where land use is
susceptible to a degree of risk of aircraft accident potential.
Approach Departure Corridor Two (ADC-2)
   A specifically designated area located from 1,2001 to 30,000 feet from the
southeastern end of runways at Davis-Monthan Air Force Base where land use is
susceptible to a degree of risk of aircraft accident potential.
Approach Departure Corridor Three (ADC-3)
   A specifically designated area located from 30,001 to 50,200 feet at the
southeastern end of runways at Davis-Monthan Air Force Base where land use is
susceptible to a degree of risk of aircraft accident potential, less than in
the ADC-1or ADC-2 zones .
Aquaponics 
   A system of aquaculture in which the waste produced by farmed fish or other
aquatic animals supplies nutrients for plants grown hydroponically, which in
turn purify the water. Aquaponics is conducted in a constructed, automatic re-
circulating system.
Archaeological Site
   A historic or prehistoric site , location, or area containing material
remains of human activity and life which include artifacts, monuments, or other
cultural remains.
Archaeologist
   A person having an M.A. or Ph.D. in anthropology or an allied field and at
least one year of training or employment in an archaeological field or
laboratory research. Any study conducted by or endorsed by such an
archaeologist satisfies the Code of Ethics and Standards of Performance of the
Society of Professional Archaeologists.
Arizona Nursery Association Standards (ANA)
   Standards for plant material size and planting guidelines prepared and
published by the Growers Committee of Arizona Nursery Association.
Arterial Road System
   Arterial roads identified on the Major Street and Routes Plan that are the
responsibility of the City of Tucson or that are designated in accordance with
Section 23A-84(14).
Arterial Street
   A street identified as an arterial or Interstate Route on the Major Streets
and Routes (MS&R) Plan .
Artisan
   One who practices an art or one trained to manual dexterity or skill in a
trade.
Artists Studio/Residence Area
   The area delineated by the map below.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3080.jpg]
Artist Studio/Residence Area
Assurable Infrastructure
   Subdivision improvements for which assurances may be required include, but
are not limited to, curbs, accessible ramps, pavement, driveway aprons,
sidewalks , survey monuments, storm drainage, all weather access, flood
control, erosion hazard control, utility infrastructure to the lot lines
(water, sewer, electric, natural gas, communication cables), fire prevention
systems, street signage, other private or public improvements and
infrastructure in right-of-way or common areas required to be constructed, and
other common elements as required by this code and other pertinent codes, or
actions required to be completed by subdivider /developer, at no cost to the
City .
Assurance
   A legally binding and enforceable instrument ensuring the construction of
all required assurable infrastructure by a subdivider . Assurances may be in
the form of third party land trusts, or monetary sureties such as performance
bonds, escrow funds, letters of credit, or such other security as are
acceptable to the City .
Attached Canopy (7A)
   A roof-like structure that provides shade and/or ornamentation, projecting
from and attached to a building wall below the highest point of the top of
parapet, and supported in whole or in part by the building.
Attached Sign (7A)
   A sign that is fastened, connected or supported in whole or in part by a
building or structure other than a sign structure that is supported wholly by
the ground.
Average Daily Traffic (ADT)
   The total traffic for a calendar year divided by number of days in a year
(365).
Average Finished Grade
   The mean average elevation of ground after site preparation, measured five
feet from a building at five-foot intervals. If the property line is closer
than five feet from the building , then the measurement is taken from the
property line .
Average Cross-Slope
   The slope of the topographic configuration of land, graphically represented
by contour lines, prior to any grading or other disturbance.
Awning (7A)
   A durable or fabric structure, attached to and supported in part or in whole
by a building, which provides shade to the entries, windows, and walls of the
building.
Awning Sign (7A)
   A sign constructed of cloth, plastic or metal and permanently affixed to a
structure and intended to provide shade.
(Am. Ord. 11246, 2/18/2015; Am. Ord. 11328, 12/8/2015; Am. Ord. 11508, 12/5/
2017; Am. Ord. 11977, 12/20/2022; Am. Ord. 12005, 6/6/2023)
11.4.3. DEFINITIONS – B
Banners, Across the Street (7A)
   See Section
7A.6.10 Signs In or Over the Public Right of Way.
Banners (7A)
   A type of portable sign that is constructed of a piece of fabric or similar
material attached to the ground or to a wall by one or more edges to a pole,
rod or cord.
Barrier-Free Accessibility
   Functional access for semiambulatory and nonambulatory persons , from a
street or parking space to, into, and through a building .
Bay
   Same as Service Bay .
Bedroom
   The term bedroom includes all of the following: 1) Any room that is
designated as a bedroom; 2) Any enclosed room that has a minimum area of 60
square feet and has an accessible opening to the exterior of the building in
compliance with the International Building Code (IBC), whether termed a studio,
family room, study, den, bonus room, or any other name, except for a living
room, dining room, kitchen , and bathrooms; and 3) Any room designated as a
bedroom for the purpose of any other code requirement.
Bicycle
   A nonmotorized device propelled only by human power having two or three
wheels, any of which is more than 16 inches in diameter.
Bicycle Locker
   A fully enclosed space of sufficient size to park a two-wheeled bicycle with
its accessories accessible only to the operator of the bicycle.
Bicycle Parking Facility
   A structure that provides for the short- or long-term placement of bicycles.
Bicycle Parking Space
   An area designated for the use of an individual bicycle.
Billboard (7A)
   An off-site sign relating to a business, activity, use or service conducted
off the site or to a product not sold on the site.
Block
   A unit of land bounded by streets or by a combination of streets and public
lands, railroad rights-of-way , watercourses, or other barriers to the
continuity of the unit of land. A block may be comprised of one or more lots .
A block made up of one lot may also be referred to as a lot or parcel .
Block Plat
   A map of a subdivision that consists of ten or fewer lots the size of which
are in conformance with the applicable zoning requirements for lot size .
Buildable Area
   The area of a lot or parcel where a building can be placed after setbacks
from property lines , streets , buildings , erosion hazards, or any other point
identified and areas identified or dedicated for non-building purposes, such as
open space or driveways , are deducted.
Building
   A structure having a roof supported by columns, posts, or walls and intended
for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of any person , entity, animal ,
process, equipment, goods, or materials of any kind or nature.
Building Footprint
   The ground area within the outside edges of the exterior walls of a building
at design grade .
Building Height
   Same as Structure Height .
Building Setback
   See perimeter yard .
Building Site
   That area to be occupied by all structures and their adjacent or immediate
grounds prior to any grading . The extremities of a building  site are measured
from the toe of any fill on the lower elevations as shown on the proposed
grading plans.
(Am. Ord. 11508, 12/5/2017)
11.4.4.    DEFINITIONS – C
Caliper
   A measurement taken between the outer dimensions of a tree trunk at six
inches for single-trunked specimens and 12 inches for multi-trunked specimens
above grade level at the base of the tree. For a noncircular specimen, use the
average of the shortest and longest measurements, and for a multi-trunked
specimen, use the sum of the measurements of the two largest trunks.
Canopy Sign (7A)
   A permanent sign on or affixed to the top or front of an attached canopy.
Canopy Tree
   A woody plant, other than a palm tree, with a mature crown diameter of at
least 15 feet and having a trunk that, at maturity, is kept clear of leaves and
branches at least six feet above grade . (See Illustration.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3082.jpg]
 
Canopy Tree
Carport
   A building that does not have walls on two or more sides and is designed for
the parking of one or more motor vehicles.
Centerline
   A survey reference line designated for a street by the Tucson Department of
Transportation Engineer and generally located parallel to the edges of the
improved right-of-way . Centerlines for certain streets are depicted on street
 right-of-way /improvement plans and street  setback line maps listed in and
made a part of the Major Streets and Routes (MS&R) Plan .
Change of Use
   A land use that is being located on vacant land; a land use that replaces an
existing use with a use from a different Land Use Class; or a land use that
replaces an existing use that is from the same Land Use Group but that requires
more parking spaces than required for the prior use.
City
   Same as City of Tucson.
City Development Review Committee
   City Development Review Committee (CDRC ) means the designees of the various
departments and agencies responsible for reviewing a proposed subdivision for
compliance with codes and legal requirements. At a minimum, CDRC review
includes City departments responsible for codes regulating streets , sidewalks
and public transportation access, zoning, engineering, floodplain and drainage,
fire, water, environmental services and Pima County departments responsible for
wastewater and utility company regulations such as Pima County wastewater, and
non-governmental entities such as appropriate utility companies. CDRC may
include such other agency or department representatives as the PDSD Director
may determine appropriate for a particular application to insure that all
pertinent codes and legal requirements are met by the proposed subdivision .
City Zoning Maps
   A set of maps that is part of the Unified Development Code (UDC) that
depicts all zoning boundaries delineating the zoning classifications applicable
to all property within the City limits.
Clearance (7A)
   Clearance refers to the distance between grade and the bottom edge of a
sign.
Collector Street
   A street identified as a collector on the Major Streets and Routes (MS&R)
Plan .
Collocation
   The use of a single tower or pole by more than one user for similar or
nonsimilar uses.
Common Area Open Space
   Land area within a development , not individually owned or dedicated for
public use, that is designed and intended for the common use or enjoyment of
the residents of the development . Common area open space may be either natural
open space or functional open space .
Common Use
   The usage and accessibility by all residents of a project , either by common
ownership, covenant, easement, or other similar legal means.
Compatibility/Compatible
   Visual consistency of development by mirroring prevailing dimensions,
spatial relationships, and architectural and design characteristics of the
neighborhood overall and the Contributing Properties within the Development
Zone . The term “compatible” does not mean “repetition or copy of” or
“identical to” existing structures within the neighborhood. Compatibility is
achieved when a development is designed in a manner that blends in with the
character of structures in the Development Zone .
Compatible
   To be in agreement with or to fit in architecturally with surrounding
development . Also, to not visually contradict a street scene, view, or
adjacent  development .
Compatible Use Zone-One (CUZ-1)
   A specifically designated area near the ends of Tucson International Airport
runways where land use is susceptible to a degree of risk of aircraft accident
potential, less than in the CUZ-3  Zone and greater than in the CUZ-2  Zone .
Compatible Use Zone-Two (CUZ-2)
   A specifically designated area near the ends of Tucson International Airport
runways where land use is susceptible to a degree of risk of aircraft accident
potential, less than either the CUZ-1 or the CUZ-3  Zones .
Compatible Use Zone-Three (CUZ-3)
   A specifically designated area near the southeastern ends of Tucson
International Airport runways where land use is susceptible to a degree of risk
of aircraft accident potential, greater than in either the CUZ-1 or the CUZ-
2  Zones .
Conceal
   To place out of sight or to prevent recognition or disclosure of the true
character of an object.
Condominium
   Condominium has the same meaning as “condominium” as defined in A.R.S. §33-
1202(10), that is real estate, portions of which are designated for separate
ownership and the remainder of which is designated for common ownership solely
by the owners of the separate portions. Real estate is not a condominium unless
the undivided interests in the common elements are vested in the unit owners.
For the purposes of UDC application, a condominium is the same as a multiple-
family  structure, office structure, or commercial structure, except platting
is required in accordance with the requirements of the UDC .
Condominium Conversion
   Condominium conversion is the subdividing of land and existing structures as
a condominium , regardless of the present or prior use of such land or
structure, and regardless of whether substantial improvements have been made to
such structures .
Conformance
   To be in agreement with; to comply with.
Conservation Easement
   An easement delineating an area that will be kept in its natural state in
perpetuity.
Contiguous
   Same as Abutting .
Contributing Property
   A property within a Historic Preservation Zone , Neighborhood Preservation
Zone , or National Register Historic District that contributes to the historic
significance and visual character of the zone or district , and has sufficient
integrity to convey that significance and those visual character defining
features in terms of location, design, setting, material, workmanship,
character, or association. Contributing Properties are historic sites or
nonhistoric compatible properties.
Cooking Facility
   An area containing facilities for the storage, cooking, or preparation of
food, is accessory to a principal use , and may be located in an enclosed or
unenclosed area. An example of a cooking facility is an outdoor cooking station
that includes a barbeque grill and refrigerator.
County
   Same as Pima County, Arizona.
Critical Riparian Habitat Areas
   Areas as shown on the Critical and Sensitive Wildlife Habitats Map that
contain:
•   Major segments of riparian habitat extending from public preserves ;
•   Major segments of riparian habitat not extending directly from a public
preserve but containing a high density and diversity of plant and animal
species;
•   Deciduous riparian woodlands;
•   Mesquite bosques;
•   Lakes, ponds, or wetlands;
•   Palo Verde-Saguaro communities; or
•   Ironwood plant communities; and
•   Are found within the Resource Corridor .
Curfew
   A time established for listed lighting systems to be automatically
extinguished.
Curb Cut
   A depressed segment of a vertical roadway curb for driveways , wheelchair
ramps, bicycle access, drainage, or other purposes.
Cut
   A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will
be removed by excavation .
(Am. Ord. 11508, 12/5/2017)
11.4.5. DEFINITIONS – D
Damaged
   Plant materials, previously rated Viable, that have little chance of
survival in a healthy and attractive manner after injury sustained during
salvage, transplanting, or construction operations.
Days
   Days of the week, including Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays. To apply days
to a review schedule, the day of the event or act from which the designated
period of time begins shall not be included. The last day of the designated
period shall be included, unless it is a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday, in which
event the period runs to the end of the next day that is not a Saturday,
Sunday, or holiday. When a designated period of time is less than ten days,
intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays shall not be included. Holidays
are those recognized by the City of Tucson.
Dedicate
   The act of giving a gift or donation to another person or entity.
Dedicated
   The act of giving a gift or donation to another person or entity and that
such gift or donation has been accepted.
Density
   The number of residential units per acre .
Design Grade
   An elevation or series of elevations that provide the minimum modification
of natural or existing grade that allows safe and appropriate access, drainage,
and buildable areas .
Design Professional
   A registered architect with historic preservation experience employed by or
under contract with the City .
Detached Sign (7A)
   Any sign not supported in whole or in part by a building or structure other
than a sign structure that is supported wholly by the ground.
Developable Area
   The land area of a site controlled by a single landowner or entity at the
time of issuance of building permits or approval of a subdivision  plat if
subdividing the property, including those areas which are dedicated as natural
areas within a Hillside Development Zone (HDZ) area, but exclusive of any
floodway property as described in Chapter 26, Division 1, Floodplain and
Erosion Hazard Area Regulations, of the Tucson Code. Those areas within a
floodway shall be included in the developable area where the Planning and
Development Services Department Engineer has approved construction of a
principal building  or of an accessory or incidental  structure .
Developing Area
   An area where less than 50% of the linear street  frontage of all property,
excluding alleys and drainageways, located on the same side of the street and
within the same block as the proposed development is occupied by principal
structures that conform to the minimum front street perimeter setback required
for the applicable zoning classification or street  frontage .
Developing Area Setback
   A term used to describe the required perimeter yard from a street applicable
where a developing area exists.
Development
   Any human alteration to the state of land, including its vegetation, soil,
geology, or hydrology, for any residential, commercial, industrial, utility, or
other use, such as, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, or grading of land,
and structural improvements , e.g., buildings , walls, fences, signs, and
vehicular use areas .
Development Inventory Report (DIR)
   A DIR is a report using narrative, maps, graphics, tables and other
informative means in describing existing conditions, needs assessments and
other useful background information regarding the infrastructure , resources
and other pertinent characteristics of the property within the proposed PCD
District.
Development Project
   Any residential, commercial, industrial or mixed use  subdivision  plat or
site plan that is submitted to the City for approval or for permit.
Development Zone
   As used in Section
5.8, "H" Historic Preservation Zone (HPZ), Section
5.10, Neighborhood Preservation Zone (NPZ), and, Section
5.11, Rio Nuevo District, (RND), a certain designated area adjacent  to the lot
to be developed. Public and institutional structures within development zone
are not considered to be part of the development zone when evaluating proposed
development  on an adjacent property, except for public and institutional
structures on or eligible for inclusion on the National Register of Historic
Places. The development Zone is determined as follows: (See Illustrations
below.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3086.jpg]
Interior Lot            Corner Lot            Boundary Lot
 
   •   Where the subject lot is an interior lot , the development zone includes
that lot , all lots on either side of that lot and fronting on the same street
in the same block , and all those lots on the opposite side of that street ,
except such portions of the development zone that fall outside the boundary of
the HPZ, NPZ, or the RNA.
   •   Where the subject lot is a corner lot , the development zone includes
that lot , the corner lot diagonally opposite that lot , all lots fronting on
the same two streets in the same block , and all lots on the opposite sides of
those streets , except such portions of the development zone that fall outside
the boundary of the HPZ, NPZ, or the RNA.
   •   Where the subject lot is located adjacent to a historic zone boundary ,
the development zone includes that lot , all lots located within the same block
, and those lots facing the same street as the subject lot within one block in
either direction, except such portions of the zone that fall outside the
boundary of the HPZ, NPZ, or the RNA.
Digital Sign (7A)
   A sign component whose informational content such as symbols, logos,
graphics, and words can be changed or altered by electric, electro-mechanical
or electronic means.
Director
   The chief executive officer of a City department.
Discontinued (7A)
   A sign or sign structure is discontinued where it is not used for a
consecutive period of six months or more, and where the period of non-use is
attributable in whole or in part to the owner of the sign or premises,
regardless of whether the owner intends to abandon the sign.
Disguise
   To furnish with a false appearance or to alter in such a manner as to hide
the true character of an object.
District
   A zone that has zoning options to encourage transit-oriented development or
has specific urban design standards within the City . An example of a District
is the Downtown Area Infill Incentive District. A "district" is also referred
to as a zoning district .
District Area (DA)
   A district area is a planning area within a Planned Community Development
(PCD) District containing single or multiple designated land use and zoning
districts . Multiple classifications or mixed use classifications may be
permitted in a DA in conformance with applicable specific plans and the General
Plan . A DA in text or table format is the same area as referenced on a map but
describes the area in more specific detail. The City may approve a particular
definition of a DA for any individual PCD District.
Downtown Heritage Incentive Zone
   An area the boundaries of which are congruent with the boundaries of the
Downtown Redevelopment District .
Downtown Parking District
   An area the boundaries of which are congruent with the boundaries of the
Downtown Redevelopment District .
Downtown Redevelopment District
   That area as delineated by the map below.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3088.jpg]
 
Downtown Redevelopment District
Drip-line
   The line that could be drawn on the soil around a tree or shrub directly
under its outermost branch tips.
Drive-In
   A land use designed and operated so as to allow persons to receive a service
or purchase and consumer goods while remaining in a vehicle.
Drive-Through or Drive-Thru
   A land use designed and operated so as to allow persons to receive a service
or purchase goods, but not consume the purchased goods on the site , while
remaining in a vehicle.
Driveway
   A private access connecting two or fewer residential units to a roadway .
Drought Tolerant Vegetation
   Low water-use plants which, after they are established, can survive within
the Sonoran Desert climate with little or no supplemental watering.
Dumpster
   A large container for receiving, collecting, transporting and dumping waste
materials. (See Solid Waste collection standards in the Technical Manual.)
Dwelling Unit
   A building or portion of a building that is designed, occupied, or intended
for occupancy as living quarters exclusively for a single household , which
includes one or more rooms, with sleeping and sanitary facilities and one
enclosed  kitchen . One accessory cooking facility per dwelling unit is
permitted.
Dwelling Unit Sign (7A)
   A sign type located at a single family dwelling unit.
(Am. Ord. 11246, 2/18/2015; Am. Ord. 11508, 12/5/2017)
11.4.6.    DEFINITIONS - E
Earth Material
   Any rock, natural soil, fill , or any combination thereof.
Electric Vehicle (EV) Capable
   A parking space within 6 feet of the termination (in a listed cabinet, box,
or other enclosure) of a listed electrical conduit to accommodate a future
individual branch circuit originating at the main service or subpanel. The
service panel or subpanel circuit directory shall provide capacity to
accommodate a 40-ampere minimum 208-volt or 240-volt dedicated branch circuit.
The ampere and volt minimums described above can be modified with
administrative approval to allow for advances in industry standards. The
conduit shall be installed so that minimal removal of materials is necessary to
complete a future installation.
Electric Vehicle (EV) Installed
   A designated parking space within 6 feet of an installed networked or non-
networked charging station.
Electric Vehicle (EV) Ready
   A parking space within 6 feet of a suitable circuit termination point, such
as a NEMA 14-50R receptacle or EVSE with installed 40-ampere minimum 208-volt
or 240-volt dedicated single phase branch circuit for servicing EVSE. The
ampere and volt minimums described above can be modified with administrative
approval to allow for advances in industry standards.
Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment (EVSE)
   The conductors, including the ungrounded, grounded, and equipment grounding
conductors, and electric vehicle connectors, attachment plugs, and all other
fittings, devices, power outlets, or apparatus installed specifically for the
purpose of transferring energy between the premises wiring and an electric
vehicle.
Enclosed
   See Enclosure.
Enclosure
   A structure that confines an area. The term “enclosed building ” means a
building enclosed with solid walls from floor to ceiling. Any wall
penetrations, such as doors and windows, must include door or window fixtures
that can solidly enclose the entire opening.
Environmental Resource Report
   Exhibits, maps, and written narrative that document the following:
•   The portion of the property within the resource corridor ;
•   The critical riparian habitat within the corridor;
•   The location of wildlife habitat classes that may be found within the
corridor as defined by the Critical and Sensitive Wildlife Habitats Map and
Report;
•   Any endangered species typically found within the corridor;
•   The location of the resource corridor ; and,
•   Other information, such as narratives, conclusions, and recommendations.
Erosion
   The wearing away of the ground surface as a result of the movement of air,
water, ice, or other disturbances.
Escrow
   A fund or deposit established by the responsible party , Depositor; held in
trust by a third party Escrow Agent; and disbursed to the City of Tucson,
Beneficiary; for the fulfillment of those improvements as described in the
Escrow Agreement.
Established Area
   An area where 50% or more of the linear street  frontage of all property,
excluding alleys and drainageways, located on the same side of the street and
within the same block as the proposed development is occupied by principal
structures that conform to the minimum street  perimeter yard required by
Section
6.4.5.C, Street  Perimeter Yard, for the applicable zoning classification or
street  frontage .
Established Area Setback
   A term used to describe the required building setback from a street
applicable as follows.
      1.   When street  frontage of the property is on a street other than one
designated a major street or route by the adopted Major Streets and Routes
(MS&R) Plan ; and,
      2.   Where an established area exists.
Examiner
   Same as Zoning Examiner. See Section
2.2.4.
Excavation
   The mechanical removal of earth material .
Existing Grade
   The grade prior to grading .
Expansion of Land Use
   An increase in land use , lot area, floor area , or vehicular use area ,
except as follows. For purposes of determining compliance with the motor
vehicle and bicycle parking requirements, an increase in floor area only is
considered an expansion of land use .
Exposed Cut
   A cut that, upon completion of the improvement necessitating the cut,
remains visible from beyond the boundaries of the site or lot on which the cut
is located.
(Am. Ord. 11953, 8/23/2022)
11.4.7. DEFINITIONS – F
Façade (7A)
   The side or face of a building.
Family
   Any number of individuals customarily living together as a single household
and using common cooking facilities .
Feather Banner (7A)
   A sign typically made of a flexible fabric attached vertically to a
freestanding pole in the general shape of a feather, teardrop, or similar
shape.
Federal
   Government of the United States of America.
Fill
   A deposit of earth material placed by artificial means.
Financial Assurance
   See definition of Assurance /Financial Assurance
Finish Grade
   The final grade of the site that conforms to the approved plan.
Fixed Balloon Sign (7A)
An airtight bag filled with helium, hot air, or other gas causing the bag to be
lighter-than-air, that is anchored to any structure with rope, cable, or
similar material.
   A.   Small Fixed Balloon (7A)
   A fixed balloon that is less than 2 feet in diameter.
Floor Area
   Same as Gross Floor Area .
Floor Area Ratio (FAR)
   A ratio expressing the amount of square feet of floor area permitted for
every square foot of land area within the site. The FAR is usually expressed as
a single number, i.e., FAR of six means six square feet of floor area for every
square foot of site area. For calculation, see Section
6.4.6.
Food Producing Animal
   See Animal, Food Producing .
Fourth Avenue Business District
   The area delineated on the map.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3090.jpg]
Fourth Avenue Business District
Fowl
   A bird that is used to produce meat or eggs, including chickens, ducks,
turkeys, and similar fowl .
Freestanding Sign (7A)
   An on-site sign or three-dimensional representation of a figure or object,
not attached to any building, supported by uprights or braces or some other
approved support that is capable of withstanding the stress from weight and
wind load. Includes the following sign types:
   A.   Freestanding - Monument Type Sign (7A)
      A sign that has been provided with a base of some type (a pole cover or
architectural embellishment) or stands alone on its own foundation.
   B.   Freestanding - Low Profile Sign (7A)
      A sign that has been provided with a prepared base or support. In order
to encourage design flexibility, the maximum height of the sign may be lowered
in order to decrease the required setback from the street.
   C.   Freestanding - Pole Sign (7A)
      A sign that stands alone on its own foundation and must be provided with
a pole cover or architectural embellishment. The sign may be higher than the
other types of freestanding signs, must be setback further from the street, and
is permitted only for larger premises or developments.
Freeway (7A)
   A roadway designated as a freeway in the Major Streets and Routes Plan.
Freeway-Oriented Business
   A commercial use with direct access to the interstate frontage roads or a
commercial use with a driveway entrance within 100 feet of the interstate
frontage roads .
Freeway Sign (7A)
   A detached on-site sign directing attention to a business, commodity,
service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered upon the same premises as
those upon which the sign is located as provided in Section
7A.10.4 Permanent Signs - Additional Sign Type Standards- Freeway Sign
Standards.
Frontage
   The length of a lot line that abuts a street  right-of-way .
Frontage Road
   A local street or road auxiliary that runs parallel to a freeway or
expressway or other controlled access roadway to allow local traffic to gain
access to abutting property and adjacent areas.
Functional Open Space
   Open space that is a designed element of the development and has a
functionally described and planned use as an active or passive recreational
amenity for the direct benefit of the residents and guests of the development .
Examples include: landscaped areas which provide visual relief, shade,
screening, buffering, and other environmental amenities; nature trails;
exercise trails; active recreation areas (e.g., playgrounds, baseball fields,
multiuse areas); picnic areas and facilities; recreation areas and facilities
(e.g., swimming pools, tennis courts; golf courses).
Future Half Right-of-Way Area
   The same as major streets and routes (MS&R) half right-of-way area , or as
defined by Department of Transportation.
Future Right-of-Way Line
   The same as major streets and routes (MS&R) right-of-way line .
(Am. Ord. 11070, 5/14/2013; Am. Ord. 11328, 12/8/2015; Am. Ord. 11508, 12/5/
2017; Am. Ord. 11803, 12/8/2020)
11.4.8.    DEFINITIONS – G
Garage
   A building  enclosed with walls or doors on three or more sides used for the
parking of one or more motor vehicles.
Garden
   An area used for growing flowers, fruit, or vegetables in the ground, in
containers, and in greenhouses. Gardens include aquaponic and hydroponic
systems.
Gateway Route
   A street or parkway that is a heavily traveled entrance to and through the
City , and is designated as a Gateway Route on the Major Streets and Routes
(MS&R) Plan map. These routes link major employment areas, shopping centers,
and recreational areas used regularly by a large number of residents and
visitors and present a visual impression of Tucson’s character.
General Aviation Aircraft
   Aircraft with a maximum gross weight of 12,500 pounds, excluding ultralight
aircraft.
General Plan
   A comprehensive declaration of purposes, policies, and programs to guide the
growth and development of the City and its environs, addressing the following
elements: land use ; circulation; conservation and environmental planning;
parks, recreation, open space , and trails; public buildings , services, and
facilities; cultural heritage; housing; conservation, rehabilitation, and
redevelopment; safety; human resources; government; economic development ;
community character and design; growth area and population; cost of development
; and water resources.
Glean(ing)
   The act of gathering grain or the like after the reapers or regular
gatherers.
Goat, Miniature
   Miniature goats refer to Nigerian Dwarf, African Pygmy or other breeds that
do not exceed 70 pounds at full size.
Governmental
   Any agency or department of the federal , state , county , or City
government.
Grade
   The vertical location of the ground surface.
Grading
   Any excavating, filling, or combination thereof.
Greenhouse, Mechanical
   An enclosed structure (as by glass or plastic) used for the cultivation or
protection of plants and uses mechanical systems to heat or cool the structure.
For the purposes of determining perimeter yard requirements, greenhouses cooled
solely by an evaporative cooler are considered passive greenhouses .
Greenhouse, Passive
   An enclosed structure (as by glass or plastic) used for the cultivation or
protection of plants and does not use motorized heating or cooling systems. For
the purposes of determining perimeter yard requirements, greenhouses cooled
solely by an evaporative cooler are considered passive greenhouses.
Gross Floor Area
   The sum of the horizontal areas of all floors of all buildings , including
accessory buildings on a lot , measured from the exterior faces of the exterior
walls or from the centerline of walls separating two buildings and includes
elevator shafts and the stairwells at each story. Gross floor area includes
floor space with structural headroom of six feet and six inches or more used
for mechanical equipment; penthouses; attic space; interior balconies;
mezzanines; and service bays but does not include any interior space used for
parking, loading, or loading space that is incidental to the principal use .
Ground-mounted Sign (7A)
   Signs affixed to the ground, placed on the ground, or attached to a
perimeter wall or fence that face the street.
Group Dwelling
   Within the Downtown Area Infill Incentive District (IID) the term "group
dwelling" means a structure that:
   A.   meets the definition of "group dwelling" contained in Section
11.3.7.B; and,
   B.   is greater than two stories or 25 feet in height .
(Am. Ord. 11246, 2/18/2015; Am. Ord. 11328, 12/8/2015; Am. Ord. 11508, 12/5/
2017)
11.4.9.    DEFINITIONS – H
Height, Patio Wall or Fence
   Same as Structure Height .
Height, Structure
   Same as Structure Height .
Historic Landmark
   A historic site or structure of the highest historic, cultural,
architectural, or archaeological importance to Tucson that if demolished or
significantly altered would constitute an irreplaceable loss to the quality and
character of Tucson. A Historic Landmark is an outstanding or unique example of
architectural style; is associated with a major historic event, activity, or
person ; or has unique visual quality and identification. A Historic Landmark
may be located within the boundaries of or outside a historic district .
Historic Site or Historic Structure
   A building , structure, object, or site , including vegetation or signs
located on the premises, that:
•   Dates from a particular significant period in Tucson’s history, i.e.,
prehistoric, native indigenous, Pre-Colonial (before 1775), Spanish Frontier
(Colonial) (1775-1821), Mexican Frontier (1821-1853), Territorial (1854-1912),
Post-Territorial (1912-1920), or Post-World War I Development (1920-1945), or
relates to events, personages, or architectural styles that are at least 50
years old; however, outstanding examples less than 50 years old should be
evaluated on their own merits;
•   Is associated with the lives of outstanding historic personages;
•   Is associated with significant historic events or occurrences;
•   Exemplifies the architectural period in which it was built and has
distinguishing characteristics of an architectural style or method of
construction or is the notable work of a master builder, designer, or architect
whose individual genius influenced his/her age;
•   Contributes information of archaeological, historic, cultural, or social
importance relating to the heritage of the community; or,
•   Relates positively to buildings in its immediate vicinity in terms of
scale, size, massing, etc., such that its removal would be an irreparable loss
to the setting.
Home Occupation
   A land use activity carried out for financial gain by a resident, on the
resident’s property, conducted as an accessory use to the Family Dwelling or
Mobile Home Dwelling use on the property.
Homeowners’ Association
   A legal entity established for the purpose of owning and maintaining
commonly held private real property whether residential or commercial in
nature.
Household
   A family living together in a dwelling unit , with common access to, and use
of, all living, eating, kitchen , and storage areas within the dwelling unit .
Hula Strip Sign (7A)
A type of temporary sign that is a string of strips or pennants sewn together
side-by-side.
Hydroponics
   Cultivation of plants in nutrient solution rather than in soil.
(Am. Ord. 11328, 12/8/2015; Am. Ord. 11803, 12/8/2020)
11.4.10. DEFINITIONS – I
Improvements
   Any on-site or off-site improvements, such as, but not limited to, refuse
container enclosures , streets , sidewalks , sewer, water, and electric utility
installations, drainage and flood control facilities, monuments or other
similar facilities or developments for which the City of Tucson may ultimately
assume responsibility for maintenance and operation, or landscaping ,
screening, or other site improvements required by the Tucson Unified
Development Code (UDC) or other appropriate City code.
Incidental
   Happening in connection with something more important; secondary or minor.
Individuals with Physical Disabilities
   A person , as defined in A.R.S. §28-881, or as it may be amended, having a
physical impairment that substantially limits that person ’s ability to move
from place to place.
Infrastructure
   All structures or improvements to the land, such as roads or facilities for
the provision of gas, electric, water, drainage, or communications, that are
necessary to support development on or abutting property.
Ingress/Egress
   The safe, unobstructed passage to and from the premises for use by vehicles,
including refuse collection vehicles, fire vehicles, bicycles, and pedestrians.
Interior Landscape Border
   An area along the interior side of a property line (s) of a site containing
landscape materials , screening, and open space that serves as a buffer between
land uses of different intensities.
Interior Lot Line
   A lot line other than a street lot line .
Interior Sign (7A)
   An on-site sign, emblem, or decal that is ground or wall-mounted providing
information to the public such as wayfinding, facilities, services or
prohibitions relating to the premises and which is inside a building, in a
courtyard or hallway, or is within a premise's boundaries but is either not
facing or is not readable from the right of way or is not designed nor intended
to be readable from the right-of-way, does not require zoning review but may
require building code review.
Intrusion
   A building , object, site , structure, or portion thereof that detracts from
a district ’s historic significance because of its architectural
incompatibility with the district ’s time, place, and historic development or
its incompatibility of scale, materials, or texture or a building , object,
site , or structure whose historic architectural integrity has been
irretrievably lost.
(Am. Ord. 11328, 12/8/2015; Am. Ord. 11508, 12/5/2017)
11.4.11. DEFINITIONS – J
   Reserved
11.4.12. DEFINITIONS – K
Kitchen
   A room within a building containing facilities for the storage, cooking, and
preparation of food, specifically a sink, refrigerator, stove, and an oven.
11.4.13. DEFINITIONS – L
Land Use
   A description of the existing or proposed occupancy or utilization of land
that include the principal use and accessory uses .
Landscape Materials
   Any materials used for the purpose of landscape improvement that may
include, but are not limited to, the following: trees, shrubs, cacti,
vegetative ground covers, turf , vines, walkways, berms, stone or inert ground
cover materials, sculptures, fountains, irrigation equipment, street furniture,
outdoor lighting, fences, or walls.
Landscape Plan
   A graphic representation of the development  site indicating the location of
all existing and proposed landscape improvements to be present on the site at
the completion of the construction of the project .
Landscaping
   An exterior improvement of a site in accordance with an approved landscape
plan and approved landscape methods, materials, and maintenance.
Land Split
   Lot split has the same meaning as “land split” as defined in A.R.S. §9-463
(3), that is, the division of improved or unimproved land for the purpose of
sale or lease, which is not defined as a subdivision , whose area is two and
one-half acres or less in size, into two tracts or parcels if previously
platted, or, three tracts or parcels of land or less if not previously platted.
Ldn (Day-Night Average Sound Level)]
   Ldn values are expressed in decibels and represent the average noise level
over a 24-hour period for an average day of the year. For Tucson International
Airport , the Ldn values are calculated based on an FAA integrated noise model,
which averages noise over a 365-day year. For Davis-Monthan Air Force Base, Ldn
values are calculated based on the Department of Defense Noise Map model that
averages noise over the total flying days of the year.
Level of EVSE Charging
   There are three levels of EV charging: Level 1, Level 2, and Level 3. The
higher the level of charging, more power is delivered to the vehicle.
   Level 1 chargers plug directly into a standard 120 volt AC outlet supplying
an average power output of 1.3 kW to 2.4 kW. This power output is equivalent to
3-5 miles of EV range per hour. An overnight charge will add 30-50 miles of
range.
   Level 2 charging requires a dedicated 240 V circuit and output ranges from 3
kW to 19 kW of AC power. This power output translates to 18-28 miles of range
per hour. An average EV can be fully charged in 8 hours or less on Level 2
charging.
   Level 3 charging has a maximum output of 350 kW. Level 3 uses direct current
(DC) and can recharge an EV at a rate of 3 to 20 miles of range per minute.
Level 3 charging is designed to fill an EV battery to 80% in 20-40 minutes, and
100% in 60-90 minutes.
Loading Area
   An off-street space or berth for temporary parking of a vehicle while
loading or unloading merchandise, cargo, or materials.
Local Street
   A street that primarily serves as access to a residence or other abutting
property.
Logo (7A)
   A graphic symbol or insignia that serves to identify a business, building or
complex.
Long-Term Bicycle Parking Facility
   A temporary bicycle storage facility that provides a secure place for
employees, students, residents, commuters, and others to park their bicycles
for several hours or more.
Lot
   A tract of land bounded on all sides by property lines , of sufficient size
to meet minimum zoning standards, with legal access to a public street .
Lot Coverage
   The area of a lot covered by buildings , storage areas, and vehicular use
areas . For specific application standards, refer to Section
6.4.3.
Lot Lines
   The property lines bounding a lot .
Lot Size
   The area contained within a lot , including all easements on private
property.
Low Enrollment
   A school having registered enrollment at 65% or less than the school’s
capacity, not including any portable classroom buildings . For the purposes of
this definition, magnet schools are considered low enrollment schools.
Low-Income Area
   An area determined to have 51% or more of its residents in the low to
moderate income levels as established by the Department of Housing and Urban
Development (HUD) based on the most recent United States decennial census. A
map identifying the low income areas is available in the Housing and Community
Development Department (HCDD) and Planning and Development Services Department
(PDSD). The map is updated administratively by HCDD to reflect poverty and low
income data from the most recent United States decennial census.
Low Income Housing
   Housing that is affordable (no more than 30% of a household's total income)
for households that make 80% or less of the median income in the local area
(Area Median Income, or AMI).
(Am. Ord. 11508, 12/5/2017; Am. Ord. 11922, 7/12/2022; Am. Ord. 11953, 8/23/
2022)
11.4.14. DEFINITIONS – M
Major Employment Center
   A grouping of commercial, institutional, office, or industrial uses or any
combination of such uses that are of such scale and in such proximity to each
other that enables and encourages employees to use alternate modes of travel
both to and from work and during daily activities (e.g., shopping, lunch,
banking). Examples: Tucson Medical Center (TMC), Park Mall, El Con Mall, Pima
Community College, St. Joseph’s Hospital, Tucson Mall, and the Downtown
Business District.
Major Streets and Routes
   Those freeways, arterials, and collector streets identified in the Major
Streets and Routes Plan .
Major Streets and Routes (MS&R) Plan
   The plan adopted by the Mayor and Council to implement the circulation
element of the General Plan that identifies the general location and size of
existing and proposed freeways, arterial and collector streets , future right-
of-way lines , typical intersections, and Gateway and Scenic Routes .
Major Streets and Routes (MS&R) Right-of-Way Area
   That area between the MS&R right-of-way lines of a major street or route
designated as such by the MS&R Plan . The right-of-way width existing for the
major street or route may or may not be equal to the MS&R right-of-way area and
in certain situations includes privately-owned property.
Major Streets and Routes (MS&R) Right-of-Way Lines
   A line establishing the projected width for that major street or route
located parallel or approximately parallel to the center line of the street a
distance equal to one-half the right-of-way width shown for that street or
route in the MS&R Plan .
Master Developer
   The Master Developer is the person or entity that has sole control of the
property within the Planned Community Development (PCD) District at the time of
application and for the implementation of the PCD District after approval.
Master Development Plan (MDP)
   An MDP is a multi-faceted development plan, including a land use plan,
resource and infrastructure plan, development agreement, and phasing plan that
controls the overall implementation of the Planned Community Development
District.
Meal
   For the purposes of applying Section
4.9.4.V, a “meal” means the usual assortment of foods commonly ordered at a
restaurant at various hours of the day.
Mechanical Greenhouse
   See Greenhouse, Mechanical.
Miniature Goat
   See Goat, Miniature.
Minor Subdivision
   A subdivision that complies with the criteria established for minor
subdivisions in Section
8.4.3, Minor Subdivision. A Minor Subdivision may be accomplished with less
documentation than other subdivisions.
Mitigation
   Methods used to alleviate or compensate for the negative impact of
development on healthy Protected Native Plants .
Mixed Use
   A single building or single development of more than one building that
includes residential and non-residential uses. In a mixed use  development the
different types of land uses are in close proximity, planned as a unified
complementary whole, and functionally integrated to the use of shared vehicular
and pedestrian access and parking areas .
Mobile Home Space
   An area of a mobile home park with a pad and utility pedestal that is rented
or sold for the placement of a mobile home and for the exclusive use of the
occupants of the mobile home.
More Restrictive Zoning
   See Section
4.5, More Restrictive Zoning.
Motor Vehicle Parking Space
   An area permanently reserved and maintained for the parking of one motor
vehicle.
Multiple Use
   A development on a site with two or more separate principal land uses ,
designed, developed, and owned or managed as a single coordinated entity
utilizing legally established common elements or shared facilities. Such common
elements shall comply with the following standards.
•   Shared motor vehicle and pedestrian access is provided to the site from a
street . The number of curb cuts is limited to two or fewer, unless a greater
number is approved by the Tucson Department of Transportation City Engineer or
designee.
•   Shared pedestrian and motor vehicle circulation is provided.
•   The motor vehicle parking areas are common to all land uses on the site .
•   All common or shared facilities are legally documented for use by all land
uses on site for the life of the project as a mixed use .
Mural (7A)
   A piece of artwork painted on, or applied directly to the exterior walls.
(Am. Ord. 11328, 12/8/2015; Am. Ord. 11508, 12/5/2017)
11.4.15. DEFINITIONS – N
Native Plant Preservation Plan
   A graphic representation of a project site that includes, but is not limited
to, an aerial photograph, at a minimum scale of one inch equals 100 feet,
indicating the project site boundaries and individual native plants or native
plant preservation areas to be assessed and utilized to satisfy preservation
standards. Based on the Native Plant Preservation methodology selected by the
applicant, additional Plan elements will be required.
Native Vegetation
   Plants indigenous to the site and to areas contiguous to the site .
Natural Grade
   The topographic configuration of land, graphically represented by contour
lines, prior to any grading or other human disturbance.
Natural Open Space
   Any area of land, essentially unimproved and not occupied by structures or
man-made impervious surfaces, except as permitted herein, that is set aside,
dedicated , or reserved in perpetuity for public or private enjoyment as a
preservation or conservation area. A pedestrian or non-motorized recreational
trail may be located in a natural open space . Rights-of-way (including alleys)
and utilities are allowed to cross when the impact of the crossing on the
natural open space is minimized.
Natural Undisturbed Open Space
   An area of land that is unimproved and not occupied by structures or man-
made impervious surfaces and includes environmentally significant features (as
identified in the Environmental Resource Zone ; Hillside Development Zone ;
and, Watercourse Amenities, Safety and Habitat zone ), culturally significant
features (features eligible for National Register status as identified during
the cultural resource assessment process), or designated floodplains (except
where channelized).
Neighborhood Association
   A neighborhood association registered with the City .
Neighborhood Character
   The combination of various defining characteristics of Contributing
Properties and existing development within a Development Zone that creates and
conveys the historic significance and visual character of a neighborhood. These
characteristics include scale and proportion , architectural style and detail,
open spaces , spatial relationships, and landscaping .
Net Acreage
   The remaining ground area after deleting all portions for proposed and
existing public streets within a development , parcel , or subdivision .
Networked Electric Vehicle (EV) Station
   An EV charging unit that is part of an EVSE network, connected via the
internet, and that can provide functions such as billing, access control and
real time updates while charging. Information can be accessed remotely, such as
through a smart phone app.
Noise Control District-A (NCD-A)
   A specifically designated noise exposure area at the Davis Monthan Air Force
Base where the existing and predicted average noise levels are 65 to 70 Ldn .
Noise Control District-B (NCD-B)
   A specifically designated noise exposure area at the Davis Monthan Air Force
Base where the existing and predicted average noise levels are 70 Ldn or
higher.
Noise Control District-65 (NCD-65)
   As applied in Section
5.6, Airport Environs Zone (AEZ), a specifically designated noise exposure area
at Tucson International Airport where the existing and predicted average noise
levels are 65 to 70 Ldn .
Noise Control District-70 (NCD-70)
   As applied in Section
5.6, Airport Environs Zone (AEZ), a specifically designated noise exposure area
at Tucson International Airport  where the existing and predicted average noise
levels are 70 Ldn  or higher.
Nominal Cost
   A cost that is very small, or negligible, bearing no relation to the real
value at the time of transaction. Such cost should not exceed $500 or the
minimal cost of transferring ownership, whichever is less.
Non-Chartered Financial Institution
   A use, other than state or federally chartered bank, credit union, mortgage
lender or savings and loan association, that offers deferred presentment
services as defined in A.R.S. § 6-1251(3) or check cashing services and loans
for payment of a percentage fee. Specifically included are check cashing
businesses that charge a percentage fee for cashing a check or negotiable
instrument, payday loan businesses that make loans upon assignment of wages
received and auto title lenders who offer a short-term loan with a car title as
a means to secure the loan.
Nonconforming Sign (7A)
   A sign lawfully erected or altered in conformance with applicable
regulations, including a sign lawfully existing in the county at the time of
annexation, that no longer complies with the sign standards due to amendments
to this sign code adopted subsequent to the approved permit for the sign or the
annexation.
Nonconforming Structure or Lot
   A structure or portion thereof that was lawfully erected or altered or a lot
that was legally established that no longer complies with the specific land use
standards of the Unified Development Code (UDC) applicable to the zoning
category in which the building or structure or lot is located.
Nonconforming Use
   An existing land use activity lawfully established and maintained which no
longer complies with land use standards of the Unified Development Code (UDC)
applicable to the zoning category in which the land use activity is located.
Noncontributing Property
   A building , object, site , or structure that does not add to a historic
district ’s sense of time, place, or historic development . A Noncontributing
Property may be a nonhistoric incompatible property, a historic architecturally
compromised property, or an Intrusion .
Non-motorized Recreational Trail
   A publicly accessible, improved or natural path designed for pedestrians,
equestrians, bicycles - including electric bicycles, if local regulations
permit - and manual and electric wheelchairs.
Non-networked Electric Vehicle (EV) Station
   A stand-alone EV charging unit that is not part of an EVSE network.
Nuisance
   A condition or use on the property that endangers life or health, gives
offense to the senses, or obstructs the reasonable and comfortable use of other
property, or any combination of these effects.
(Am. Ord. 11508, 12/5/2017; Am. Ord. 11953, 8/23/2022)
11.4.16. DEFINITIONS – O
Oasis Allowance
   A certain percentage of the land area on a site in which plants not listed
on the Arizona Department of Water Resource’s Low Water Use/Drought Tolerant
Plant List may be used and that is located where the oasis will return maximum
benefit in terms of cooling, aesthetic pleasure, and exposure to people.
Obsolete Sign Copy (7A)
   Any sign copy, excluding heritage landmark signs (HLS), that no longer
correctly identifies or directs attention to an existing use or product
available on the premises.
Occupancy (7A)
   The purpose for which a building or part thereof is used or intended to be
used.
Off-Site Sign (7A)
   A sign not located on the premises of the use identified or advertised by
the sign.
Off-Street
   To be within property boundaries and not within a right-of-way , such as a
street or alley .
Off-Street Parking
   Any space provided for vehicular parking not within the street  right-of-way
.
On-Site Sign (7A)
   A sign located on the same premises as the use identified or advertised by
the sign.
On-Street Parking
   The storage space for an automobile or other motorized vehicle that is
located within the street  right-of-way .
Opaque
   Opaque means that the material shall not transmit visible light.
Open Space
   Open space is the aggregate of “natural undisturbed open space (NUOS),”
“natural open space ” and “functional open space .”
Open Structure
   Any structure that is open on the three sides nearest the street and that
does not obscure lines of sight above 30 inches or below six feet, measured
from finish grade of pavement.
Outdoor Recreation Facility
   An area designed for active recreation, whether publicly or privately owned,
including, but not limited to baseball, soccer, football, golf, tennis,
swimming pools, and race tracks of any sort.
(Am. Ord. 11508, 12/5/2017; Am. Ord. 11803, 12/8/2020)
11.4.17. DEFINITIONS – P
Parapet (7A)
   The portion of a wall that extends above the roofline.
Parcel
   The same as “lot .” The term “parcel” is generally listed to describe a
piece of property recorded as a division of land by a metes and bounds
description and may or may not be a part of a subdivision  plat. In a project
where a division of land is proposed, each proposed division is considered a
lot for the purpose of applying the requirements of the zoning ordinance.
Parking Area
   Same as Vehicular Use Area .
Parking Area Access Lane (s) (PAAL)
   The area within a parking lot serving as a travel lane or lanes , other than
those in a street , that provides direct ingress and egress from individual
parking spaces. Typical examples include shopping center parking lots ,
apartment developments using common parking, and other places in which the
primary or sole purpose is to provide access to a parking area , as opposed to
providing access directly to property.
Parking Lane
   An area set aside at the edge of a paved roadway for purposes of parking
vehicles.
Parking Lot
   Same as Vehicular Use Area .
Parking Lot Sign (7A)
   A wall or freestanding sign used to identify a parking facility.
Parking Structure
   A structure used for the parking of vehicles where parking is accommodated
on one or more levels.
Party
   As applicable to a public review process, means any of the following:
•   Applicant;
•   All owners of record of property within the property owners notification
area specified by the applicable development process and any tenants residing
on such property;
•   The City , including applicable Ward offices; or,
•   Any person , organization, group, or governmental entity which demonstrates
to the hearing body a substantial interest in the matter before it or receives
a particular and direct impact which is distinguishable from the effects or
impacts upon the general public.
Party of Record
   The applicant, all persons who received notice of the application during a
review process, all persons who provided a written statement of an interest in
the project prior to the issuance of a decision, and all persons who gave
testimony at a public hearing.
Passive Greenhouse
   See Greenhouse, Passive.
Peak
   A point of maximum elevation.
Peak Use Times
   The period(s) during which activity at any given use is highest. Peak use
times are determined on a daily, weekly, or seasonal basis depending on the
type of use.
Pedestrian Circulation Path
   An exterior way of passage that is designed for pedestrian use and which may
include general pedestrian areas, such as sidewalks , plazas, and courts.
Pedestrian Distance
   A measurable distance between supportive land uses (such as between
residential uses and schools or residential uses and commercial uses) that
encourage walking as part of a multi-modal strategy within a development .
Perimeter Yard
   A setback area to separate buildings from adjacent property or streets .
Permanent Sign (7A)
   A sign that is not a portable or temporary sign.
Person
   Any individual as well as any firm, corporation, partnership, company, or
any other form of multiple organization for the carrying on of business.
Phased Development
   For purposes of consideration and approval of Protected Development Right
Plans, a Phased Development is a development that (a) consists of at least 40
acres depicted on a single master subdivision  plat for a residential
development or (b) consists of at least 20 acres depicted on a single master
subdivision  plat or site plan for a nonresidential development or (c) is the
subject of a newly adopted Planned Area Development (PAD) zone or (d) the Mayor
and Council have identified as a phased development for purposes of protected
development rights .
Phased Grading
   For grading purposes requires separate/additional grading permits where the
project is more than 35 acres . Phased grading may be required for any size of
development where the City determines, or the applicant proposes, that phasing
is required due to design or safety-related issues for the project that may be
related to public access or construction activity.
Pictograph (7A)
   A graphic, symbolic representation of a commonly recognized idea or item,
excluding words or phrases. Example: a picture of a camera used to identify a
photographic supply store.
Plan Amendment
   A proposed change(s) to a plan previously adopted by Mayor and Council.
Plans Review Subcommittee
   The same as the Tucson-Pima County Historical Commission Plans Review
Subcommittee.
Plant Community
   A biological grouping of vegetation frequently found under natural
conditions due to their common soils, moisture, climate, and orientation
requirements.
Plant Inventory
   A numerical listing and assessment of the plants on a site that includes
plant genus and species, size, health, age, form or structure, and locational
situation, such as soils and topography.
Plat
   A map of a subdivision . The term “plat” includes:
   A.   Block Plat
   A map of a subdivision that consists of ten or fewer lots the size of which
are in conformance with the applicable zoning requirements for lot size .
   B.   Tentative Plat
   A graphic representation of a proposed subdivision , including supporting
data, designed and prepared in accordance with the subdivision provisions of
this Article, any other local applicable regulation, and state statute. A
tentative plat is the same as a preliminary plat as defined in state statute.
   C.   Final Plat
   A survey document suitable for recordation of all or part of a subdivision
substantially conforming to an approved tentative plat, if a tentative plat is
required, prepared in accordance with the subdivision provisions of this
Article, any other local applicable regulation, and state statute.
   D.   Recorded Plat
   A fully executed final plat, bearing all required signatures and
certificates of approval, that has been recorded in the Pima County Recorder’s
Office.
Pole Cover (7A)
   A cover that encloses or decorates a pole or other structural sign support.
Political Election Sign (7A)
   A sign not permanently installed in the ground or attached to a building
relating to the election of a person to a public office, or to a political
party, or to a matter to be voted upon at an election called by a public body.
Does not include political headquarters signage.
Population Ratio
   Population ratio is a formula used to derive a relationship between a
population or dwelling unit count within a development and the square footage,
acreage or number of facilities such as parks, fire stations, and related
facilities required in the development .
Portable Sign (7A)
   A sign that is capable of being moved and not designed to be permanently
attached to a building or permanently anchored to the ground that is
constructed of paper, cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, plywood, light
plastic or other non-permanent similar materials.
Premise (7A)
   A premise is all contiguous land used and occupied by a use or business. All
buildings, parking, storage and service areas, and private roads or driveways
that are an integral part of the use or business are considered part of the
premise. Commercial shopping centers, office complexes, commercial or
industrial subdivisions, or similar developments are a premise to the extent
such lands are identified as a single site that may contain one or multiple
development plans or packages.
Preservation-in-Place
   No disturbance of one or more plants; site planning and design that retains
existing plant genus and species in their current location, grade, and
configuration and allows for their future health and growth.
Prevailing Setback
   The most frequently occurring distances between structures and street and
interior property lines in a Development Zone .
Principal Use
   The primary use to which the premises is devoted and the primary purpose for
which the premises exist.
Private Road
   A street not dedicated to the public.
Private Street Access
   Ingress-egress to a parcel provided by an abutting private street in which
the owner of the parcel has a legal interest to assure perpetual use for
access.
Professional Inspection
   The inspection required by this code to be performed by the civil engineer,
soils engineer or engineering geologist. Such inspections include those
performed by a person supervised by such engineers or geologists and shall be
sufficient to form an opinion relating to the conduct of the work.
Project
   A development , consisting of one or more contiguous  lots , planned and
constructed to function as a single entity, utilizing common or shared
facilities, structures , parking, and vehicular and pedestrian access.
Project Completion Documentation
   Documents associated with the completion of a project , and may include as-
builts, substantial completion letters.
Project Site
   In general application, the area of the project . A site may be any number
of contiguous  lots , separated by no more than 600 feet, or it may be one lot
. As applicable in Section
5.6, Airport Environs Zone (AEZ), the land area designated for development  and
managed as a single entity, exclusive of any abutting  public right-of-way .
The project  site  utilizes common facilities such as parking, structures , and
vehicular and pedestrian access. Noncontiguous lots  shall, at a minimum, be
connected by pedestrian facilities.
Projecting Sign (7A)
   A sign, other than a wall sign, attached to a building or other structure
and extending in whole or in part more than twelve inches beyond the surface of
the portion of the building to which it is attached, beyond the building, or
over the public right-of-way.
Property Line
   The lot line that defines the legal exterior limits of a lot .
Property Owner’s Association
   A legal entity established for the purpose of owning and maintaining
commonly held private real property.
Proportion
   The relationship between the width and height of a building ’s front facade,
windows, and doors.
Protected Development Right
   As provided in A.R.S. §9-1201, a protected development right is the right to
undertake and complete the development and use of property under the terms and
conditions of a protected development right plan, without compliance with
subsequent changes in zoning regulations and development standards, except as
provided by A.R.S. §9-1204.
Protected Native Plants
   Plant genus and species of a minimum size with special status per the
Protected Native Plant List in Section
5-02.0.0 of the Technical Standards Manual.
Protected Peak
   A peak identified by the Mayor and Council to be visually significant and
important to the image and economy of the City . These peaks are shown on the
Hillside Development Zone (HDZ) Maps.
Protected Peak Setback Area
   The 300 foot distance, measured horizontally in all directions from a
protected peak .
Protected Ridge
   A ridge identified to be visually significant and important to the image and
economy of the City . These ridges are shown on the Hillside Development Zone
(HDZ) Maps.
Protected Ridge Setback Area
   The 300 foot distance, measured horizontally in all directions from the line
of a protected ridge .
Protected Riparian Area
   Restricted area as defined in Section X and includes overlapping floodplain
and riparian areas.
Provider
   See Section
11.4.24, Wireless Communication Provider.
Public Accommodation
   All public places of entertainment, amusement, or recreation; all public
places at which food or beverages are sold for consumption on the premises; all
public places that are conducted for the lodging of transients or for the
benefit, use, or accommodation of those seeking health or recreation; and all
establishments that cater or offer their services, facilities, or goods to, or
solicit patronage from, the members of the general public. Any residential
house or residence in which less than five rooms are rented is not a place of
public accommodation.
Public Area
   The area within a publicly-owned property, such as, but not limited to,
street or alley  right-of-way , or the area within a public accommodations
 land use set aside for use by the general public, such as, but not limited to,
the dining, waiting, or rest room areas in a restaurant.
Public Assembly
   Any structure that is intended, designed, or used in whole or in part by the
general public, for such purposes as, but not limited to, deliberation,
worship, entertainment, education, amusement, drinking, or dining. For the
purposes of this definition, the term general public does not include those
persons who are employed full or part time at the project site ; those persons
who, on a temporary basis, provide or deliver goods or services to the project
site ; or any other persons engaged in similar activities at the project site .
Public Entrance
   An entryway into a building intended for direct public access from a vehicle
use area or sidewalk .
Public Open Space
   Open space owned by a public agency, such as the City of Tucson Department
of Parks and Recreation, and maintained by it for the use and enjoyment of the
general public.
Public Preserve
   Saguaro National Park (Rincon Mountain District and Tucson Mountain
District); Tucson Mountain Park; and Coronado National Forest.
Public Street Access
   Ingress-egress to a parcel provided by an abutting public street in which
the owner of the parcel has a legal interest to assure perpetual use for
access.
(Am. Ord. 11328, 12/8/2015; Am. Ord. 11508, 12/5/2017)
11.4.18. DEFINITIONS – Q
(Reserved)
11.4.19. DEFINITIONS – R
Radioactive Material
   Any material (solid, liquid, or gas) that emits radiation spontaneously. For
the purpose of this definition, radiation means ionizing radiation, i.e., gamma
rays and X-rays, alpha and beta particles, high-speed electrons, neutrons,
protons, and other nuclear particles.
Recreational Vehicle (R.V.)
   A unit designed to provide travelers’ accommodations built into, as an
integral part of, or attached to a self-propelled motor vehicle chassis or
drawn by a motor vehicle. The unit contains permanently installed independent
support systems that provide at least four of the following facilities:
cooking, refrigerator or ice box, self-contained toilet, heating, air
conditioning, a portable water supply system including a faucet and sink, a
separate 110-125 volt electrical power supply, or an LP gas supply.
Recreational Vehicle (R.V.) Space
   An area within an R.V. park for the placement of an R.V. unit, in addition
to any exclusive use area adjacent to the unit set aside for the occupants of
the R.V., such as a patio or vehicular space.
Regional Park System
   Park land and associated recreational facilities and improvements to City -
owned land used for active and passive recreational purposes for public use.
Regional Park (System) Improvements
   Capital improvements that result in a net expansion of the park land or
recreational facilities in regional parks that are available to the public.
Remodeling, replacement or maintenance of existing equipment or facilities
shall not constitute a regional park system improvement.
Rental Unit
   One or more rooms in a Travelers’ Accommodation, Lodging, facility designed
for occupancy by one or more persons for compensation.
Repair (7A)
   To mend, renovate, or restore a sign structure to its original existing
condition.
Resource Corridor
   An area running approximately parallel to the sides and banks of designated
washes defined and characterized by the location of critical riparian habitat
associated with the wash, plus an area of 150 feet from the edge of the
critical riparian habitat on each side of the wash.
Revegetation
   Establishment of plants at a density similar to what exists under similar
topographic and soil conditions.
Rezone
   To change the zoning classification of land.
Rhythm
   The ordered recurrent alternation of solids to voids in the facade and
streetscape.
Ridge
   When used in relation to natural terrain, a relatively narrow elevation that
is prominent on account of the steep angle at which it rises; an elongated
crest or series of crests, with or without peaks , significantly higher than
the adjoining ground.
Ridge Line
   A ground line located at the highest elevation of the ridge running parallel
to the long axis of the ridge .
Right-of-Way
   An area reserved for a public or private use, such as, but not limited to,
street or alley  rights-of-way and utility easements.
Riparian
   Land adjacent to or within washes and drainageways that is occupied by
biotic communities differing in species composition and/or density from
surrounding upland due to an increase in moisture and different soil
conditions.
Roadway
   The paved portion of a street , excluding curbs. On an unpaved street , the
roadway is the area set aside for motor vehicle traffic.
Roof Signs (7A)
   Signs that are erected upon, against, or directly above a roof, or on top of
or directly above the parapet of a building.
(Am. Ord. 11508, 12/5/2017)
11.4.20. DEFINITIONS – S
Salvageable/Transplantable Plant
   A plant rated as viable that also has a good likelihood of surviving and
adapting to a new location if dug up and replanted.
Scenic Route
   Any route designated as a Scenic Route in the Major Streets and Routes
(MS&R) Plan .
Screen
   An opaque barrier designed and constructed to conceal areas used for
storage, refuse, mechanical equipment, parking, or delivery service loading
bays from street and public view or to buffer adjacent  land uses .
Search Area
   As applied to wireless communication standards, the limited area within a
service area where an antenna can be placed that will provide satisfactory
communications service within that service area .
Seriously Mentally Ill Person
   One as defined in A.R.S. § 36-550. The determination is to be made by an
individual qualified in the State of Arizona to make such evaluation.
Service Area
   As applied to wireless communication standards, the geographical area where
satisfactory communications service can be provided by the placement of a
specific antenna .
Service Bay
   A specific location on a site reserved for servicing a motor vehicle. Such
location can be within an enclosed  building or can be a designated area
located outside a building .
Service Radius Distance
   Service radius distance is a measurable distance that is measured from a
public facility (such as a park, fire station, police station, school, and
related facilities) outward toward land uses that fall within the facility’s
service area .
Service Units
   Vehicle-miles of travel and equivalent dwelling units .
Setback
   The distance from a set point and is frequently used interchangeably with
the term “perimeter yard .” Setbacks may also pertain to drainage-related or
other setbacks.
Short-Term Bicycle Parking Facility
   A facility which provides a stationary object to which the operator can lock
the bicycle frame and both wheels with a user provided U-shaped lock or a cable
and lock.
Sidewalk
   A constructed pedestrian circulation path meeting, at a minimum, the
specifications for construction listed in this code or the Technical Manual.
Sidewalk Area
   That portion of a street between the curb line or the lateral line of a
roadway and the adjacent  property line , whether identified on the ground as a
pedestrian walkway or not.
Sign (7A)
   Every advertising message, announcement, declaration, display, illustration,
insignia, surface or space erected or maintained in a location outside any
building and visible to the public for identification, advertising or promotion
of the interest of any person, entity, product or service.
Sign Copy (7A)
Any words, letters, numbers, figures, designs, or other symbolic
representations incorporated onto the face of a sign.
Site
   The land area consisting of a portion of a lot , an entire lot , or
contiguous  lots , not including dedicated public property, designated for
development as a single entity.
Site Area
   The land area of a site .
Site Coverage
   The area of an overall project site , inclusive of individual lots , covered
by such improvements as buildings , storage areas, and vehicular use areas .
See Section
6.4.3, Lot Coverage and Site Coverage, for the types of improvements  included
and not included in the site  coverage calculation. Site coverage, instead of
lot coverage , is used when calculating coverage limits for Flexible Lot
Developments.
Site Plan
   A drawing of a project site that provides detailed information that shows
how a proposed project will be developed in compliance with City regulations
and other applicable regulations as required by outside review agencies
involved in development review.
Site Utilization
   The spacing between the sides of buildings .
Slope
   An inclined ground surface the inclination of which is expressed as a ratio
of horizontal distance to vertical distance.
Slope Plan
   A plan that demonstrates the feasibility of complying with the site  grading
standards and site  cut and fill standards, and further depicts the location,
extent, and treatment of all cut and fill  slopes .
Solar Access
   Access to sunlight to protect active or passive solar energy systems from
shadows blocking exposure to the sun during hours of high insolation, from 9:20
a.m. to 3:20 p.m. local time.
Solar Energy System
   Either or some combination of (1) a design using natural and architectural
features to cool or heat a structure or (2) a mechanical assembly that may
include a solar collector, storage facility, and any other components needed to
cool or heat a structure.
Specific Plan
   A detailed policy plan or regulation that implements the General Plan or any
of the elements of that Plan. Specific plans include subregional, area, and
neighborhood plans; the Major Streets and Routes (MS&R) Plan ; the Unified
Development Code (UDC) ; and any other similar plan.
Specified Anatomical Areas
   Either the less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttock, anus, or female breasts below a point immediately above the
top of the areola; or human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even
if completely and opaquely covered.
Specified Sexual Activities
Include the following:
•   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
•   Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or sodomy; or,
•   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus, or female breasts.
Square Foot
   The area of a square with sides of one foot in length.
Stacking Space
   An area designed to accommodate vehicles waiting in line to receive a
service.
Standards
   Design principles, criteria, and specifications that describe the manner in
which development and related improvements are accomplished in order to obtain
development approval.
State
   Same as the State of Arizona.
Status Offender
   A youth of juvenile court age who is under the jurisdiction of a court for
offenses that are unlawful for children but not unlawful for adults. It is the
status of childhood that allows children to be status offenders.
Street
   Any permanent public or private right-of-way , other than an alley , access
lane , or parking area access lane , set aside to accommodate vehicular travel
lanes, parking lanes , bike lanes, pedestrian facilities, utility areas, and
other such design features, whether designated as a street , drive, highway,
thoroughfare, road, boulevard, avenue, lane, or place.
Street Landscape Border
   An area along the street  frontage of a site containing landscape materials
, screening, and open space , the purpose of which is to enhance the visual
appearance of the streetscape.
Street Lot Line
   The property line bounding a street .
Street Perimeter Line
   Same as Street lot line .
Street Yard
   The yard between a street lot line and a building .
Strip Easement
   A utility easement running parallel with, and abutting , a street .
Structure
   A physical element constructed or erected with a fixed location on the
ground or attached to another physical element having a fixed location at,
below, or above grade. Structures include such elements as, but are not limited
to, buildings , paved areas, walls, fences, posts, and patios.
Structure Height
   The vertical dimension of a structure measured from a specified point on the
ground. For information on applying a height standards, refer to Section
6.4.4, Height.
Stub Streets
   Dead-end streets that are planned to be continued along the same alignment
in a future development .
Subdivider
   A person or other legal entity that files an application and initiates
proceedings for the subdivision of land in accordance with the provisions of
this Article or any other local applicable ordinance or state statute, except
that an individual serving as agent for such a person or other legal entity is
not a subdivider. When applicable, the developer may be required to assume
responsibility of the subdivider.
Subdivision
   Any division of land, improved or unimproved, for the purpose of financing,
sales, or lease, whether immediate or future, in one of four ways:
   A.   Any property whose boundaries are not fixed by a recorded plat which is
divided into four or more lots , tracts, or parcels of land;
   B.   Any property that requires the development of a new street , which is
divided into two or more lots , tracts, or parcels of land;
   C.   Any property whose boundaries are fixed by a recorded plat, which is
divided into more than two parts; or
   D.   Any condominium , cooperative, community apartment, townhouse, or
similar project containing four or more parcels , in which an undivided
interest in the land is coupled with the right of exclusive occupancy of any
unit located thereon, but plats of such projects need not show the buildings or
the manner in which the buildings or airspace above the property shown on the
plat are to be divided.
Subdivision Improvements
   Subdivision  improvements include all assurable infrastructure for the
specific subdivision , common areas, and buildings and other infrastructure
needed for the individual lots created by the plat. Subdivision  improvements
also include the recording of full legal entitlements necessary for the
functioning of the subdivision such as easements, dedications or other binding
legal documents. Buildings on newly platted lots are generally not considered
part of the assurable subdivision  improvements , unless determined by special
conditions of the project .
(Am. Ord. 11200, 9/23/2014; Am. Ord. 11508, 12/5/2017; Am. Ord. 11803, 12/8/
2020)
11.4.21. DEFINITIONS – T
Tagging
   The tagging of plants on-site to denote their identification number and
their disposition, such as whether they will be preserved in place, salvaged
and transplanted on-site , and/or salvaged and transplanted off-site .
Tandem Parking
   Two motor vehicle parking spaces placed one behind the other with direct
access from a street , alley , parking area access lane (PAAL) , or other
travel lane to only one of the spaces. (See Illustration.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3092.jpg]
Tandem Parking
Temporary Sign (7A)
   Any sign constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wallboard,
plastic or other light material and not rigidly and permanently installed in
the ground or attached to a building. Political election signs are not included
in this definition.
Tenant (7A)
   The occupant of a portion of a site or structure with exclusive control over
that portion, regardless of whether it is by individual ownership or lease.
Terrace
   A relatively level step constructed in the face of a graded slope surface
for drainage and maintenance purposes.
Tower
   A mast, pole, monopole, guyed or freestanding framework, or other vertical
element that acts as an antenna or to which an antenna is affixed or attached.
Tract
   The same as “lot .”
Travel Lane
   The area within a paved roadway reserved for moving vehicular traffic.
Tucson General Plan
   Same as General Plan .
Turf
   An area of grass ground cover grown together in a thick mat.
(Am. Ord. 11508, 12/5/2017)
11.4.22. DEFINITIONS – U
Undisturbed Natural Desert
   An area of land maintained in its original condition with natural desert
cover, native topography, and native vegetation intact.
Unified Development Code (UDC)
   Chapter 23 of the Tucson Code as adopted by the Mayor and Council
establishing zoning regulations governing the use, placement, spacing, and size
of land and structures within the corporate limits of the City . Such
regulations are applied on individual properties through the use of zoning
districts . The boundaries of these districts are depicted on the adopted City
Zoning Maps . For the purposes of convenience and ease of use, the UDC is also
published as a separate book from the Tucson Code.
Unoccupied (7A)
   A premises or structure:
   A.   That is not occupied, or
   B.   That is not being put to those uses authorized by the last business
privilege license issued by the City of Tucson for that address and business,
or
   C.   Where the public utilities are not in service.
Upland Vegetation
   Refers to vegetation that grows outside of the floodplain, typically on low
desert slopes . Upland vegetation on south-facing slopes typically includes the
Foothill Palo Verde, Saguaro, and Ocotillo; on north facing slopes , it
typically includes the Foothill Palo Verde and Whitethorn Acacia. Some plants,
such as Mesquites, are able to grow as upland and riparian vegetation.
Urban Agriculture
   The practice of producing food locally through the cultivating, processing,
distributing, selling, or gleaning of agricultural products and other related
activities in the City and may involve horticulture, aquaculture, and animal
husbandry.
Utilities
   Services such as gas, electric, water, telephone, and cable television.
(Am. Ord. 11328, 12/8/2015; Am. Ord. 11508, 12/5/2017)
11.4.23. DEFINITIONS – V
Vacant (7A)
   A premises or structure:
   A.   From which the fixtures utilized in conjunction with the business
activities as authorized by the last business privilege license for that
address issued by the City of Tucson have been removed, or
   B.   Where the public utilities are not in service.
Valet Parking
   A service provided whereby a patron leaves his or her car for an attendant
to park the car on-site or at an approved off-site location and retrieves it.
Vehicle-miles of Capacity (VMC)
   The product of the maximum number of vehicles that can be accommodated on a
roadway during an hour and the length of the roadway in miles.
Vehicle Signs (7A)
   Signs mounted upon, painted upon or otherwise erected on or affixed to
trucks, cars, boats, trailers and other motorized vehicles or equipment.
Vehicle Storage
   A space or structure that is used to house or store vehicles, which may
include forklifts, moving equipment, lawn equipment, and other powered
transport devices or equipment, as well as automobiles and trucks. Vehicle
storage does not include commercial long-term parking lots and garages
associated with such uses as airports and train stations. Vehicle storage may
be a principal or accessory use .
Vehicular Use Area
   Any area of a site or structure used for the movement, parking, or standing
of motor vehicles. The vehicular use area includes access drives, maneuvering
areas, refuse collection locations, loading spaces, and any landscaping and
screening within ten feet of these areas.
Viable Plant
   A plant on the Protected Native Plant List that is in good physical
condition with high or medium rating for health, age, and form.
Violation
   Any improvements that are constructed or any use established on a property
without zoning compliance or any improvements under construction that are not
in compliance with plans approved for zoning or other City code compliance are
considered a violation of this chapter. The Planning and Development Services
Department (PDSD) shall enforce compliance with this chapter by suspending
construction or through other available means until compliance is achieved.
Visible from the Scenic Route
   Not blocked from view by buildings , structures , or natural features from
the Scenic Routes . An object shall be considered visible whenever it can be
seen, not blocked by an intervening structure, vegetation, or terrain, from
four feet above the natural grade at the Major Streets and Routes right-of-way
line along the parcel .
(Am. Ord. 11508, 12/5/2017)
11.4.24. DEFINITIONS – W
Wall (7A)
   An exterior building surface 30 degrees or less from vertical including,
signs affixed to the interior and the exterior of window and door surfaces.
Wall Sign (7A)
   Sign that is placed upon a building, its structure, parapet, or
architectural feature, with the exposed face of the sign in a plane parallel to
the plane of the affected wall, parapet, or architectural feature.
Waiting Area
   That portion of a public accommodations use allocated to clientele waiting
to request or receive products or services offered by the use.
Window Sign (7A)
   A sign affixed to the interior or exterior of window surface.
Wireless Communications Provider
   The entity that provides the wireless communication service.
(Am. Ord. 11508, 12/5/2017)
11.4.25. DEFINITIONS – X
Xeriscape
   A landscaping program designed to save water using the seven principles
listed below:
•   Water conserving design;
•   Low water use/drought-tolerant plants;
•   Reduction in turf;
•   Water harvesting techniques;
•   Appropriate irrigation methods;
•   Soil improvements and use of mulches; and,
•   Proper maintenance practices.
11.4.26. DEFINITIONS – Y
   Reserved
11.4.27. DEFINITIONS – Z
Zone
   A specifically designated area within which uniform regulations govern the
use, placement, spacing, and size of land and buildings . Examples include R-
1 residential zone and overlay zones such as the Historic Preservation Zone. It
is also referred to as a zoning district .
Zone Boundaries
   Zone boundary lines are intended to follow lot lines to the centerlines of
streets , alleys, railroad rights-of-way , or extensions of such rights-of-way
, except where referenced to a street line or other designated line.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3094.jpg]
Zone Boundaries
Zoning District
   Designated areas that are zones and/or districts.
   In a Planned Community District (PCD), a zoning district is an area within a
Development Area (DA) comparable to a zoning district established by the UDC ,
containing one or more land uses and for which the Development Guidelines and
Standards in the Master Development Plan (MDP) may be established as provided
in Section 2-05.3.2.A.4 of the Administrative Manual.
Zoning Maps
   Same as City Zoning Maps .
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Ordinances
Ord. No. Adopted Section(s) Affected
Ord. No. Adopted    Section(s) Affected
                    1.1,
                    1.7.4,
                    2.2.6,
                    3.2.2,
                    3.2.3,
                    3.2.4,
                    3.3.3,
                    3.5.3,
                    3.5.5,
                    3.10.2,
                    3.10.3,
                    3.11.1,
                    4.8.3,
                    4.8.4,
                    4.8.5,
                    4.8.6,
11070    5/14/2013  4.8.7,
                    4.8.8,
                    4.8.9,
                    4.9.4,
                    4.9.13,
                    5.8.1,
                    6.3.4,
                    6.4.4,
                    6.4.5,
                    6.4.6,
                    6.6.3,
                    7.4.5,
                    7.4.6,
                    7.6.4,
                    8.4.1,
                    8.7.1,
                    9.1.3,
                    11.4.7
                    3.2.2,
                    3.2.3,
                    3.2.4,
                    3.4.3,
                    3.4.4,
                    3.5.3,
                    3.5.5,
                    3.10.3,
                    3.11.1,
11127    11/6/2013  4.8.3,
                    4.8.4,
                    4.8.6,
                    4.8.7,
                    4.9.7,
                    4.9.13,
                    5.3.4,
                    5.8.8,
                    6.3.4,
                    7.6.4
                    5.8,
                    5.8.1,
                    5.8.2,
                    5.8.3,
                    5.8.4,
                    5.8.5,
11150    3/18/2014  5.8.6,
                    5.8.7,
                    5.8.8,
                    5.8.9,
                    5.8.10,
                    5.8.11,
                    5.8.12
                    3.2.3,
                    4.8.6,
                    4.8.7,
                    4.8.8,
                    4.9.7,
                    5.4.6,
                    5.13.4,
11171    5/20/2014  6.4.5,
                    6.4.6,
                    6.4.7,
                    6.6.2,
                    7.4.4,
                    7.4.5,
                    8.7.3,
                    11.3.4
                    4.9.9,
11199    9/9/2014   7.4.4,
                    7.4.8
11200    9/23/2014  8.4.2,
                    11.4.20
                    3.3.3, 
                    3.3.5,
11201    9/23/2014  4.8.7,
                    4.9.7,
                    6.3.4,
                    7.4.5
                    4.8.5,
11235    1/21/2015  4.8.6,
                    4.9.10
                    2.2.6,
                    3.3.9,
                    5.12.1,
                    5.12.2,
                    5.12.3,
                    5.12.4,
                    5.12.5,
                    5.12.6,
                    5.12.7,
                    5.12.8,
11246    2/18/2015  5.12.9,
                    5.12.10,
                    5.12.11,
                    5.12.12,
                    5.12.13,
                    5.12.14,
                    5.12.15,
                    5.12.16,
                    5.12.18,
                    11.4.2,
                    11.4.5,
                    11.4.8
                    4.8.3,
                    4.8.4,
                    4.8.5,
11257    4/21/2015  4.8.6,
                    4.8.7,
                    4.8.8,
                    4.8.9,
                    11.3.3
11320    11/17/2015 8.7.3
                    3.3.4,
                    4.7.2,
                    4.7.3,
                    4.7.5,
                    4.7.6,
                    4.7.7,
                    4.7.8,
                    4.7.9,
                    4.7.10,
                    4.7.11,
                    4.7.12,
                    4.7.13,
                    4.7.14,
                    4.7.15,
                    4.7.16,
                    4.7.17,
                    4.7.18,
                    4.7.19,
                    4.7.20,
                    4.7.21,
                    4.7.22,
                    4.7.23,
                    4.7.26,
                    4.7.27,
                    4.7.28,
                    4.7.29,
11328    12/8/2015  4.7.30,
                    4.8.3,
                    4.8.4,
                    4.8.5,
                    4.8.6,
                    4.8.7,
                    4.8.8,
                    4.8.9,
                    4.9.2,
                    4.9.7,
                    4.9.9,
                    4.9.13,
                    6.6.2,
                    6.6.5,
                    7.4.4,
                    7.4.8,
                    7.6.4,
                    7.6.5,
                    11.3.2,
                    11.3.9,
                    11.4.2,
                    11.4.7,
                    11.4.8,
                    11.4.9,
                    11.4.10,
                    11.4.14,
                    11.4.17,
                    11.4.22
11346    2/23/2016  4.9.9
11386    7/6/2016   3.5.5,
                    5.4.7
11408    11/9/2016  6.3.4
                    4.8.3,
                    4.8.4,
11409    11/9/2016  4.8.9,
                    4.9.13,
                    5.13.9
11410    11/22/2016 4.9.4
11411    11/22/2016 5.8.6
11446    4/5/2017   4.8.7
                    2.2.12,
                    3.5.5,
                    4.9.4,
                    7A.1,
                    7A.2,
                    7A.3,
                    7A.4,
                    7A.5,
                    7A.6,
                    7A.7,
                    7A.8,
                    7A.9,
                    7A.10,
                    7A.11,
                    7A.12,
                    7A.13,
                    9.1.1,
                    10.3.7,
11508    12/5/2017  11.4.1,
                    11.4.2,
                    11.4.3,
                    11.4.4,
                    11.4.5,
                    11.4.7,
                    11.4.8,
                    11.4.10,
                    11.4.13,
                    11.4.14,
                    11.4.15,
                    11.4.16,
                    11.4.17,
                    11.4.19,
                    11.4.20,
                    11.4.21,
                    11.4.22,
                    11.4.23,
                    11.4.24
                    4.8.3,
                    4.8.4,
11557    6/5/2018   4.8.6,
                    4.8.7,
                    4.9.7
                    4.8.6,
                    4.8.7,
11577    8/8/2018   4.8.9 ,
                    4.9.13,
                    11.3.4
                    4.8.4 -
11608    12/18/2018 4.8.7,
                    4.8.9,
                    4.9.4
11609    12/18/2018 4.8.6,
                    4.9.4
11612    1/8/2019   4.9.9
11639    4/23/2019  5.12.6
                    5.12.2,
11640    4/23/2019  5.12.5,
                    5.12.6,
                    5.12.8
                    3.2.2,
11729    2/19/2020  3.5.3,
                    3.6.5
                    1.5.1;
                    2.2.1,
                    2.2.9;
                    3.2.2,
                    3.2.4.
                    3.3.2 -
                    3.3.5,
                    3.4.2,
                    3.5.3,
                    3.6.8,
                    3.9.2,
11732    2/19/2020  3.10.2,
                    3.11.1,
                    Table 3.2-1;
                    4.9.4,
                    4.9.11;
                    5.8.7,
                    5.8.10,
                    5.10.3,
                    5.12.6;
                    6.6.5;
                    7.4.5,
                    7.4.10;
                    8.7.3
                    2.2.12,
                    3.5.5,
                    5.3.4,
                    5.3.10,
                    5.5.2,
                    5.5.4,
                    5.8.7,
                    5.8.9,
                    7A.3,
                    7A.4.1,
                    7A.4.4,
                    7A.6.5,
                    7A.6.8,
                    7A.6.9,
11803    12/8/2020  7A.7.1,
                    7A.8.1,
                    7A.8.2,
                    7A.8.4,
                    7A.9.2,
                    7A.10.1 -
                    7A.10.5,
                    7A.11,
                    7A.11.1 -
                    7A.11.3,
                    7A.12,
                    11.4.7,
                    11.4.9,
                    11.4.16,
                    11.4.20
                    4.8.6,
11828    4/6/2021   4.8.7,
                    4.9.9,
                    11.3.9
11860    8/10/2021  4.9.7
                    4.8.3,
                    4.8.4,
                    4.8.5,
                    4.8.6,
11890    12/7/2021  4.8.9,
                    6.6.1,
                    6.6.2,
                    6.6.3,
                    6.6.4 
                    11.3.7
                    3.3.3,
11922    7/12/2022  3.3.5,
                    7.4.5,
                    11.4.13
                    4.9.11,
11942    7/12/2022  5.3.9,
                    5.5.4,
                    11.3.11
                    7.4.3,
                    7.4.5,
                    7.4.11,
11953    8/23/2022  7.4.12,
                    11.4.6,
                    11.4.13,
                    11.4.15
                    5.12.6,
                    5.12.7,
                    5.12.8,
                    5.12.9,
                    5.12.10,
11977    12/20/2022 5.12.11,
                    5.12.12,
                    5.12.13,
                    5.12.14,
                    5.12.16,
                    5.12.18,
                    11.4.2
                    4.8.6,
11978    12/20/2022 4.9.9,
                    5.6.8,
                    11.3.9
                    3.2.3,
                    3.5.4,
                    4.8.3,
                    4.8.4,
                    4.8.5,
                    4.8.6,
                    4.8.7,
                    4.8.8,
                    4.8.9,
11996    3/21/2023  4.9.4,
                    4.9.7,
                    4.9.11,
                    6.3.4,
                    6.4.5,
                    6.6.3,
                    7.4.4,
                    7.4.6,
                    7.4.10,
                    11.3.7
12005    6/6/2023   7.6.4,
                    11.4.2
                    4.8.6,
12057    11/14/2023 4.8.9,
                    4.9.9,
                    11.3.4
                    4.8.6,
                    4.8.7,
12060    11/28/2023 4.8.9,
                    4.9.4,
                    7.4.4,
                    11.3.4
                    3.5.3,
12131    10/22/2024 5.8.9,
                    6.6.3
12139    12/10/2024 3.12.3
                    2.2.6,
                    3.2.3,
12152    3/18/2025  5.11.1 -
                    5.11.12,
                    7.4.5,
                    7.4.11
                   
 
 
ADMINISTRATIVE MANUAL
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-17.jpg]
 
Supplement to the Unified Development Code
Adopted – October 9, 2012
Effective – January 2, 2013
Last Revision — June 4, 2025
SECTION 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
1-01.1.0   Establishment
1-01.2.0   Purpose
1-01.3.0   Maintenance and Publication
1-01.4.0   Enforcement
1-01.5.0   Procedure to Amend the Administration Manual
SECTION 2: APPLICATION SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS
2-01.0.0   Permitted Modifications to the Application Submittal Requirements
2-02.0.0   Plan Amendment Applications
2-03.0.0   Rezoning (Change of Zoning) Applications
2-04.0.0   Planned Area Development Rezoning Application
2-05.0.0   Planned Community Development Rezoning Application
2-06.0.0   Development Package Applications
2-07.0.0   Final Plat, Block Plat, Minor Subdivision, and Condominium Plat
Applications
2-08.0.0   Land Split Applications
2-09.0.0   Assurances
2-10.0.0   Landscaping Plan Requirements
2-11.0.0   Native Plant Preservation Plan Requirements
2-12.0.0   Protected Development Right Applications
2-13.0.0   Folding a 24" x 36" Sheet to 8.5" x 11" Format
SECTION 3: REVIEW COMMITTEE AND COMPLIANCE REVIEW TIMEFRAMES POLICY
3-01.0.0   City Development Review Committee
3-02.0.0   Compliance Review Time Frames Policy
3-03.0.0   Flexible Application Process
SECTION 4: DEVELOPMENT REVIEW FEE SCHEDULE
4-01.1.0   General
4-02.1.0   Building
4-03.1.0   Site Review
4-04.1.0   Sign Fees
4-05.1.0   Rezoning, Modifications, Plan Amendments, and Special Exceptions
4-06.1.0   Fire
4-07.1.0   Transportation
SECTION 5: DEFINITIONS
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Ordinances
References to Administrative Directives
SECTION 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 1-01.0.0: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
1-01.1.0   ESTABLISHMENT
1-01.2.0   PURPOSE
1-01.3.0   MAINTENANCE AND PUBLICATION
1-01.4.0   ENFORCEMENT
1-01.5.0   PROCEDURE TO AMEND THE ADMINISTRATIVE MANUAL
1-01.1.0   ESTABLISHMENT
   The City of Tucson Administrative Manual (“Administrative Manual”) is
established as Administrative Directive 1.02-9, under the City of Tucson
Administrative Directives. The Administrative Manual is a supplemental document
to the City of Tucson Unified Development Code .
1-01.2.0   PURPOSE
   The purpose of the Administrative Manual is to establish criteria that
ensure that land development is properly planned and executed with due
consideration for public services and facilities, topographic constraints, and
the general public’s health, safety, and welfare and that review of land
development proposals are completed in a timely manner. Specifically, the
Administrative Manual establishes the following:
2.1   Application submittal requirements;
2.2   Permitted modifications to the application submittal requirements;
2.3   City Development Review Committee review procedures;
2.4   Compliance Review Timeframes Policy; and,
2.5   Development review fees.
(Am. Admin. Directive 1.02-9, rev. 4/25/2014)
1-01.3.0   MAINTENANCE AND PUBLICATION
   The Planning and Development Services Department (PDSD) is responsible for
maintaining and publishing the Administrative Manual. The Administrative Manual
is available as a public record in the City Clerk’s Office, the PDSD, and the
agency responsible for their initiation and/or review. The Administrative
Manual is also available on the PDSD website.
1-01.4.0   ENFORCEMENT
   The department and/or agency responsible for the adopted Administrative
Manual section are responsible for its implementation.
1-01.5.0   PROCEDURE TO AMEND THE ADMINISTRATIVE MANUAL
5.1   Purpose
   The purpose of this section is to establish the procedure for amending the
Administrative Manual.
5.2   Applicability
   The amendment procedure provided below applies to amendments to Sections 1,
Establishment of the Administrative Manual; 2, Submittal Requirements; 3, City
Development Review Committee Procedure; and 5, Definitions. The amendment
procedure for Development Review Fees is provided in Section 4.
5.3   Initiation
   Only the Mayor and Council, City Manager, or the Director of any city
department or non-city agency involved in development review may initiate
amendments to the Administrative Manual.
5.4   Review
   A.   Proposed amendments are submitted to the Planning and Development
Services Department (PDSD) for review.
   B.   The director of the department responsible for the section under
consideration will determine whether review of the proposed amendment requires
review and comment by the public, City Development Review Committee (CDRC),
and/or any other city department or non-city agency involved in the review of
development applications.
   C.   The director of the department responsible for the section under
consideration will ensure that community members affected by any proposed or
revised Administrative Manual section, including annual subscribers to the
Administrative Manual, have the opportunity to review and comment on such
proposals. These individuals are notified by the PDSD that a draft
Administrative Manual section is available for review. Anyone interested in
reviewing the draft Administrative Manual section proposal may request a copy
from the PDSD. The public review may occur concurrently with preliminary CDRC
review.
   D.   The proposed amendment may be revised based on any comments received.
5.5   Decision
   A.   Following review of the proposal, the director of the department
responsible for the section will consider whether to approve, deny, or request
further revisions to the proposed amendment.
   B.   If approved, the director's decision is final, and the Administrative
Manual section becomes effective upon the signature of the director of the
department responsible for the section, unless the director refers the matter
to the Mayor and Council for consideration and action.
   C.   In situations where the Administrative Manual section is established or
amended through adoption of an ordinance by the Mayor and Council, the
effective date of the ordinance will apply.
5.6   Notice of Decision
   Notice of the PDSD Director’s or the Mayor and Council’s decision, whichever
is applicable, is sent to the affected governmental and non-governmental
agencies and individuals who have requested to be notified of amendments to the
Administrative Manual.
(Am. Admin. Directive 1.02-9, rev. 4/25/2014)
SECTION 2: APPLICATION SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS
SECTION 2-01.0.0: PERMITTED MODIFICATIONS TO THE APPLICATION
SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS
Section
2-01.1.0   GENERAL
2-01.2.0   REQUEST REQUIRED
2-01.3.0   REVIEW AND APPROVAL
2-01.1.0   GENERAL
   Upon a request from an applicant, the Planning and Development Services
Department (PDSD) Director may allow modifications and exceptions to the
application submittal requirements for all application and plan types, except
the Protected Development Right Plan requirements.
2-01.2.0   REQUEST REQUIRED
   Requests from applicants for modifications and exceptions to the submittal
requirements must be made prior to submittal of the application. The request
must identify the submittal requirement(s) being requested for modification or
exception and provide a rationale for the change;
2-01.3.0   REVIEW AND APPROVAL
3.1   The PDSD Director may decide to approve or deny the request;
3.2   The PDSD Director shall consider the purpose statements of the applicable
plan policies, zone, overlay, subdivision, site plan, and other development
standards when rendering a decision. Approval of the request does not represent
the department’s endorsement or approval of the project;
3.3   For projects requiring approval through a legislative procedure, the
Zoning Examiner, Planning Commission, or the Mayor and Council, whichever is
applicable, may request additional information concerning the omitted or
modified sections during their review and consideration for approval; and,
3.4   The rationale for the approved exceptions shall be included with the
submittal.
SECTION 2-02.0.0: PLAN AMENDMENT APPLICATIONS
Section
2-02.1.0   APPLICABILITY
2-02.2.0   APPLICATION SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS
2-02.3.0   REAPPLICATION
2-02.1.0   APPLICABILITY
   This section provides the application submittal requirements for the Land
Use Plan Adoption and Amendment Procedure provided in Section
3.6 of the Unified Development Code (UDC).
2-02.2.0   APPLICATION SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS
   Plan amendment application forms are available from the Planning and
Development Services Department. The following documents and information are
required upon application. The types of documents and the specific number of
copies required of each of the documents are provided in the plan amendment
application.
2.1   Application Form
   A completed application signed by the property owner or authorized designee
is required.
2.2   Neighborhood Meeting Information
   Written proof of the offer to meet with the surrounding property owners and
other applicable parties in accordance with Section
3.2.2 of the UDC must be submitted with the application. Required documentation
includes copies of the meeting notification letter, the mailing list provided
to the applicant by the city, the meeting attendance sheet, and the minutes of
the meeting. The minutes should include any concerns raised at the meeting and
the applicant’s response to them, if any.
2.3   Plan Amendment Request Information
   A.   A description of the section of the plan for which the amendment is
requested.
   B.   A statement by the applicant explaining why this amendment is necessary
and how it is consistent with the overall goal(s) of the plan.
   C.   Proposed new language and/or maps which incorporate this change.
2.4   Concept Plan Recommended
   The applicant is encouraged to submit a concept plan of the proposed
development, particularly for sites of two and one-half acres or greater. The
plan will assist staff and the Planning Commission in the determination of
whether the proposed plan amendment would be compatible with the surrounding
areas. The concept plan is for informational purposes only to assist in the
review and consideration of approval of the proposed amendment. The concept
plan is not formally adopted through approval of the plan amendment.
2.5   Fees
   Fees in accordance with Section
4-01.0.0, Development Review Fee Schedule, is required at the time of
application submittal.
2-02.3.0   REAPPLICATION
   In accordance with Section
3.6.11, Reapplication, of the UDC, new plan amendment applications will not be
accepted for any property which had a previous application acted upon by the
Mayor and Council within one year of the date of that action, except as
follows.
3.1   When the application does not involve a request for a zoning district or
land use which was denied;
3.2   When there has been substantial change in the use of the property
adjacent to the plan amendment site since the previous case was heard; or,
3.3   When there has been an ownership change on the plan amendment site and a
substantially modified development concept is presented.
SECTION 2-03.0.0: REZONING (CHANGE OF ZONING) APPLICATIONS
Section
2-03.1.0   APPLICABILITY
2-03.2.0   APPLICATION SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS
2-03.3.0   PRELIMINARY DEVELOPMENT PACKAGE (PDP) FORMAT REQUIREMENTS
2-03.4.0   PRELIMINARY DEVELOPMENT PACKAGE (PDP) CONTENT REQUIREMENTS
2-03.5.0   ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCE REPORT
2-03.1.0   APPLICABILITY
   This section provides the application submittal requirements for the
Rezoning (Change of Zoning) Procedure provided in Section
3.5 of the Unified Development Code (UDC).
2-03.2.0   APPLICATION SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS
   Rezoning application forms are available from the Planning and Development
Services Department (PDSD). Submit applications and accompanying materials to
PDSD. The types of documents and the specific number of copies required of each
of the documents are provided in the rezoning application.
   The following documents and information must be submitted upon application.
2.1   Application Form
   A completed application signed by the property owner or authorized designee
is required.
2.2   Neighborhood Meeting Information
   Written proof of the offer to meet with the surrounding property owners and
other applicable parties in accordance with Section
3.2.2 of the UDC must be submitted with the application. Required documentation
includes copies of the meeting notification letter, the mailing list provided
to the applicant by the city, the meeting attendance sheet, and the minutes of
the meeting. The minutes should include any concerns raised at the meeting and
the applicant’s response to them, if any.
2.3   Development Package or Preliminary Development Package, whichever is
applicable
   For direct ordinance adoption requests, a Development Package in accordance
with Section
2-06.0.0, Development Package, is required.
   For requests other than direct ordinance adoption, a Preliminary Development
Package (PDP) is required in accordance with Sections
2-03.3.0, Format,
2-03.4.0, Content, and, when applicable,
2-03.5.0, Environmental Resource Report.
2.4   Fees
   Fees in accordance with Section
4-01.0.0, Development Review Fee Schedule are required.
2-03.3.0   PRELIMINARY DEVELOPMENT PACKAGE (PDP) FORMAT REQUIREMENTS
   The PDP shall include:
3.1   A written report in eight and one-half inch by 11-inch format, which may
include maps and photographs;
3.2   Maps must include a legend and north arrow;
3.3   Aerial photographs must be no more than two years old, indicate the
flight date, a north arrow, and the project site boundaries; and,
3.4   Illustration(s) showing the applicable components of the site analysis
and plan proposal:
   A.   On a 24-inch by 36-inch sheet folded to the standard eight and one-half
inch by 11-inch format;
   B.   Fully dimensioned; and,
   C.   Drawn to an appropriate scale (one inch equals 40 feet is recommended).
2-03.4.0   PRELIMINARY DEVELOPMENT PACKAGE (PDP) CONTENT REQUIREMENTS
   The PDP shall include the following components: 1) Introduction and Policy,
Section
 2-03.4.1; 2) Site Analysis, Section
2-03.4.2; and, 3) Plan Proposal, Section
2-03.4.3; and, when applicable, 4) Environmental Resource Report, Section
2-03.5.0.
4.1   Introduction and Policy
   A.   Indicate the applicable subregional, area, or neighborhood plans;
   B.   Provide a summary statement describing how the proposed development
complies or conflicts with adopted plan policies; and,
   C.   Delineate any area of the site proposed for development which would
conflict with an adopted city ordinance or policy.
4.2   Site Analysis
   A.   General
      1.   A table of contents;
      2.   A map showing the location of the project site within the boundaries
of the plan area;
      3.   A small project location map at a scale of one inch equals 1,000
feet showing the rezoning site at the center and indicating what generalized
land uses surround it within a one-half mile radius. Major streets should be
identified;
      4.   The property boundary dimensions;
      5.   Existing zoning on-site and adjacent to the site. If more than one
zone is requested, identify the location of the proposed zoning boundaries with
dimensions and acreage of each zone requested on the Plan Proposal;
      6.   Locations, size (square footage), and height of all existing
buildings within 100 feet of the project site, dimensioned to show distance to
project site boundaries, including approximate densities of residential uses
and types of commercial or industrial uses;
      7.   Locations, size (square footage), and height of all buildings
existing or proposed on the project site. Note the approximate setbacks from
property boundaries and whether existing buildings will remain as part of the
project or if they will be removed; and,
      8.   Locations of any existing billboards on the project site. Note
whether the intent is to leave in place, relocate, or remove.
   B.   Circulation and Trips
      1.   Map the following information:
         a.   Major and/or local streets abutting the project; names and widths
of these streets; proposed rights-of-way for the major streets per the Major
Streets and Routes (MS&R) Plan; scenic or gateway routes abutting the project
site; distance to and identification of nearest major intersection;
         b.   Existing and proposed curb cuts and access drives; their widths
and locations relative to the street intersection or to the project property
line; any driveways to be closed;
         c.   Locations of deceleration or turn lanes if traffic volumes,
access, or other design features require this solution after consultation with
the City Traffic Engineer; and,
         d.   Locations of existing/proposed curbs, driveways, sidewalks, and
bike paths both on-site and adjacent off-site; locations of structures, such as
poles or transformers, that will require relocation because of new right-of-way
improvements.
      2.   Provide the following information in the form of notes on the map or
as part of a separate report.
         a.   Locations of existing or proposed traffic signals within one mile
of the project boundaries;
         b.   Locations of nearest existing public transit stops, any proposed
transit stops, and park-and-ride facilities;
         c.   Projected date of any roadway or other improvements affecting the
project and currently included in the City Capital Improvement Program
(C.I.P.), including street lighting improvements; indicate if property owner is
required or willing to participate in an improvement district for these
improvements;
         d.   Existing traffic counts (average daily traffic) on the major
streets within one mile of the proposed project; and,
         e.   Provide trip generation calculations for existing and proposed
uses on the project site, including separate calculations for each different
land use activity if the proposed project is a mixed use project.
   C.   Cultural Resources
   Provide a letter from the Arizona State Museum, the State Historic
Preservation Office, or a qualified archaeologist indicating whether the site
has been field surveyed, whether there are archaeological or historical
resources on or adjacent to the site, and stating their recommendations with
regard to further investigation and/or preservation.
   D.   Hydrology & Drainage
      1.   Map the following information:
         a.   On-site and off-site drainageways which relate to project site
drainage characteristics. Note if part of any of the drainageway or its
adjacent off-site system is natural or constructed (engineered channel, etc.);
         b.   One hundred-year floodplains on the site or adjacent to the site;
         c.   Drainageways subject to the provisions of the Environmental
Resource Zone (ERZ) or Watercourse Amenities, Safety, and Habitat (WASH)
ordinances; and,
         d.   Erosion hazard (setback) areas.
      2.   Provide the following information as notes on the map or in a
separate report:
         a.   Estimated amount of cubic feet per second (cfs) on record at peak
flow 100-year event currently entering and leaving the site;
         b.   Whether existing condition is sheet flow or in a contained
channel (natural or constructed), and locations of proposed retention/detention
areas; and,
         c.   Reference whether the City Floodplain Ordinance and/or Article
VIII, Section 29-12 of the Tucson Code, WASH, or ERZ are applicable to the
site.
   E.   Schools, Recreational, and Cultural Facilities
      1.   Map the following information:
         a.   Locations of any schools, parks, libraries, and public land
abutting the project site; show the name of the facility and the ownership. If
any abutting vacant land is proposed for such uses, indicate the name of the
facility and the ownership;
         b.   Pedestrian and bike routes currently used by children going to
schools, parks, or other public facilities and those proposed if the project is
residential; note any conflict points, if known, between vehicular and
pedestrian or bicycle traffic; and,
         c.   Location of any trail or trail access (foot, horse, or bicycle
access or any access to a public preserve), on or adjacent to the site,
existing or designated on the City Parks, Recreation, Open Space, and Trails
(PROST) Element of the General Plan or the Pima County Trail System Master
Plan. Note whether any current or future trails are located within one mile of
the site.
      4.   For residential projects only, provide the following information in
the form of notes on a map or as part of a separate report:
         a.   Names of any existing or proposed schools which service this
project and the estimated number of children who will attend these schools;
and,
         b.   Parks and libraries within a one mile of the rezoning site.
   F.   Soils
      1.   Map the following information:
         a.   Any heavily disturbed areas (by prior grading or excavation) and
any unstable soils which may be prone to subsidence or erosion; and,
         b.   Locations of any hazardous materials on the project site placed
on the property or naturally occurring, such as landfills, “wildcat” dumps,
dross, or radon gas. Provide the results of soil testing that may have been
done for the site, either for the proposed project or for previous development.
      2.   Provide the following information in the form of notes on the map or
in a separate report.
         a.   Locations of any landfill sites or hazardous materials storage
within one mile;
         b.   Any other existing facilities/operations within one mile which
may impact the project (such as sand/gravel operations, power plants, airports,
sewage treatment plants, etc.); and,
         c.   If applicable, describe soil suitability for septic use.
   G.   Topography
   Map the following:
      1.   Topographic contour lines or spot elevations; and,
      2.   Direction and percent slope of all areas over 15%. Indicate whether
the site is within the Hillside Development Zone (HDZ).
   H.   Utilities
   Map the all utilities (including utility line sizes and locations) and any
dedicated easements existing on or adjacent to the project site, such as gas,
electric, water, telephone, cable, sewer, fire protection, etc.
   I.   Vegetation
   Provide a written description and map on an aerial photograph the following
information:
      1.   Existing on-site vegetation, including mesquite bosques, visually
prominent cacti, or individual trees with a caliper of four inches or greater,
and all saguaros. Identify those vegetative areas of wildlife, scenic value, or
screening significance; and,
      2.   Existing landscaping and screening (walls/fences) along site
boundaries.
   J.   Views
   Describe the views to and from the site. Provide photographs and/or map the
views.
4.3   Plan Proposal
   A.   Building Layout
   Illustrate the location of proposed buildings. Note on the plan the square
footage and height of each building.
   B.   Design Compatibility
   Describe, and when possible, illustrate the following:
      1.   Mitigation ensuring the privacy of adjacent residences;
      2.   How the proposed building form, surface treatment, and materials
respond to and are compatible with the climate and surrounding area;
      3.   Techniques that will conserve energy and reduce the urban heat
island effect created by the proposed development;
      4.   Additional proposed building setbacks, beyond the minimum
requirement, which mitigate impact;
      5.   Transition of building height and number of stories;
      6.   Transition of densities;
      7.   Landscaping and screening that will be employed to mitigate sound,
visibility, exterior lighting, traffic, and other negative impacts of the
proposed development;
      8.   Street improvements that are proposed to mitigate any traffic
impacts anticipated as part of this development (i.e., center or right turn
lanes);
      9.   Defensible space techniques;
      10.   View corridors to and from the site; and,
      11.   Changes in elevation due to grading.
   C.   Hydrology & Drainage
      1.   The proposed drainage solution (generalized), i.e., natural channel,
street system, retention, constructed channel, landscaped areas, parking areas,
etc. Include rationale for constructed drainage system, if one is proposed;
and,
      2.   Describe and map postdevelopment water discharge on- and off-site
within one-fourth of a mile; describe and map potential drainage impacts of
off-site land uses both upstream and downstream of the proposed development.
   D.   Landscaping and Screening
   The following information is most appropriately shown on a landscape plan.
If possible, this information can be shown on the preliminary development plan.
      1.   Types of materials, location, and dimensions of screening from
adjacent properties. Indicate the width and type of any proposed vegetative
screening;
      2.   Types, placement, and sizes of proposed vegetation. Include the
number of canopy trees in parking areas; and,
      3.   Indicate whether there will be landscaping within detention areas
and drainageways.
   E.   Lighting. Types and placement of lighting.
   F.   Pedestrian Access
      1.   Pedestrian circulation and access, including ADA considerations;
and,
      2.   Locations of walkways, parking and loading areas, and pedestrian
connections.
   G.   Signs. Types and placement of signs.
   H.   Topography. Proposed changes in elevation and topography due to the
proposed grading plan, including spot elevations;
   I.   Traffic and Trip Generation
      1.   Traffic mitigation measures proposed by the applicant (including air
quality mitigation, such as carpooling programs, staggered work hours, park-
and-ride lots, and bus shelters); and,
      2.   Trip generation calculations for existing and proposed uses on the
project site, including breakout by different land use activities if it is a
mixed use project.
   J.   Undisturbed Areas. Map and note any areas to be left undisturbed and
preserved in place. Temporary fencing must be installed to preclude disturbance
prior to grading and construction.
   K.   Utilities
      1.   Map the any proposed changes to existing utilities and easements and
any new utilities and easements due to utility service or any required upgrades
(poles, transformers, cables, etc.).
      2.   Provide the following information in the form of notes on the plan
or in a separate report:
         a.   If the project is residential, provide the estimated number of
residents that will live on-site;
         b.   Indicate the water service provider. Indicate whether the water
company is certified by the state for the 100-year assured water supply. If the
provider is other than Tucson Water, indicate whether the company can also
provide fire protection service;
         c.   Indicate whether the project can be connected to existing
infrastructure or whether the project requires new off-site improvements to the
infrastructure; and,
         d.   Indicate whether the development will connect to public sewer. If
on-lot sewage disposal is proposed, state the reasons for not utilizing public
sewer service.
   L.   Vehicular Use Areas. Illustrate the following:
      1.   Motor vehicle and bicycle parking areas, including drive-through
lanes, access lanes and parking area access lanes (PAALs);
      2.   Public or private streets;
      3.   Loading areas; and,
      4.   Solid waste and recycling collection areas, including the proposed
location(s) of collection container(s) and proper maneuvering area for pick-up
vehicle.
(Am. Admin. Directive, 5/14/2013)
2-03.5.0   ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCE REPORT
5.1   Purpose
   The purpose of the Environmental Resource Report (ERR) is to identify and
describe environmental issues that must be taken into consideration.
5.2   Applicability
   An Environmental Resource Report is required of rezoning requests for site
(s) in the following instances:
   A.   Site(s) located in the following plan areas: Bear Canyon, Catalina
Foothills, Esmond Station, Houghton East, Old Fort Lowell, Pantano East,
Rincon/Southeast, Santa Cruz, Sabino Canyon-Tanque Verde, South Pantano, Tucson
Mountains, and Tumamoc;
   B.   Site(s) adjacent to a designated resource corridor or within one mile
of designated public preserves as identified for preservation or protection by
the General, Area, and/or Neighborhood plan, basin management plans, the Tucson
Stormwater Management Study, or the Critical and Sensitive Biological
Communities Map (CSBC); or,
   C.   Whenever the “set aside” option of the Native Plant Preservation
Ordinance (NPPO) is proposed. The Environmental Resource Report may also be
used as the basis for the Native Plant Inventory and Native Plant Preservation
Plan if prepared in sufficient detail.
5.3   Format Requirements
   A.   The Environmental Resource Report may be provided as individual
illustrations and/or in report form, which may include photographs, maps, and
illustrations;
   B.   Maps must include a legend and north arrow;
   C.   Aerial photographs must be no more than two years old, indicate the
flight date, a north arrow, and the project site boundaries; and,
   D.   Illustrations must:
      1.   Include a legend and north arrow;
      2.   Be fully dimensioned;
      3.   Be drawn to an appropriate scale (one inch equals 40 feet is
recommended); and,
      4.   Be on a 24-inch by 36-inch sheet folded to the standard eight and
one-half inch by 11-inch format.
5.4   Content Requirements
   The ERR shall include the following:
   A.   General
      1.   A table of contents; and,
      2.   A location map showing the project site within the boundaries of the
plan area or a public preserve is required.
   B.   Topography/Hydrology Map
      1.   Topography may be shown with a one- or two-foot contour map or an
aerial photo with a one- or two-foot contour overlay.
      2.   On-site predevelopment hydrologic characteristics should be mapped
including any 100- year floodplains with discharge of 50 cfs or greater and
peak discharges entering or leaving the site for 100-year events.
      3.   If significant natural features, vegetation, or floodplain areas are
proposed to be encroached upon, state why the encroachment could not be avoided
and what mitigation measures will be taken.
   C.   Vegetation and Wildlife Map
      1.   Delineate any habitat type noted on the Critical and Sensitive
Biological Communities (CSBC) Map including riparian and significant
nonriparian habitat. Describe the densities of any of these communities or
associations.
      2.   Include a written statement from the Arizona Game and Fish
Department’s regional office regarding:
         a.   Endangered species (both plant and animal) on or near the project
site;
         b.   Significant densities of wildlife by species; and,
         c.   All Class I or Class II habitat as defined by the CSBC Map
present on or adjacent to the project site.
   D.   Conceptual Grading Plan
      1.   Indicate all areas proposed for grading;
      2.   Note all proposed changes in elevations within the project boundary
due to grading by providing predevelopment and post-development spot
elevations. Indicate maximum grade differential from adjacent properties at
project boundaries. Differential grading information is to be provided in
accordance with the Differential Grading Ordinance;
      3.   Indicate approximately how much surface area of the project site
will be graded as a result of the proposed development; and,
      4.   Show all changes to drainageways including upstream and downstream
conditions.
   E.   Composite Map
      1.   The purpose of the composite map is to identify where development is
appropriate and where it inappropriate due to site constraints;
      2.   The composite map is prepared based on the information obtained from
the PDP and the above mentioned requirements;
      3.   The proposed project as shown on the PDP should reflect the findings
of the composite map; and,
      4.   Include the following elements as applicable on the composite map:
         a.   Gateway or scenic routes;
         b.   Drainageways to be left in a natural state;
         c.   Historical or archaeological features;
         d.   Heavily disturbed soils;
         e.   Landfills;
         f.   Protected peaks/ridges;
         g.   Sloped areas in excess of 15%;
         h.   Significant vegetative communities and/or wildlife habitat
corridors;
         i.   Trails and trail access points; and,
         j.   Adjacent land uses.
SECTION 2-04.0.0: PLANNED AREA DEVELOPMENT (PAD) REZONING APPLICATIONS
Section
2-04.1.0   APPLICABILITY
2-04.2.0   APPLICATION SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS
2-04.3.0   FORMAT REQUIREMENTS
2-04.4.0   CONTENT REQUIREMENTS
2-04.1.0   APPLICABILITY
   This section provides the application submittal requirements for the Planned
Area Development (PAD) Rezoning provided in Section
3.5.6 of the Unified Development Code (UDC).
2-04.2.0   APPLICATION SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS
2.1   Pre-Review Requirements
   Prior to formal submittal of the PAD for rezoning, the City Development
Review Committee (CDRC) must conduct a pre-review of the PAD application and
report. The pre-review only is conducted in accordance with Section
3-01.0.0, CDRC Procedure. The applicant shall provide the following for pre-
review:
   A.   Application Form. A completed rezoning application signed by the
property owner or authorized designee;
   B.   PAD Report in accordance with Sections
2-04.3.0, Format, and
2-04.4.0, Content. The number of copies required will be determined on a case-
by-case basis; and,
   C.   Fees. One-half of the total fees in accordance with Section
4-01.1.0, Development Review Fee Schedule.
2.2   PAD Rezoning Application Requirements
   PAD rezoning application packets are available from the PDSD Department.
Submit applications and accompanying materials to PDSD. Incomplete or
inaccurate applications will not be accepted, nor will any application in which
the preapplication conference or neighborhood meeting requirements have not
been met. The types of documents and the specific number of copies required of
each document are provided in the rezoning application packet.
   The following documents and information shall be submitted upon application.
   A.   Application Form. A completed rezoning application signed by the
property owner or authorized designee;
   B.   Neighborhood Meeting Information. Written proof of the offer to meet
with the surrounding property owners and other applicable parties in accordance
with Section
3.2.2 of the UDC must be submitted with the application. Required documentation
includes copies of the meeting notification letter, the mailing list provided
to the applicant by the city, the meeting attendance sheet, and the minutes of
the meeting. The minutes should include any concerns raised at the meeting and
the applicant’s response to them, if any;
   C.   PAD Report in accordance with Sections
2-04.3.0, Format Requirements, and
2-04.4.0, Content Requirements; and,
   D.   Fees. The balance of the total fees (one-half of the fees was due at
the time of pre-review) in accordance with Section
4-01.1.0, Development Review Fee Schedule.
2-04.3.0   FORMAT REQUIREMENTS
3.1   The information required below shall be in the form of illustrations and
a separate written report, which may include maps, aerial photographs, and
photographs.
3.2   Illustrations must be:
   A.   On a 24-inch by 36-inch sheet folded to the standard eight and one-half
inch by 11-inch format;
   B.   Fully dimensioned; and,
   C.   Drawn to an appropriate scale (one inch equals 40 feet is recommended).
3.3   Maps must include a legend and north arrow.
3.4   Aerial photographs must be no more than two years old, indicate the
flight date, a north arrow, and the project site boundaries.
2-04.4.0   CONTENT REQUIREMENTS
   The PAD Report shall include the following components: 1) Introduction and
Policy, Section
2-04.4.1; 2) Site Analysis, Section
2-04.4.2; and, 3) PAD Proposal, Section
2-04.4.3; and, 4) Other Information as Required by the PDSD Director, Section
2-04.4.4.
4.1   Introduction and Policy
   A description of the purpose, scope, main concepts, and goals of the PAD,
indicating the following:
   A.   Substantial conformance with the General Plan and city land use plans
which encompass all or part of the proposed PAD;
   B.   The rationale for the use of a PAD zone rather than the use of other
zones;
   C.   The benefits to the community and the applicant by the use of a PAD;
   D.   The suitability of the PAD to significant environmental factors if
applicable;
   E.   The compatibility of the PAD with adjoining land uses; and,
   F.   The physical and economic suitability and feasibility of the PAD with
existing infrastructure and services.
4.2   Site Analysis
   The following information is required:
   A.   Significant natural and built constraints of the site and surroundings;
   B.   Major transportation and circulation elements intended to serve the
PAD;
   C.   Existing zoning of the PAD site and parcels within 150 feet;
   D.   Adjacent parcels and structures within 150 feet of the PAD boundary;
   E.   Off-site open space, recreational facilities, parks, and trails within
one mile of the PAD site;
   F.   Public, educational, community, and cultural facilities on site and
within one mile off site;
   G.   Existing drainage;
   H.   PAD site affected by any overlay zone ordinances and the Major Streets
and Routes (MS&R) Ordinance;
   I.   Inventory of existing structures, roads, and other development;
   J.   Location and extent of existing provisions for sewage disposal,
effluent use, stormwater drainage, and utilities;
   K.   Inventory of existing infrastructure and public services;
   L.   Hydrology and water resources;
   M.   Topography and slope;
   N.   Vegetation and wildlife;
   O.   Geology and soils;
   P.   Viewsheds and visual analysis; and,
   Q.   Paleontological and cultural (archaeological and historical) sites,
structures, and districts.
4.3   PAD Proposal
   The following information is required:
   A.   Illustrative site plan;
   B.   The general allocation and identification of major proposed land uses,
including residential (by density range), nonresidential, open space, and
recreational land uses;
   C.   Name, location, and extent of existing or proposed major streets
located within the PAD or needed for servicing the PAD;
   D.   Typical street cross-sections;
   E.   A detailed listing of the permitted land uses in the PAD;
   F.   A detailed listing of the regulations governing permitted uses,
including, performance standards and standards for development, regulations for
development densities, heights, floor area and floor area ratios (FARs), open
space, lot area and coverage, parking, landscaping, and other site
improvements;
   G.   Standards for the conservation, development, or utilization of natural
resources, including surface water, soils, vegetation, and wildlife;
   H.   Where applicable, the methods of conservation for scenic natural and
built features and viewsheds;
   I.   Standards and responsibilities for maintenance of infrastructure and
whether the infrastructure is public or private;
   J.   Standards for the phasing and construction of streets proposed for the
PAD or needed for servicing the project as identified in the required study
(ies) submitted with the PAD proposal;
   K.   Standards for the phasing and construction of sewage disposal, effluent
use, stormwater drainage, solid waste disposal, and public utilities as
identified in the required study(ies) submitted with the PAD proposal;
   L.   A phasing schedule for the following, as applicable:
      1.   The preservation of site features established by the PAD;
      2.   The development of the PAD; and,
      3.   The construction, dedication, and provision of public services.
   M.   When financial assurances are required, a draft form of financial
assurances to be recorded prior to ordinance adoption;
   N.   Specifications as to how and to what extent the PAD is to supplement or
supersede adopted city zoning regulations;
   O.   Standards for the interpretation of the PAD regulations and
requirements;
   P.   Development design guidelines;
   Q.   General landscape program;
   R.   Drainage plan;
   S.   A traffic and transportation study which includes trip generation
factors for various modes, estimated trips per day by land use, proposed
vehicular access and circulation plan, and traffic impacts by mode on adjacent
development;
   T.   Impacts on existing structures, roads, and other development;
   U.   Impacts on existing infrastructure and public services; and,
   V.   Location and extent of proposed provisions for sewage disposal,
effluent use, stormwater drainage, and utilities.
4.4   Other information as may be determined necessary by the PDSD Director
SECTION 2-05.0.0: PLANNED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT (PCD) REZONING APPLICATIONS
Section
2-05.1.0   APPLICABILITY
2-05.2.0   APPLICATION SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS
2-05.3.0   FORMAT REQUIREMENTS
2-05.4.0   CONTENT REQUIREMENTS
2-05.1.0   APPLICABILITY
   This section provides the application submittal requirements for the
Rezoning (Change of Zoning) Procedure provided in Section
3.5 of the Unified Development Code (UDC).
2-05.2.0   APPLICATION SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS
   PCD rezoning applications are available from the PDSD Department. Submit
applications and accompanying materials to PDSD. The types of documents and the
specific number of copies required of each of the documents are provided in the
rezoning application.
   The following documents and information shall be submitted upon application.
2.1   Application Form
   A completed application signed by the property owner or authorized designee
is required.
2.2   Neighborhood Meeting Information
   Written proof of the offer to meet with the surrounding property owners and
other applicable parties in accordance with Section
3.2.2 of the UDC must be submitted with the application. Required documentation
includes copies of the meeting notification letter, the mailing list provided
to the applicant by the city, the meeting attendance sheet, and the minutes of
the meeting. The minutes should include any concerns raised at the meeting and
the applicant’s response to them, if any.
2.3   Development Inventory Report and Master Site Plan
   A Development Inventory Report and Master Site Plan in accordance with
Sections
2-06.3.0, Format, and
2-06.4.0, Content, is required; and,
2.4   Fees
   Fees in accordance with Section
4-01.0.0, Development Review Fee Schedule, is required.
2-05.3.0   FORMAT REQUIREMENTS
   The PCD rezoning application shall be in the form approved by the Planning
and Development Services Director and shall include text, map(s), diagrams,
charts/tables, photographs, or a combination of all elements as appropriate.
2-05.4.0   CONTENT REQUIREMENTS
   The PCD rezoning application shall include the following elements.
4.1   Development Inventory Report (DIR)
   The DIR shall describe and provide information regarding the existing
conditions, characteristics, infrastructure, and natural resources of the
property within the proposed PCD that will be used as supporting data for
recommended actions and proposals to be included in the Master Site Plan (MSP).
To the extent that the information and plans of the DIR and MSP listed below
are redundant to any submittal requirements for the Zoning Examiner’s
Legislative Procedure, Section
3.5.3, the DIR and MSP shall be deemed to satisfy the submittal requirements.
This information shall include the following:
   A.   Contact listing of key project team representatives including the
contact, owner, and developer;
   B.   A vicinity map drawn to a suitable scale showing the existing land use,
zoning, major streets and routes plan map, other applicable city plans, and
general condition of the land within the proposed PCD boundary and adjacent
lands located within a one-half mile radius of the PCD boundary;
   C.   Legal description, of the PCD boundary stamped by a registered land
surveyor; and,
   D.   Existing conditions in the form of scaled maps, text, diagrams,
graphics, tables, pictures, analysis reports, letters from appropriate
agencies, composite maps, as requested by the Planning and Development Services
Department. The background information shall include the total gross property
acreage, current principal land uses, a delineation of major physical
constraints or opportunities, major environmental features, topography,
existing roads, trails, utilities, and 100-year floodways and mapped storm
water drainage conditions.
4.2   Master Site Plan (MSP)
   The MSP shall include a Land Use Plan, a Resource and Infrastructure Plan,
Phasing Plan, Implementation Plan, and, if applicable, a Development Agreement.
The MSP shall be in compliance with the purpose statements of the PCD in
accordance with Section 3.5.7.A.
   A.   Land Use Plan
   The Land Use Plan shall include general information, a land use map,
development standards , and design guidelines as provided below:
      1.   General information comprised of:
         a.   A statement by the applicant describing the overall rationale for
the proposal in the subject area;
         b.   An explanation in the application describing how the PCD complies
with the policies of the applicable General Plan, specific plan, area plan or
neighborhood plan;
         c.   A parcel matrix or other summary table format of the proposed
contents of the District Areas (DA) and DA zoning districts(s), showing the
approximate size in acres of land uses including residential, nonresidential,
mixed use, job/employment centers, functional open space, natural undisturbed
open space, and natural open space. The matrix will show: the minimum and
maximum acreage of functional open space, natural undisturbed open space,
natural open space and total open space; the minimum and maximum number of
potential dwelling units, and the proposed minimum and maximum square footage
for nonresidential and mixed uses. In addition, the matrix will show the
approximate number of miles of roads and trails. The anticipated rate of
development will also be provided in narrative or graphic form; and,
         d.   Citywide policy compliance. To the extent there are policies in
effect in the city, this report must address compliance with the following:
energy efficiency, water conservation, an affordable housing strategy, mass
transit, alternate transportation modes, transportation levels of service,
water harvesting, and related policies as applicable to development within the
city.
      2.   Land Use Map. The PCD land use map shall be divided into DAs and any
zoning districts within DAs as applicable. The map shall be drawn to a scale
suitable to the Planning and Development Services Department and include at
least the following:
         a.   The boundary for the proposed PCD;
         b.   The general location of all proposed major and minor arterial
streets, including any proposed connections to major streets identified on the
Tucson Major Streets and Routes Map;
         c.   Major drainage elements;
         d.   The proposed locations of educational facilities, public parks
(ten acres or greater in size or as requested) and regional natural open space
areas; and,
         e.   The proposed locations of public trails and/or bikeways,
including any proposed connections to conceptual trail locations identified in
the Eastern Pima County Trails Master Plan and related city plans.
      3.   The Development Standards establish the standards applicable to the
PCD. These requirements shall comply with Sections 3.5.7.C, Identification of
the PCD, 3.5.7.D, Development Standards, of the UDC and shall at a minimum
contain:
         a.   Development Standards . The PCD shall provide development
standards  for the following, but not limited to: landscaping, streetscapes,
block patterns, lot clustering, screening, pedestrian connections, street
design and connectivity, parking, environmental, natural resource and cultural
conservation areas, scenic corridors, private recreation areas, housing types,
and any other areas that are appropriate. To the extent applicable, the
development standards  shall be comparable to those in Article 6 of the UDC;
         b.   Dimensional Regulations. The standards  shall address, as
applicable, permitted heights; setbacks; lot coverage; perimeter yards; minimum
and maximum density ranges; commercial, civic, and industrial square footage
standards ; population ratios; acceptable pedestrian distances; facility
service radius distances; and, related topics; and,
         c.   Cross-Sections. Provide cross-sections illustrating the proposed
standards  for roads, sidewalks, and trails.
      4.   The Design Guidelines shall contain the following:
         a.   Urban design strategies and specific techniques to enhance the
land use compatibility and physical design of all components of a master
planned community and interface with adjacent existing development; and,
         b.   Design guidelines that address building orientation, residential
product diversity, and architectural, character, variety and materials.
   B.   Resource and Infrastructure Plan
   The Resource and Infrastructure Plan shall include individual plans with
maps, programs, and requirements for a systematic implementation of the PCD.
The Plan shall elaborate the various conceptual plans based on the information
and details in the DIR.
      1.   Master Drainage and Hydrology Plan, prepared by an Arizona
registered engineer based on publicly available data, including the following:
         a.   Existing washes and/or drainageways that shall be preserved as
natural open space;
         b.   Proposed manmade channels or wash realignment;
         c.   Proposed flood control facilities, such as stormwater detention
dams and basins; and,
         d.   A basin-wide analysis of the cumulative affect of upstream and
downstream impacts on basins in the watershed, detention and retention
facilities and existing and proposed rates of on-site and off-site flows shall
be provided. Pima County Flood Control District shall be included in all
reviews.
      2.   Master Water and Sewer System Plan prepared by an Arizona registered
engineer based on publicly available data with analysis of sewer capacity by
the Pima County Regional Wastewater Reclamation Department.
      3.   Traffic Impact Analysis Engineering Plan prepared by an Arizona
registered engineer recommending logical connections and extensions based on
publicly available data as is practicable including mass transit, multi-modal
levels of service, and any other pertinent data as required by the authorizing
agency.
      4.   Public Facilities Plan showing the proposed locations of schools,
police stations, fire stations, parks and recreational areas/amenities, as
applicable.
      5.   Cultural Resource and Archaeology Plan consistent with state and
federal regulations.
      6.   Natural Resource Plan identifying areas specified or appropriate for
preservation as natural open space or natural undisturbed open space in the
applicable General Plan, specific plans, areas that may be subject to
applicable city natural resource regulations [e.g. Environmental Resource Zones
(Section
5.7 of the UDC)], W.A.S.H. Ordinance (Tucson Code, Chapter 29, Article VIII),
and areas proposed as natural open space, or natural undisturbed open space by
the applicant.
      7.   Horizontal Infrastructure Site Plan including roads, water,
wastewater, and dry utilities (such as gas, electric, telephone, cable;
drainage structures) providing the following:
         a.   Summary of capacity of existing horizontal infrastructure as it
relates to the project;
         b.   Summary of horizontal infrastructure demand and improvements
needed to support the project; and,
         c.   Summary of how the horizontal infrastructure will be phased to
support the project, and the concurrent partial or full release or substitution
of assurances for such infrastructure.
      8.   An Infrastructure Financing Plan describing the proposed methods for
financing the public infrastructure that is needed to support the project.
   C.   Phasing Plan
   The PCD application shall contain a preliminary phasing plan including the
following:
      1.   The anticipated approximate start date under which horizontal
infrastructure construction or development is expected to begin, the number of
phases, the approximate duration of time required for completion of each phase;
and
      2.   Proposed development phasing if the project will not be developed as
a single DA or phase.
   D.   Implementation Plan
   An implementation plan and procedure document shall be prepared that
establishes how the goals, criteria, requirements, development, and phasing
schedules in the overall MSP will be implemented and monitored in the approval
of individual site plans and subdivision plats.
   E.   Development Agreement
   A development agreement between the city and the applicant pursuant to
A.R.S. § 9-500.05 may be prepared and reviewed concurrently to afford
resolution to issues and concerns identified through agency review including
the financing and phasing of public facilities and infrastructure.
SECTION 2-06.0.0: DEVELOPMENT PACKAGE (TENTATIVE PLATS AND SITE PLANS)
Section
2-06.1.0   GENERAL
2-06.2.0   APPLICATION SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS
2-06.3.0   FORMAT REQUIREMENTS
2-06.4.0   CONTENT REQUIREMENTS
2-06.5.0   FLEXIBLE LOT DEVELOPMENT (FLD) - ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS
2-06.1.0   GENERAL
1.1   Purpose
   This standard has been prepared for the purpose of informing applicants of
the submittal and review requirements for development package documents to
assure proper and adequate information is presented in a consistent manner,
thereby providing the basis for an efficient and timely review. The development
package documents are prepared in support of applications for building permits
and related reviews.
   The information that is requested establishes the basis upon which the
project will be approved and could affect what is required of the property in
the future, should there be a proposal for expansion or for a different use of
the property.
   This standard does not waive any applicable city regulations or codes.
1.2    Applicability
   This standard shall be used for all site plans and tentative plats submitted
to PDSD for review.
2-06.2.0   APPLICATION SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS
   Development Package applications are available from PDSD. Completed
applications and accompanying materials shall be submitted to PDSD. Incomplete
or inaccurate applications will not be accepted, nor will any application in
which the pre-application conference or neighborhood meeting requirements have
not been met. The types of documents and the specific number of copies required
of each of the documents are on the PDSD website or may be obtained from PDSD.
Resubmittals of development packages require a comment response letter that
details how all previous comments have been addressed. Provide the same number
of copies of the comment response letter as plans provided.
   The following documents and information shall be submitted upon application:
2.1   Application Form
   A completed application signed by the property owner or authorized designee;
   
2.2   Development Package
   A development package must be prepared to the format and content
requirements described herein;
2.3   Related Reviews
   In addition to the plan process, a project may require review for other
types of plans and documents. The applications for those processes are
submitted to the appropriate department for review and approval. These related
reviews can be applied for so that review can occur concurrently with the
development package application. However, it must be understood that, should
the related application be approved subject to conditions or denied, this may
affect the development package documents ;
2.4   Concurrent Reviews
   The development package is designed to allow for concurrent review of any
site related reviews. Concurrent review means that all plans and documents
needed for the review are submitted as one package. Examples of site related
reviews include but are not limited to: site plans, landscape plans, NPPO
plans, water harvesting plans, grading plans, SWPPP plans, floodplain use
permits, and overlay reviews. Separate applications are often required for the
different site related reviews even if the plans are submitted concurrently;
and,
2.5   Fees
   Fees in accordance with Section
4-01.0.0, Development Review Fee Schedule.
2-06.3.0   FORMAT REQUIREMENTS
3.1   Each sheet shall measure 24 inches by 36 inches and include a minimum one
inch margin on left side and one-half inch margin on all other sides to
facilitate efficient record keeping. A larger sheet format may be used with the
approval of the Planning and Development Services Department (PDSD).
3.2   All mapped data shall be drawn at an engineering scale having no more
than 50 feet to the inch. This scale is the minimum accepted to assure the plan
will be legible during review and when digitized and/or reduced for record-
keeping purposes. The same scale shall be used for all sheets within the set.
Smaller scales (60:1 or greater) may be used for some or all of the sheets with
the prior approval of PDSD when it is determined legibility and the ability to
be digitized and/or reduced for archiving will not be affected.
3.3   All lettering and text (upper or lower case), and numbering, shall be a
minimum of three-thirty-seconds inches in height to assure the plan will be
legible during review and when digitized and/or reduced for archiving.
3.4   A title block shall be provided in the lower right quadrant of each
sheet.
3.5   A three-inch by five-inch space shall be reserved in the lower right
quadrant of each sheet for an approval stamp.
3.6   Provide a blank three-inch by five-inch block in the lower right corner
of the plan adjacent to the title block on the first sheet of the development
package for use by Pima County Addressing.
3.7   A small, project-location map shall be provided in the upper right corner
of the cover sheet.
3.8   The north arrow, contour interval, and scale as applicable to each sheet
should be placed together in the upper right corner of each sheet.
3.9   The plan drawing shall be oriented with north toward the top of the
sheet. If it is not practical to orient north to the top of the sheet, the plan
drawing shall be oriented with north to the left side of the sheet.
3.10   A legend that shows and describes all symbols used on the drawing is to
be provided, preferably on the first sheet.
3.11   A key plan (if provided) shall be located on the first sheet.
3.12   An index of sheets in the development package shall be provided on the
first sheet.
(Am. Admin. Directive, 5/14/2013)
2-06.4.0    CONTENT REQUIREMENTS
4.1   The name, mailing and email addresses, and phone number of the primary
property owner of the site, the developer of the project, registrant(s), and
other person(s), firm(s), or organization(s) that prepared the development
package documents  shall be provided on the right half of the cover sheet. The
applicable registration or license number shall be provided if prepared by or
with the assistance of a registered professional, such as a surveyor,
architect, landscape architect, or engineer. All sealing shall be consistent
with Arizona Board of Technical Registration guidelines.
4.2   The title block shall include the following information and be provided
on each sheet:
   A.   The proposed name of the project or subdivision, or if there is no
name, the proposed tenant’s name;
   B.   A brief legal description and a statement as to whether the project is
a resubdivision are to be provided. On resubdivisions, provide the recording
information of the existing subdivision plat;
   C.   The number of proposed lots and common areas are to be noted. If the
subdivision is a Flexible Lot Development (FLD), a condominium, or a similar
type of residential subdivision utilizing special provisions of the UDC, it
shall be so noted;
   D.   The page number and the total number of pages in the package (i.e.,
sheet xx of xx).
4.3   The administrative street address and relevant case numbers (development
package document, subdivision, rezoning, board of adjustment, DDO, MDR, DSMR,
overlay, etc.) shall be provided adjacent to the title block on each sheet.
4.4   The project-location map to be located on the first sheet of the
development package in the upper right corner, shall cover approximately one
square mile, be drawn at a minimum scale of three inch equals one mile, and
provide the following information.
   A.   Show the subject property approximately centered within the one square
mile area;
   B.   Identify major streets and regional watercourses within the square mile
area and all streets that abut the subject property; and,
   C.   Section, township, and range; section corners; north arrow; and the
scale will be labeled.
4.5   When the development package documents  consists of more than one sheet,
a sheet index (a legible drawing of the site showing the area represented on
each sheet) is to be placed on the cover sheet or the second sheet.
4.6   If the project is located within the boundaries of a Planned Area
Development (PAD) zone, include a reduced-scale map of the PAD on the first
sheet, indicating the location of the portion being developed.
4.7   General Notes
   The following general notes are required. Additional notes specific to each
plan are required where applicable.
   A.   Zoning and Land Use Notes
      1.   List as a general note: “Existing zoning is ____.”
      2.   List the gross area of the site/subdivision by square footage and
acreage.
      3.   If the plan/plat has been prepared in conjunction with a rezoning
application, add the following note next to the existing zoning note: “Proposed
zoning is ____.” List the applicable rezoning file number and conditions of
approval. Also place the C9-__-__ (if applicable) and the plan/plat file
numbers in the lower right corner of each sheet.
      4.   Identify the existing and proposed use of the property as classified
per the UDC. List all UDC sections applicable to the proposed uses.
      5.   On residential projects, list the total number of units/lots
proposed.
      6.   If a plan or plat is prepared in conjunction with other applications
or overlays or the parcel being developed is subject to conditions of an
application processed previously, additional information must be added to the
plan. Such applications and overlays include, but are not limited to:
annexations; rezonings; special exceptions; Board of Adjustment variances;
Design Development Options; Technical Standard Modification Request; overlays
(Airport Environs Zone, Environmental Resource Zone, Gateway Corridor Zone,
Hillside Development Zone, Historic Preservation Zone, Major Streets and
Routes, Rio Nuevo District, Scenic Corridor Zone, WASH); Modification of
Development Regulations through the Downtown Area Infill Incentive District or
Rio Nuevo District; Downtown Heritage Incentive Zone; or, Design Review Board.
Provide the following information on the plan.
         a.   List additional applications and overlays, by case number (if
applicable), in lower right corner of each sheet. As a general note provide the
type of application processed or overlays applicable, a statement that the
project meets the criteria/conditions of the additional application or overlay,
the case number, date of approval, what was approved, and the conditions of
approval, if any.
         b.   If there is more than one lot within the site, the note should
specify which lots are affected by the additional applications or overlay
zones.
         c.   If the property includes Protected Riparian Area add a note
stating that the project is designed to comply with Technical Manual Section 4-
02, Floodplain, WASH, and ERZ Standard, specifying all lots impacted and
including a total for the regulated area and the Protected Riparian Area.
      7.   If the property is part of a subdivision plat that is being reviewed
or has been recorded, provide the case number in the lower right corner of each
sheet. As a general note, indicate whether the project is part of a Flexible
Lot Development (FLD), condominium, or another similar type project.
      8.   For development package documents provide:
         a.   Floor area for each building;
         b.   Percentage and area in square feet of building and accessory
building coverage;
         c.   Percentage of building, lot area, or vehicular use area
expansion. If the building(s) or lot area have been previously expanded, those
calculations shall be included; and,
         d.   When the proposed site is part of a larger site, the calculations
encompass the entire site, whether existing or proposed. If the project is
being phased, calculations must show that, at each phase, requirements are
being met.
   B.   Drainage Notes
   List the following notes as appropriate:
      1.   List the following notes on all plans/plats:
      “The developer, any successors and assigns, will hold the City of Tucson,
its officers, employees, and agents harmless from any and all claims for
damages related to the use of this development as shown hereon, now and in the
future, by reason of flooding, flowage, erosion, or damage caused by water,
whether surface flood or rainfall.”
      2.   If applicable, list the following notes and complete the blanks.
         a.   “The following lots are affected by the City of Tucson Floodplain
Regulations: _________.” (List the lots affected by lot number.)
         In the case of one lot development, substitute the words, “This
project is affected by the City of Tucson Floodplain Regulations.”
         b.   “A floodplain use permit and/or finished floor elevation
certificates are required for the following lots: __________.” (List the lots
affected by lot number, or in the case of a one lot development, place a period
after the word “required” and delete the remainder of note.
      3.   List the following note on all development package documents :
      “Drainage will remain in its natural state and will not be altered,
disturbed, or obstructed other than as shown on this site plan.”
   C.   Streets and Roads Notes
      1.   List the following note if applicable: “All new public roads within
and adjacent to this project will be constructed in accordance with approved
plans. Construction plans will be submitted to the City Engineer’s Office for
review and approval.”
      2.   List the following note on all development package documents : “No
structure or vegetation shall be located or maintained so as to interfere with
the sight visibility triangles in accordance with Section
10-01.5.0, Sight Visibility, of the Technical Standards Manual.”
      3.   Provided the following notes as applicable:
         a.   “Total miles of new public streets is ____________.”
         b.   “Total miles of new private streets is ____________.”
   D.   Utilities Note
   All development package documents are to include the following note: “Any
relocation or modification of existing utilities and/or public improvements
necessitated by the proposed development will be at no expense to the public.”
   E.   Wastewater Management Notes
   List the following notes as appropriate.
      1.   If public sewers are proposed, the following notes will appear on
the plan/plat, as applicable.
         a.   The following notes will be placed on all plans/plats.
            1)   “On-site sanitary sewers will be public and will be designed
and constructed to Pima County Wastewater Management Department Standards and
must be accepted and released for service by Pima County Wastewater Management
prior to the issuance of sewer connection permits.”
            2)   “A project Construction Permit must be secured from Pima
County Wastewater Management before beginning any work on this project.”
         b.   The following note will be placed on all plans/plats in instances
where off-site sewer construction is required: “The required off-site public
sanitary sewer line will be designed and constructed to Pima County Wastewater
Management Department Standards .”
         c.   The following note will be placed on all plans/plats in instances
where off-site augmentation is required: “The required off-site public sanitary
sewer augmentation will be designed and constructed to Pima County Wastewater
Management Department Standards .”
         d.   The following note will be placed on all plans/plats if the
proposed project is a commercial or industrial project: “Any wastewater
discharged into the public sanitary sewerage system shall meet the requirements
of Pima County Ordinance No. 1991-140, or as amended.”
      2.   The following notes will be provided on the plans/plats if private
sewers are proposed for construction on the property.
         a.   “On-site sanitary sewers will be private and will be constructed,
operated, and maintained on a private basis. The location and method of
connection to an existing public sanitary sewer is subject to review and
approval by the Pima County Wastewater Management Department at the time of
submittal of plumbing or building plans.”
         b.   “A property owners’ association will be formed to accept
responsibility and liability for construction, maintenance, operation, and
control of all private sewers.” (This applies only if there is more than one
lot within the development.)
         If no homeowners’ association is being formed, use the following note:
“Maintenance and operation of the private sanitary sewer to its point of
connection to the public sanitary sewer is the responsibility of each and every
property owner within this development.”
      3.   The following note shall be placed on a plan/plat proposed for
commercial or industrial use: “Any wastewater discharged into the public
sanitary sewerage system shall meet the requirements of Pima County Ordinance
No. 1991-140, as currently amended.”
      4.   The following note will be provided if public and private sewers are
proposed for construction or if public sewers are existing: “On-site sanitary
sewers, except public sewers within public sewer easements or rights-of-way,
will be private and will be constructed, operated, and maintained on a private
basis. The location and method of connection to an existing public sanitary
sewer is subject to review and approval by the Pima County Wastewater
Management Department at the time of submittal of plumbing or building plans.”
      5.   The following note will be provided on the development review
documents if private disposal systems will be provided: “Sewerage disposal for
lots ____ through ____ will be by private individual disposal systems.
Conceptual approval by the Pima County Department of Environmental Quality for
private individual disposal systems will be obtained prior to approval of the
development package documents .” (In the case of a one lot development, delete
“ . . . for lots ____ through ____ . . . “ on the first line.)
   F.   Trails Notes
   List the following notes as appropriate.
      1.   If a trail or path is proposed, provide a note, as appropriate,
indicating that a trail or path will be constructed for public or private use,
the general location of the trail or path, and whom it will be constructed and
maintained by. If it is intended to connect to an offsite feature, such as an
exiting trail, wash, sidewalk, road, commercial or residential development,
etc., so indicate. If the trail or path is to be dedicated, indicate the method
of dedication.
      2.   If a new trail or path will be constructed, add the following note,
as appropriate: “All new onsite and offsite trails or paths constructed in
conjunction with this project will be constructed in accordance with approved
plans. Construction plans will be subject to the review and approval of the
city’s Parks and Recreation Department, and, if requested, Pima County Natural
Resources, Parks and Recreation.”
      3.   The Eastern Pima County Trails System Master Plan does not show any
trails on or adjacent to the development site.
4.8   Existing Site Conditions
   The following information shall be provided on the plan/plat drawing to
indicate the existing conditions on site and within 50 feet of the site. On
sites bounded by a street with a width of 50 feet or greater, the existing
conditions across the street will be provided.
   A.   Provide site boundary/subdivision perimeter information, including
bearing in degrees, minutes, and seconds, with basis for bearing noted,
together with distances in feet, to hundredths of a foot, or other functional
reference system.
   B.   All easements shall be drawn on the plan. The recordation information,
location, width, and purpose of all easements on site will be stated. Blanket
easements should be listed in the notes, together with recordation data and
their proposed status. Should an easement not be in use and be proposed for
vacation or have been abandoned, so indicate. However, should the easement be
in conflict with any proposed building location, vacation of the easement shall
occur prior to approval of plan unless written permission from easement holder
(s) is provided.
   C.   The following information regarding existing private or public right-
of-way adjacent to or within the site shall be provided: the name, right-of-way
width, recordation data, type and dimensioned width of paving, curbs, curb
cuts, and sidewalks.
   D.   The following information regarding existing utilities shall be
provided: the location and size of water wells, water pumping plants, water
reservoirs, water lines, fire hydrants, sanitary and storm sewers, including
the pipe diameter and the invert and rim elevations of all manholes and
cleanouts; the Pima County Wastewater Management Department (PCWMD) reference
number; locations of gas lines, electric and telephone lines, poles, and
communications cables, on-ground junction boxes, and street lights. If water
mains and sewers are not located on or adjacent to the tract, indicate the
direction, distance to, and sizes of those nearest the property.
   Identifying the locations of all utilities and service equipment immediately
adjacent to the project is especially important in situations where pedestrian
and vehicular access and circulation or landscaping can be in conflict. By
knowing the location of the existing utilities, design of the project can take
those elements into consideration and can help avoid expensive and time-
consuming relocation of utilities, major redesign, or requests to vary
regulations after commencement of construction.
   E.   Indicate the ground elevation on the site based on City of Tucson Datum
(indicate City of Tucson field book number and page).
      1.   For land that slopes less than approximately 1%, contour lines shall
be drawn at intervals of not more than one foot. Spot elevations shall be
provided at all breaks in grade and along all drainage channels or swales and
at selected points not more than 100 feet apart in all directions.
      2.   For land that slopes between approximately 1% and 5%, contour lines
shall be drawn at intervals of not more than two feet.
      3.   For land that slopes more than 5%, contour line intervals shall be
drawn at five-foot intervals. If the property is subject to the Hillside
Development Zone (HDZ), the contour lines are to be drawn at intervals which
satisfy the specific requirements of the HDZ and Section
9-01.0.0, Hillside Development Zone, of the Technical Standards Manual.
      4.   If applicable, protected peaks and ridges shall be delineated on the
plan/plat.
   F.   Existing storm drainage facilities on and adjacent to the site will be
shown.
   G.   Other significant conditions on the site, such as major rock outcrops,
structures, fences, walls, etc., shall be shown. These elements should be
indicated in a different line weight than the proposed improvements and labeled
“to be removed” or “to be retained.”
   H.   Conditions on adjacent land significantly affecting the design of the
project will be shown, such as the approximate direction and gradients of
ground slope; character and location of adjacent development; and drainageways,
arroyos, ditches, and channels, including their existing conditions.
   I.   Floodplain information, including the location of the 100-year flood
limits for all flows of 100 cfs or more with 100-year flood water surface
elevations, shall be indicated.
      1.   Where natural floodprone areas, such as washes, channels,
drainageways, etc., exist within the development document boundaries of the
drawing, water surface contours for the 100-year flood with water surface
elevations indicated must be shown and clearly labeled.
      2.   The linear distance between water surface contour intervals should
not exceed 200 feet unless prior agreement has been made with the City
Floodplain Engineer or designee.
      3.   A symbol identical to that used to represent the water surface
contour intervals on the development package documents should be included in
the legend.
4.9   Information on Proposed Development
   The following information on the proposed project shall be shown on the
drawing or added as notes.
   A.   Draw in all proposed lot lines with approximate distances and
measurements.
   B.   Identify each block or lot by number within the subdivision boundary
and include the approximate square footage of each, or a note may be provided
stating that all lots comply with the minimum lot size requirements.
   C.   If the project has common areas, label each common area individually
with a separate letter designation. Enclose with a solid line each common area,
private street, etc., that will have separate restrictions, a separate
homeowners’ association, or any common area that is separated by a public
right-of-way.
   D.   Delineate proposed Natural Undisturbed Open Space (NUOS) in a
surveyable manner.
   E.   Proposed land splits or existing lot lines shall be drawn on the plan
with dimensions and the identification number and approximate square footage of
each lot. (Please be aware that, if land division occurs and the number of lots
falls within the definition of subdivision, a subdivision plat is required.)
Land splits require a separate permit and review.
   F.   All existing zoning classifications on and adjacent to the project
(including across any adjacent right-of-way) shall be indicated on the drawing
with zoning boundaries clearly defined. If the property is being rezoned, use
those boundaries and classifications. The basis for this requirement is that
some zoning requirements on a project are based on the zoning classification of
adjacent property. Also, in some instances, each zone has to be taken into
consideration on property that is split by two or more zoning classifications,
as each may have different requirements.
   G.   If the project is to be phased, provide calculations, setbacks, etc.,
to indicate that each phase complies with all requirements as a separate
entity. Show phase lines on the drawing. Show and label any temporary
improvements that may be needed to make the site function for each phase as one
entity. If such temporary improvements are off the site of the phase under
consideration, a temporary easement or other legal documentation to assure
legal use of the property is required. Note recording information.
   H.   Proposed traffic circulation:
      1.   Proposed traffic circulation will be designed in accordance with
Section
10-01.0.0, Street Technical Standards, of the Technical Standards Manual, to
include streets, intersections, street names, right-of-way widths, curve radii
of centerlines and curb returns, and proposed improvements, such as pavement,
curbs, access points (driveways), accessible ramps, and sidewalks. Street
improvements, such as sidewalks, curbs, pavement, and accessible ramps, do not
need to be drawn on the plan if such information is provided on typical street
cross sections.
   Please be aware that, if a new street is created (for other than for
subdivisions) which divides the property into two or more lots, a subdivision
plat is required (refer to the definition of subdivision in Section
11.4.20 of the UDC).
      2.   Show future and existing sight visibility triangles. On a designated
MS&R street, the sight visibility triangles are based on the MS&R cross-
section.
      3.   Indicate fire circulation, including accessibility and vehicle
maneuverability.
      4.   Indicate if existing streets are public or private; provide street
names, widths, curbs, sidewalks, and utility locations, all fully dimensioned.
      5.   If utilizing parking area access lanes (PAALs), they shall be
designed in accordance with Section
7.4.6, Motor Vehicle Use Area Design Criteria, of the UDC.
         a.   Show all motor vehicle off-street parking spaces provided, fully
dimensioned. As a note, provide calculations on the number of spaces required
(include the ratio used) and the number provided, including the number of
spaces required and provided for the physically disabled. The drawing should
indicate parking space locations for the physically disabled. A typical parking
space detail shall be provided for both standard parking spaces and those for
the physically disabled. For information on parking requirements for the
physically disabled, refer to adopted building and accessibility codes of the
City of Tucson. Design criteria for parking spaces and access are located in
Section
7.4.6, Motor Vehicle Use Area Design Criteria, of the UDC.
         b.   If any of the required parking is located off-site as permitted
by the UDC, a drawing of that parking area is to be provided, together with the
city’s required parking agreement (include a copy of the lease agreement if
applicable) must be provided. Please remember that in these situations, if the
off-site parking location is a new parking area, it must comply with all
parking area requirements and must be allowed as a principal use by the zoning
classification of that property. If the off-site parking area location is an
existing parking lot, the parking spaces utilized for the proposed land use
must be nonrequired parking for the existing use for which the parking area was
established.
         c.   Show all loading zones, vehicle maneuverability fully
dimensioned, and access route. Provide as a note the number of loading spaces
required, the number provided, whether the loading space is a Type A or B as
provided in UDC Section
7.5.4.
         d.   Show bicycle parking facilities fully dimensioned. For specifics,
refer to Section
7.4.9, Bicycle Parking Design Criteria, of the UDC. Provide, as a note,
calculations for short and long term bicycle spaces required and provided.
      6.   If the project is phased, the phase under consideration shall be
designed so those later phases are assured legal access. If such access is
provided through the phase under consideration, public streets are required, or
access easements must be delineated and dedicated for such use. If private
easements are utilized, protective covenants establishing the right of access,
maintenance and incorporation of future phases into this project are required.
      7.   If streets are proposed, indicate if they are designed for on-street
parking to accommodate visitor parking or if parking is provided in common
parking areas. Visitor parking is to be evenly distributed and usable by all
residents of the project. Extra parking on individual lots, such as tandem
parking in driveways, does not count toward visitor parking, as it is not
available to other property owners within the project. Design criteria for
streets are located in Technical Standards Manual Section
10-01.0.0.
   Streets designed at the minimum width, without on-street parking, need
clearance for access to all homes by life safety vehicles and, where no alleys
are provided, by refuse collection vehicles. If motor vehicles are parked along
streets that are not designed to allow for parking, life safety services will
be inhibited and, in many situations, blocked.
   I.   Show all right-of-way dedications on or abutting the site and label. If
the development package documents have been prepared in conjunction with a
subdivision plat or is required as a condition of approval of a review process,
such as a rezoning, street dedications in accordance with the Major Streets and
Routes (MS&R) Plan may be required by these processes.
   Projects bounded by streets having only a portion of the right-of-way width
dedicated will be required to dedicate right-of-way, up to one-half, to
complete the street width.
   Should there be any proposed street or alley vacation, provide this
information. If vacation has occurred, include the recording information.
   J.   If street dedication is not required or proposed and the project site
is adjacent to a Major Street or Route, draw the Major Street right-of-way
lines for those streets. (Add the MS&R future sidewalk, right-of-way lines,
sight visibility triangles, etc.)
   K.   Identify and provide dimensions, approximate areas in square footage,
and purposes of any lots proposed for dedication (such as open spaces,
recreation areas, or natural areas) or for reservation for a public use (such
as public parks, water facilities, or school sites).
   L.   All proposed easements (utility, sewer, drainage, access, etc.) are to
be dimensioned and labeled as to their purposes and whether they will be public
or private. The easements may have to be recorded and the recordation
information added to the development package prior to approval.
   M.   Grading Plan
      1.   A conceptual grading plan is required on projects with significant
topographic conditions. The PDSD Engineering Administrator or designee will
determine the need for such a plan.
      2.   Concurrent Review. For all projects, grading plans may be included
in the development package and will be reviewed concurrently.
      3.   Tentative Plats - Non Concurrent Review. A separate grading plan may
be submitted after the second resubmittal of the tentative plat; however, the
grading plan cannot be approved unless it is conformance with an approved
tentative plat.
   Note: In the case of a tentative plat submitted in conjunction with a
rezoning request, the tentative plat and grading plan cannot be approved until
30 days after adoption of the rezoning ordinance. See Section
3.5.3.K.6, Ordinance Effective Date, of the UDC.
   N.   In conjunction with a drainage report or statement, as applicable,
prepared in accordance with the City Engineer’s instructions and procedures,
the following information will be indicated on the development package
documents . For additional information regarding drainage standards , see the
City of Tucson Standards Manual for Drainage Design and Floodplain Management.
      1.   Show areas of detention/retention including 100-year ponding limits
with water surface elevations.
      2.   Indicate proposed drainage solutions, such as origin, direction, and
destination of flow and method of collecting and containing flow.
      3.   Provide locations and types of drainage structures, such as, but not
limited to, drainage crossings and pipe culverts.
      4.   Indicate all proposed ground elevations at different points on each
lot to provide reference to future grading and site drainage.
      5.   Verification will be provided that any drainage solutions which
occur outside the boundaries of the development document area are constructed
with adjacent owners’ permission. (Additional notarized documentation of that
approval will be submitted with the drainage report.)
      6.   The 100-year flood limits with water surface elevations for all
flows of 100 cfs or more will be drawn on the development package documents .
      7.   Draw locations and indicate types of off-site runoff acceptance
points and/or on-site runoff discharge points.
   O.   All applicable building setback lines, such as erosion hazard,
floodplain detention/retention basins, and zoning, including sight visibility
triangles, will be shown.
   P.   The following Pima County Wastewater Management information will be
indicated on the development package documents .
      1.   Preliminary sewer layout, including points of connection to existing
sewers, proposed rim and invert elevations, and flow arrows at all manhole
locations, length and percent of grade between manholes, size of pipe, and
proposed flow-thru locations, should be shown if applicable.
         a.   The preliminary sewer layout shall be designed so that manholes
will not interfere with street survey monuments. However, survey monuments may
be offset from manhole locations if so indicated on the plan.
         b.   Where sewers must be located in easements other than
drainageways, the sewer and easement must be located entirely on one lot, or a
note must be added to the plan which states the following. “No permits will be
issued for any structures proposed to be built within a sewer easement.”
         c.   The minimum width of sanitary sewer easements shall be 20 feet.
If applicable, indicate that off-site easements will be recorded by separate
instrument. Easements may have to be recorded and the recordation information
added to the development package prior to approval.
         d.   All sanitary sewers will be designed to provide gravity flow, if
possible.
   Q.   Provide the square footage and the height of each commercial,
industrial, or business structure and the specific use proposed within the
footprint of the building(s).
   R.   Show on-site pedestrian circulation and refuge utilizing location and
the design criteria in Section
7-01.0.0, Pedestrian Access, of the Technical Standards Manual.
   S.   Show existing or proposed pedestrian circulation along abutting rights-
of-way. Such sidewalks must comply with accessibility requirements for the
physically disabled and the design criteria in Section
10-01.0.0, Street Technical Standards, of the Technical Standards Manual.
   T.   Show refuse collection areas, including locations of dumpsters,
screening location and materials, and vehicle maneuverability, fully
dimensioned, and access route. If dumpster service is not proposed, indicate
type of service. For specific information on refuse collection, refer to
Section
8-01.0.0, Solid Waste and Recycle Disposal, Collection, and Storage, of the
Technical Standards Manual. Refuse collection on all projects shall be designed
based on that section, even if collection is to be contracted to a private
firm.
   U.   Indicate graphically, where possible, compliance with conditions of
rezoning.
   V.   For gang mailboxes indicate location to assure there are no conflicts
with other requirements, such as pedestrian accessibility, utilities, and
landscaping.
   W.   Indicate the locations and types of proposed signs (wall, free-
standing, pedestal) to assure there are no conflicts with other requirements
and that minimal locational requirements can be met. Indicate if there are any
existing billboards on site. Compliance to the Sign Code, Chapter 3 of the
Tucson Code, is required.
   X.   Show compliance with landscaping and screening requirements by
locations, material descriptions, and dimensions. Specific plant or hardscape
material shall be detailed on a landscape plan. A detailed landscape plan is
required. In accordance with Section
2-11.0.0, Landscape Plan Requirements.
(Am. Admin. Directive, 5/14/2013)
2-06.5.0   FLEXIBLE LOT DEVELOPMENT (FLD) - ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS
5.1   Site Plan Required
   FLDs not proposing to subdivide the project site must prepare a site plan in
accordance with Section
2-06.0.0, Development Package, including Section
2-06.5.3, Additional Information;
5.2   Tentative Plat Required
   An FLD proposing to subdivide the project site into two or more lots must
prepare a tentative plat. Tentative plats for FLDs must be prepared in
accordance with Section
2-06.0.0, Development Package, including Section
2-06.5.3, Additional Information, and the following developable area
information:
   A.   Provide, by note on the plat, the developable area calculation for the
entire FLD; and,
   B.   Show the maximum developable area of each lot (i.e., building
footprint).
5.3   Additional Information
   The following are required in addition to the requirements of the tentative
plat or site plan, whichever is applicable:
   A.   Reduced Perimeter Yards
   Street perimeter yards along interior street rights-of-way and perimeter
yards between interior lots may be modified in accordance with Section
8.7.3.L, Perimeter Yards on Interior Lots, of the UDC. Applicants requesting a
perimeter yard reduction must indicate what the required and reduced perimeter
yards are and their locations. Applicants requesting a reduced street perimeter
yard must provide a written description of how the reduced yard will enhance
the architectural design or the vehicular circulation in the FLD and submit a
transportation statement, or if required by the Department of Transportation, a
traffic impact analysis;
   B.   Maximum Density Option
   Applicants requesting a Maximum Density Option in accordance with Section
8.7.3.C.3.b must demonstrate compliance with the applicable criteria by written
report or on the plat or site plan, whichever is appropriate;
   C.   Functional Open Space
   Delineate the boundaries of the proposed functional open space on the
tentative plat or site plan, whichever is applicable. Provide, by note on the
plat, the required and proposed functional open space calculations;
   D.   Building Elevations
   Provide dimensioned building elevations of all proposed units. The
elevations can be preliminary drawings. The model home construction plans will
be used to determine exact setbacks and screening requirements at the time of
application for building permits;
   E.   Architectural Variation Plan
   When applicable, an Architectural Variation Plan (AVP) is required in
accordance with Section
8.7.3.M.1 of the UDC as follows:
      1.   Identify on the tentative plat or site plan the lots and/or units
that must provide architectural variation; and,
      2.   Provide a written statement and drawings (such as elevations and
building footprints) demonstrating how the proposed architectural variation
techniques comply with Section
8.7.3.M.1 of the UDC.
      3.   Alternative Compliance requests require the following in addition to
the Architectural Variation Plan:
         a.   Rationale for Alternative Compliance with the requirements of
Section
8.7.3.M.1;
         b.   Explanation of how the proposed is a best practice; and,
         c.   Photographs and/or graphical illustrations to support the
rationale and best practice.
   F.   Privacy Mitigation Plan
   When applicable, a privacy mitigation plan is required in accordance with
Section
8.7.3.M.2.d of the UDC as follows:
      1.   Identify on the tentative plat or site plan the lots and/or units
that must provide privacy mitigation;
      2.   Provide photographs of the site and its interface with the adjacent
properties documenting the existing conditions; and,
      3.   Provide a written statement and drawings (such as elevations and
landscape plans) demonstrating how the proposed mitigation techniques comply
with Section
8.7.3.M.2.b of the UDC. The plan should include when practicable additional
design elements to increase privacy such as the siting angle of buildings,
windows, and lots;
   G.   Covenants, Conditions, and Restrictions
      1.   Provide three copies of the Covenants, Conditions, and Restrictions
(CC&Rs) regarding the homeowner’s association’s responsibility for the
ownership and maintenance of commonly-owned property.
      2.   Provide two copies of the protective covenants or common use
agreements for any shared areas being established by easements over
individually-owned property.
(Am. Ord. 11320, 11/17/2015)
SECTION 2-07.0.0: FINAL PLAT, BLOCK PLAT, MINOR SUBDIVISION, AND CONDOMINIUM
PLAT APPLICATIONS
Section
2-07.1.0   APPLICABILITY
2-07.2.0   APPLICATION SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS
2-07.3.0   SUBMITTAL TIMING
2-07.4.0   FORMAT REQUIREMENTS
2-07.5.0   CONTENT REQUIREMENTS
2-07.6.0   APPROVAL DOCUMENTS AND PROCEDURE
2-07.1.0   APPLICABILITY
   Final plats, block plats, minor subdivisions, and condominium plats shall be
prepared according to the requirements provided below. Hereafter referred to as
“plat” or “plats.”
   A final plat serves as a survey document suitable for recordation of all or
part of an approved tentative plat, if applicable. The final plat must conform
to the approved tentative plat or site plan in lot configuration, design, and
required conditions of development. The final plat, once approved, is recorded
in the Pima County Recorder’s Office. The final plat is kept on file and
becomes part of the permanent record for the subject site.
(Am. Admin. Directive, 5/14/2013)
2-07.2.0   APPLICATION SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS
   Plat application packets are available from the PDSD Department. Completed
applications and accompanying materials are submitted to the PDSD. Incomplete
or inaccurate applications will not be accepted, nor will any application in
which the pre-application conference or neighborhood meeting requirements have
not been met. Should an incomplete submittal be accepted for review, the
applicant should be aware that, because of a lack of information, the review
will take longer since comments cannot be finalized until after the resubmittal
when the required information is provided. The types of documents and the
specific number of copies required of each of the documents are on the PDSD
website or may be obtained from the CDRC office.
   The following documents and information shall be submitted upon application:
2.1   Application Form
   A completed application signed by the property owner or authorized designee;
2.2   Plat
   A plat must be prepared to the format and content requirements described
herein; and,
2.3   Fees
   Fees in accordance with Section
4-01.0.0, Development Review Fee Schedule.
2-07.3.0   SUBMITTAL TIMING
   Review of final plats is normally initiated after the tentative plat has
been approved, unless concurrent tentative and final plat submittal has been
approved by the PDSD prior to submittal. Final plats may also be submitted for
review prior to the approval of a tentative if a minimum of one review of the
tentative plat have occurred. In any case, submittal of the final plat prior to
approval of the tentative plat is done at the applicant’s risk since changes
could be required of the tentative that may affect the final plat.
2-07.4.0   FORMAT REQUIREMENTS
   Plats must:
4.1   Be on a 24-inch by 36-inch sheet(s) folded to the eight and one-half inch
by 11-inch format shown in Exhibit I. The plat may comprise several sheets
showing various elements of required data;
4.2   Be prepared on materials that can be transferred to double-matt Mylar
reverse read;
4.3   Have a two-inch margin on the left side and one-half inch margins on the
remaining sides to comply with standardization requirements of state law for
recorded plats;
4.4   Be drawn to a scale of no more than one inch equals 40 feet; and,
4.5   All lettering and dimensions shall be three-thirty-seconds inch in
height.
2-07.5.0   CONTENT REQUIREMENTS
5.1   General
   A.   A project-location map must be drawn in the upper right corner of the
first sheet of the plat at a scale of three inches equals one mile and include
the following information:
      1.   The project site approximately centered within a one square mile
area;
      2.   Label the section, township, and range; section corners; north
arrow; and the scale;
      3.   Subdivisions, arterial and collector streets, major watercourses,
and railroads within the one-mile area; and,
      4.   The city’s jurisdictional limits, if within the mapped area.
   B.   If the plat contains more than one sheet, a small index drawing of the
site showing the area represented on each sheet is to be placed on the first
sheet. Exception: The project-location may be used as the index map on plats
having only two or three sheets.
   C.   If the project is located within the boundaries of a Planned Area
Development (PAD) zone, include a reduced-scale map of the entire PAD on the
first sheet, indicating the location of the portion being developed.
   D.   Place the words “SEQ#________” in both the upper and lower right
corners outside the margin line. The blanks will be completed by the Pima
County Recorder’s Office at the time of recordation.
   E.   Provide a title block in the lower right corner of each sheet with the
following information:
      1.   Subdivision name; number of blocks, lots, and/or units; and common
area;
      2.   Legal description by section, township, and range; and,
      3.   If the final plat is a resubdivision of a previously recorded plat,
indicate the title and the book and page/sequence number reference of the
existing subdivision; and
      4.   State “FINAL PLAT” in the tittle and title block.
   F.   Orient the subdivision drawing with north toward the top of the page,
when possible. Place a north arrow on each sheet in the upper right corner with
the scale of the drawing beneath the arrow. All lettering, dimensions, etc.,
must be oriented to the north. If it is not practical to orient north to the
top of the sheet, the plan drawing shall be oriented with north to the left
side of the sheet.
   G.   Line weights will reflect the nature of the line, e.g., right-of-way
lines must be more prominent than lot lines or easements and drainageways must
be shown in heavy solid lines except at street crossings.
   H.   The S(Year)-___ subdivision case number assigned to the approved
tentative plat must be placed in the lower right corner of the plat next to the
title block. If the property is subject to a rezoning case, the C9-__-__
rezoning case number is to be noted also.
   I.   A legend which shows and describes all symbols used on the drawing must
be placed on either the first sheet of the plat or the first sheet which
contains all or part of the subdivision drawing.
5.2   General Notes
   The plat must include the following general notes. Additional notes specific
to each project are required when pertinent. Fill in the blanks with the
project-specific information.
   A.   “The gross area of this subdivision is ____ acres.”
   B.   “The total number of lots is ____.”
   C.   Provide the following notes:
“Total miles of new public streets are ____.
“Total miles of new private streets are ____.”
   D.   If the property is subject to conditions of rezoning, add the following
note: “This plat is subject to the conditions of rezoning case number C9-__-__,
unless superseded by a subsequent rezoning ordinance.”
   E.   If subject to floodplain requirements, add the following note: “Prior
to issuance of any building permit, a Flood Plain Use Permit is required for
Lots ____.”
   F.   If the property is subject to the requirements of the Hillside
Development Zone, add the note: “Prior to the issuance of any building permits,
Hillside Development Zone approval is required for Lots ____.”
   G.   If a Board of Adjustment variance is granted, provide the following
note: “This plat is subject to Board of Adjustment variance C10-__-__, unless
expired or superseded by a subsequent application.”
   H.   Add the following note on all plats. The purpose of this note is solely
for review for compliance with local and state laws governing subdivision and
land splits. “There will be no further division of lots without the expressed
approval of the City of Tucson.”
   I.   If the subdivision was the result of a rezoning case and did not
require submittal and review of a tentative plat, add the following note: “Any
relocation, modification, etc., of existing utilities and/or public
improvements necessitated by the proposed development will be at no expense to
the public.”
   J.   If applicable, add the following note: “This subdivision is subject to
Ordinance No. ____ which established zoning in the _____________________
Annexation Area.”
5.3   Standard Paragraphs
   The plat must include the following statements, as applicable. All
signatures must be in permanent, black, India ink and be accompanied by a
notary signature and seal.
   A.   Certification of Survey
   The following statement must be signed by a registered land surveyor and
placed on the first page:
 
  CERTIFICATION OF SURVEY
   
  “I hereby certify that the boundary survey as shown on this plat was performed
  under my direction and that all existing or proposed survey monuments and
 markers shown are correctly described. I further certify that this plat was       
  prepared under my direction.”
   
  _______________________      _________________________
  Printed Name            Seal and Signature
   
 
   B.   Dedications
   The following statements are required on the first page of the plat. These
statements indicate that all streets, alleys, easements, and other rights-of-
way and any lands for public uses are dedicated by the plat to the public or
for private use. The paragraph entitled DEDICATIONS consists of four elements:
a statement of certification of title; a dedication statement; a hold harmless
clause; and a signature line(s) for the property owner(s). The paragraphs may
be amended to fit the applicable situation.
      1.   Certification of Title.
 
  “(I/We), the undersigned, hereby warrant that (I am/we are) the owner(s) and
  the only (party/parties) having any interest in the land shown on this plat,
  and (I/we) consent to the subdivision of said land in the manner shown
 hereon.”                                                                      
  _________________________________________________
  Printed Name             Signature
   
 
      2.   Dedication Language. Use one of the following four statements as may
be appropriate for the plat. Section
2-07.5.3.B.2.c may be used in subdivisions with private elements. Section
2-07.5.3.B.2.d may be used where electrical facilities are not specifically
located in common areas.
         a.   “(I/We) hereby dedicate and convey to the public forever all
rights-of-way as shown hereon, including all streets, roads, parks, easements,
and drainageways.”
         b.   “(I/We) hereby grant to the public and all utility companies all
easements as shown hereon for the purposes of access for installation and
maintenance of public sewers and utilities and other uses as designated by this
plat.”
         c.   “Private streets, drainageways, and common areas, as shown
hereon, are reserved for the private use and convenience of all owners of
property within this subdivision and are granted as easements to the public and
all utility companies for the purposes of access, installation, and maintenance
of utilities, drainage, and public sewers. Title to the land of all private
streets, drainageways, and common areas shall be vested in an association of
individual lot owners as established by Covenants, Conditions, and Restrictions
recorded in Sequence #________ in the Pima County Recorder’s Office. The
association will accept responsibility for control, maintenance, and liability
for the private streets, drainageways, private sewers, and common areas within
this subdivision.”
         d.   “Private streets, drainageways, and common areas shown on this
plat are reserved for the private use and convenience of all owners of property
within this subdivision, and easements are granted to the public and all
utility companies together with access for the installation, maintenance, and
improvements of aboveground and underground utilities, public sewers, and
drainage. Title to the land of all private streets, drainageways, and common
areas will be vested in an association of individual lot owners as established
by Covenants, Conditions, and Restrictions recorded in Sequence #________ in
the Pima County Recorder’s Office. The association will accept responsibility
for control, maintenance, and liability for the private streets, drainageways,
private sewers, and common areas within this subdivision.”
      3.   Add the following hold-harmless statement: “(I/We), the undersigned,
do hereby hold harmless the City of Tucson, its successors and assigns, their
employees, officers, and agents from any and all claims for damages related to
the use of the property depicted on this plat now and in the future by reason
of flooding, flowage, erosion, or damage caused by water, whether surface flood
or rainfall.”
      4.   Add the signature lines for the property owners. The number of
signatures depends on the number of persons who have fee title interest
according to a title report current within 30 days of recordation of the
proposed plat.
      5.   The signature shall be notarized in general conformance with the
following format, modified as necessary:
 
   State of Arizona   ) s.s.:
   Pima County      )
   On this___________day of__________ , 20__ , before me personally appeared
___________________, who acknowledged to be the trust official of
________________ and being authorized so to do, executed the foregoing
instrument for the purpose therein.
   My commission expires:___________________
   Notary Public
 
   C.   If applicable, the following BENEFICIARY block must be included on the
title page.
 
   
  BENEFICIARY
 “The beneficiary of (Title Company Name and Trust Number) is (Name and  
  Address).”
   
 
   D.   Approval and Recording Data Blocks
   The APPROVAL paragraph, where the City Clerk certifies that the plat has
been approved by Mayor and Council, and the RECORDING DATA paragraph, which
provides space for the recording information, must be placed on the first sheet
of the plat adjacent to each other. The paragraphs are as follows.
 
  APPROVAL
   
  “I, (fill in name of current City Clerk), Clerk of the City of Tucson,
  Arizona, hereby certify that this plat was approved by the Mayor and
  Council of the City of Tucson, Arizona, on this ____ day of __________,
  20__.”
   
  ____________________________________________ ______________
  Clerk, City of Tucson                      Date
   
  Sequence________________
  Fee_____________________
 State of Arizona                                                          
  County of Pima
  I hereby certify that the instrument
  was filed for record at the request
  Of__________________________
  Date________________________
  Time_________________________
  Witness my hand and Official Seal
  day and year above written.
  F. ANN RODRIGUEZ, County Recorder
  BY___________________________
  Deputy
   
 
   E.   Assurances
   The following ASSURANCE block must be placed on the plat’s first sheet.
 
  ASSURANCES
   
  “This is to certify that all improvements, such as streets, non-lot specific/common area sidewalks, sewers, water and utility installation, drainage and flood control facilities, and monuments, required by the City of Tucson
  have been completed or the future completion of such improvements has been assured by a land trust financial assurance agreement, the posting of performance bonds, an escrow account, letter of credit, or other security as the
  City of Tucson deems necessary and proper. In the event that any such assurance expires, lapses or is otherwise inadequate to assure the completion of assurable infrastructure, the city may suspend the issuance of building
 permits or certificates of occupancy.”                                                                                                                                                                                              
   
                                                                                                                    
  City of Tucson Planning and Development Services Department Director
   
                                                                                                                    
  City of Tucson Engineer
 
5.4   Proposed Subdivision Information
   Provide the following information on the plat:
   A.   Indicate the name and width of each street, alley, easement (type), and
drainageway within the subdivision boundary being created by this plat. Label
each as public or private, along with the appropriate dedication notation;
   B.   Identify each block or lot within the subdivision boundary by number,
and include the square footage of each;
   C.   If the project has common areas, label each common area individually
with a separate letter designation. Enclose with a solid line each common area,
private street, etc., that will have separate restrictions, a separate
homeowners’ association, or any common area that is separated by a public
right-of-way;
   D.   Provide location, dimensions, areas in square footage, and purposes of
lots proposed for dedication (such as open spaces, recreation areas, and
natural areas) or for reservation for a public use (such as public parks, water
facilities, and school sites);
   E.   Show required setbacks, such as erosion hazard, drainage, etc.;
   F.   Show the limits of the 100-year floodprone area in a surveyable and
readily retraceable manner with frequent ties to intersecting lot lines for all
flows of 100 cfs or more;
   G.   Corner lots may be designated with a star symbol indicating which
street will be used for access. Use of this designation may limit design
options for access. In instances where the city, for safety reasons, limits
accessibility, a one-foot no-access easement will be required;
   H.   Show no-vehicular access easements where applicable;
   I.   Show detention/retention areas in a surveyable and readily retraceable
manner;
   J.   Show the boundaries of all protected peaks and ridges, if applicable;
   K.   If the plat represents one phase of a multiphased project and access is
provided through this phase to the future phases, indicate the access easements
or public streets on this plat that will guarantee the access; and,
   L.   Areas that include Protected Riparian Area shall be shown on the plat
in a surveyable manner and designated as areas where no further development is
permitted.
5.5   Survey Information
   A.   Indicate primary control points, or descriptions and ties to such
control points, to which all dimensions, angles, bearings, and similar data on
the plat will be referred. Where a coordinate system has been established by
the City Engineer or County Engineer, primary control points may be referenced
thereto. At least one corner of the subdivision will be tied by course and
distance to a section corner, a quarter section corner, or an established city
or county survey monument. The plat must include a description of that corner
marker and an indication of how the bearings were determined. Corner tie
recordation information is to be provided on the plat.
   B.   Indicate tract boundary lines; right-of-way and centerlines of streets,
easements, and other rights-of-way; and property lines of residential lots and
other sites, with accurate dimensions, bearings, or deflection angles and
radii, arcs, and central angles of all curves.
   C.   Additional details to be shown are as follows:
      1.   Basis of Bearings. The purpose of the basis of bearings on a survey
is to enable another surveyor to retrace the original survey. As such, the
statement must be referenced to found, readily locatable monuments. There are
three general methods of establishing bearings:
         a.   Reference to a record of survey or a recorded plat;
         b.   Astronomic (normally solar or polaris); and,
         c.   Assumed.
   The basis of bearings must be established from at least two found,
physically monumented points described and shown on the final plat. If the
monuments at each end of the reference line are fully described on the plat,
they need not be described in the “Basis of Bearings” statement;
      2.   Label all boundary lines as to exact nature;
      3.   The boundary survey and section breakdown must be shown, if
performed;
      4.   Boundary monumentation(s) must be labeled as “found” or “set.”
         a.   Fully describe and show all markings on found monuments.
         b.   A one-half inch iron rod tagged by a registered land surveyor
must be set at all corners upon completion of construction.
      5.   Show the distance and bearing between all monuments used. Indicate
whether measured or calculated. Measured is the physical, direct occupation of
a point/line by line of sight and not through calculations of other measured
distances; and,
      6.   In castings for points on section and quarter section lines, the
standard survey monuments must be set on the street monument line at all
intersections, points of curves (P.C.s), points of reverse curves (P.R.C.s),
stub street termini, and at radius points of cul-de-sacs, eyebrows, or
knuckles. All street monuments must be in place, stamped, and punched before
public streets will be accepted for maintenance. Crossed out manhole covers are
not acceptable survey monuments.
5.6   Protective Covenants
   Protective covenants or Covenants, Conditions, and Restrictions (CC&Rs)
establishing responsibility for construction, maintenance, and ownership of any
proposed common area, open space, private street, or similar joint use, when
needed, will:
   A.   Provide for maintenance of and liability for any proposed commonly-
owned areas; and
   B.   Include the various conditions of rezoning or other special situations
requiring permanent administration by an owners’ association.
(Am. Admin. Directive, 5/14/2013; Am. Admin. Directive, 11/13/2019)
2-07.6.0   APPROVAL DOCUMENTS AND PROCEDURE
   State law requires that Mayor and Council approval is given for final plats
before the original final plat document is recorded. In the event that any
changes are made to a plat after Mayor and Council have approved it, the
revised plat is resubmitted to Mayor and Council for reapproval.
6.1   Documents Required
   Applicants must provide the following documents once the CDRC recommends
approval of the final plat. The final plat will be scheduled for the Mayor and
Council’s consideration when PDSD has received the required documents and fees
from the applicant.
   A.   Submit the original, double-matt Mylar reverse read of the final plat
as approved, with all appropriate original signatures and seals affixed;
   B.   Submit original documents that require recordation in conjunction with
the plat, such as CC&Rs, consents to dedicate, and financial assurances, with
appropriate signatures affixed;
      C.   Submit all documents in pdf format;
      D.   All fees per the CDRC approval letter; and,
      E.   Submit an updated title report (current within 30 days). A statement
from the title company certifying the title report previously submitted is
still valid is acceptable in place of an additional title report.
6.2   Procedure
   A.   City Development Review Committee (CDRC) Approval
   CDRC approval is required before a final plat is scheduled for Mayor and
Council consideration.
   B.   Scheduling for Mayor and Council Agenda
   The original, fully executed final plat is required by the Planning
Development Services Department (PDSD) prior to scheduling for Mayor and
Council consideration. In addition to the plat, all other documents, i.e.,
Covenants, Conditions, and Restrictions (CC&Rs), access agreements, consents to
dedicate, assurances etc., which may or may not require recordation with the
plat, must be submitted with the final plat Mylar.
   Upon receipt of the original documents, PDSD certifies that the project has
been approved by CDRC, verifies that the final documents meet current
ordinances and standards and schedules the plat for Mayor and Council
consideration and recordation, if approved.
   If the plat is dependent on the adoption of a rezoning ordinance, Mayor and
Council consideration of the plat shall be scheduled for the same agenda as, or
on an agenda following, the Mayor and Council consideration of the rezoning
ordinance.
   C.   Final Plat Mylar and Associated Documentation Transmitted to City Clerk
   The fully executed Mylar of the final plat and associated documents are
transmitted to the City Clerk. After the Mayor and Council approve the plat,
the Clerk signs the original to certify the Council action and has the plat
recorded by the Pima County Recorder’s Office. The recordation should occur
within five days of approval of the final plat by Mayor and Council. If the use
of the property proposed through the plat is dependent on the adoption of a
rezoning ordinance, the recordation shall occur within five days after the
effective date of any change in zoning. The subdivider shall pay the recording
fees as specified by the Pima County Recorder’s Office. In addition to the
recording fees, the subdivider shall pay the cost of providing reproducible
copies of the recorded final plat to any government agency if necessary.
   PDSD prepares a list of the parties that wish to receive notice of the
public meeting and provides it to the City Clerk’s Office. The list shall
include the applicant and all parties who have requested notice. The City
Clerk’s Office mails the notices of the public meeting.
   D.   Notice of Decision
   A notice of the Mayor and Council’s decision shall be provided by the City
Clerk to the applicant and any party requesting such notice.
   E.   Changes to Approved Plat
   If changes are made to an approved plat, the revised document is sent back
to the Mayor and Council for approval.
SECTION 2-08.0.0: LAND SPLIT APPLICATIONS
Section
2-08.1.0   PURPOSE
2-08.2.0   APPLICABILITY
2-08.3.0   APPLICATION SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS
2-08.4.0   FORMAT REQUIREMENTS
2-08.5.0   CONTENT REQUIREMENTS
2-08.1.0   PURPOSE
   The purpose of this Section is to provide the submittal requirements for
land splits.
2-08.2.0   APPLICABILITY
   Proposed land splits as defined in Article 8 of the Unified Development Code
(UDC) shall be prepared according the requirements provided below.
2-08.3.0   APPLICATION SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS
   Land split application packets are available at the Planning and Development
Services Department (PDSD). Completed applications and accompanying materials
shall be submitted to PDSD. Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be
accepted.
   The following shall be submitted upon application:
3.1   A completed application signed by the property owner or authorized
designee is required;
3.2   Two copies of the drawing showing the proposed land split;
3.3   Documentation of the land division history of the parcel. Documentation
may consist of Assessor’s maps and records, deeds, title history search, or any
other information that would credibly show the number of land divisions that
have occurred from the original parcel from the date of annexation or
recordation of a plat. The property information available at the Pima County
Assessor’s Office establishing existing land split dates is acceptable;
3.4   If applicable, a copy of any easement agreement or other legal document
which permits shared vehicle use areas and/or easements;
3.5   Two copies of any legal instruments that will be recorded establishing
the shared aspects of the project must be provided;
3.6   Two copies of any easement that is to be recorded as a part of the land
split;
3.7   Two copies of new legal descriptions; and,
3.8   Fees in accordance with Section
4-01.0.0, Development Review Fee Schedule.
2-08.4.0   FORMAT REQUIREMENTS
4.1   The drawing showing the proposed land split shall be:
   A.   Eleven inches by 17 inches or larger;
   B.   Drawn to scale no less than one inch equals 20 feet; and
   C.   Fully dimensioned.
4.2   A survey drawing and legal descriptions prepared by a registered surveyor
may be required at the PDSD Director’s discretion.
2-08.5.0   CONTENT REQUIREMENTS
   The drawing showing the proposed land split shall include the following:
   A.   The boundaries of the original parcel or lot prior to the land split
with distance and bearings labeled;
   B.   The proposed lots with distance and bearings labeled;
   C.   The rights-of-way adjacent to or within the property, including streets
and easements. The streets and easements must be labeled, dimensioned and
purpose listed;
   D.   All proposed easements on and surrounding the property;
   E.   The locations and dimensions of any existing structures and buildings;
   F.   The setbacks of existing buildings and structures from existing and
proposed property lines;
   G.   The land area of each proposed lot in square feet or acreage. If the
property is developed, additional information, such as but not limited to FAR,
lot coverage, vehicle and bicycle parking, may be needed;
   H.   Access to all proposed lots in compliance with Section
7.8, Access; and,
   I.   Whether there is any shared use of vehicle use areas, easements, etc.
between properties.
SECTION 2-09.0.0: ASSURANCES
Section
2-09.1.0   PURPOSE
2-09.2.0   POLICY
2-09.3.0   SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENT ASSURANCES
2-09.1.0   PURPOSE
   To provide affected city departments with procedures for approving
assurances for the completion of assurable infrastructure as required by state
law, A.R.S. § 9-463.01(C)(8) and Article 8 of the Unified Development Code
(UDC).
2-09.2.0   POLICY
   Subdivision plats are to be reviewed and approved in a manner consistent
with the requirements of state law.
2-09.3.0   SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENT ASSURANCES
3.1   Assurance of Completion of Improvements
      Assurances that all assurable infrastructure shall be completed,
including streets and non-lot specific/common area sidewalks; sewer, water, and
electric utilities; drainage and flood control improvements; and monuments, as
required by Article 8, Land Division and Subdivision Standards, of the UDC, the
Tucson Code, the Technical Standards Manual, the electric utility, the Pima
County Regional Wastewater Reclamation Department, and state statutes and
regulations, shall be approved by the city before a subdivision plat is
approved. All required improvements shall be made by the subdivider in
accordance with current policies of the PDSD, Department of Transportation,
Tucson Water, Pima County and the applicable utilities.
3.2   Types of Assurances
   Assurances for the completion of required assurable infrastructure shall be
provided in the form of a Third Party Land Trust unless the PDSD Director or
designee approves an alternate form as provided in this section. The PDSD
Director or designee may also determine that no assurances are required.
   A.   Third Party Land Trust
   In accordance with Section
8.6.2.B.4, Third Party Land Trust, of the UDC, the subdivider may transfer
title of the subdivision property to a land trustee to be held as an assurance
that the required assurable infrastructure will be completed. The subdivider
and land trustee shall then agree to the Third Party Land Trust, Agreement to
Construct Assurable Infrastructure and Amendment to Trust Agreement (the “Third
Party Land Trust”) in the form provided by the city. The Third Party Land Trust
is an agreement that the assurable infrastructure will be constructed before
the title to the Property held in the land trust is released in accordance with
Section
8.6.2, Subdivision Improvements and Financial Assurances, of the UDC. The Third
Party Land Trust amends that trust to conform to the requirements of this
Technical Standards Manual. By submitting the Third Party Land Trust, the
subdivider and land trustee agree to be legally bound by the terms of the
agreement and agree that these terms shall supercede and control over any
contrary terms in the signed Third Party Land Trust or in the trust agreement
between the subdivider and the land trustee.
   B.   Completion/Performance Bond
   In accordance with Section
8.6.2.B.1, Completion/Performance Bond, of the UDC, the subdivider may, at the
discretion of the Director or designee, post a completion/performance bond from
a surety bonding company authorized to do business in the State of Arizona as
an assurance that the required assurable infrastructure will be completed. The
subdivider shall then agree to the Completion/Performance Bond Financial
Assurance Agreement and Agreement To Construct Subdivision Improvements (the
“Completion/Performance Bond Financial Assurance Agreement”) in the form
provided by the city. The Completion/Performance Bond Financial Assurance
Agreement is an agreement that the subdivider will construct the assurable
infrastructure or, if not completed, that the city may provide for the
construction by executing on the performance bond. By submitting the
Completion/Performance Bond Financial Assurance Agreement the subdivider agrees
to be legally bound by the terms of the agreement and agrees that these terms
shall supercede and control over any contrary terms in the signed Performance
Bond Financial Assurance Agreement.
   The bonds shall name the City of Tucson as obligee and shall be in an amount
at least equal to the cost, as estimated by the subdivider’s engineer and
approved by the PDSD Director or designee as sufficient to secure to the city
the satisfactory construction, installation, and dedication of the uncompleted
portion of the required improvements. The Director or designee is authorized to
require a performance bond that is up to one and one-half times the estimated
costs in order to provide for inflation and increased costs that would be
incurred if the city was required to complete the improvements. If the PDSD
Director or designee determines that the performance bond is impractical method
to provide assurances for a specific project, the Director or designee shall
have the discretion to require an alternate form of assurance.
   C.   Escrow Account
   In accordance with Section
8.6.2.B.2, Escrow Account, of the UDC, the subdivider may, at the discretion of
the Director or designee, establish an account with the city with a cash or
negotiable instrument (the “Escrow Account”) as an assurance that the required
assurable infrastructure will be completed. The subdivider shall then agree to
the Escrow Account Financial Assurance Agreement and Agreement To Construct
Subdivision Improvements (the “Escrow Account Financial Assurance Agreement”)
in the form provided by the city. The Escrow Account Financial Assurance
Agreement is an agreement that the subdivider will construct the assurable
infrastructure or, if not completed, that the city may provide for the
construction by using the funds in the Escrow Account. By submitting the Escrow
Account Financial Assurance Agreement, the subdivider agrees to be legally
bound by the terms of the agreement and agrees that these terms shall supercede
and control over any contrary terms in the signed Escrow Account Financial
Assurance Agreement. The Escrow Account may be established with an escrow agent
approved by the city provided the subdivider and escrow agent agree to be
legally bound by the terms of the agreement and agree that these terms shall
supercede and control over any contrary terms in the signed Escrow Account
Financial Assurance Agreement.
   The amount of the cash or negotiable instruments in the account shall be at
least equal to the cost, as estimated by subdivider’s engineer and approved the
city, of construction, installation, and dedication of the required
improvements. The Director or designee is authorized to require an escrow
amount that is up to one and one-half times the estimated costs in order to
provide for inflation and increased costs that would be incurred if the city
was required to complete the improvements. If the PDSD Director determines that
the escrow amount is impractical method to provide assurances for a specific
project, the Director or designee shall have the discretion to require an
alternate form of assurance.
   The Escrow Account shall provide for one of the following:
      1.   That the principal and accumulated interest shall be held in trust
by the city or an escrow agent approved by the city until released in whole or
part by the city. The Escrow Account may not be used or pledged by the
subdivider for any purpose during the period the Restricted Account is in
effect; and further, that in the case of a failure on the part of the
subdivider to complete the required improvements within the specified time
period and upon notice by the city to the subdivider, the funds and all
accumulated interest in the Escrow Account shall immediately, without further
action, be made available to the city for use in completion of those
improvements.
      2.   That the subdivider may make a cash contribution to a Escrow
Account, and to include the interest accumulated thereon after the date of such
contribution, so as to provide the city the flexibility of deferring permanent
improvements along or adjacent to arterial or collector streets by holding
contributed funds until such time as sufficient funds become available to
design, and/or construct, an entire section of roadway or other improvement.
   D.   Letter of Credit
   In accordance with Section
8.6.2.B.3, Letter of Credit, of the UDC, the subdivider may, in the discretion
of the Director or designee, provide a letter of credit as estimated by the
subdivider’s engineer and approved by the city, from a bank or other financial
institution or person acceptable to the city as an assurance that the required
assurable infrastructure will be completed. The subdivider shall then agree to
the Letter of Credit Financial Assurance Agreement and Agreement To Construct
Subdivision Improvements (the “Letter of Credit Financial Assurance Agreement”)
in the form provided by the city. The Letter of Credit Financial Assurance
Agreement is an agreement that the subdivider will construct the assurable
infrastructure or, if not completed, that the city may provide for the
construction by using the funds in the Letter of Credit account. By submitting
the Letter of Credit Financial Assurance Agreement the subdivider agrees to be
legally bound by the terms of the agreement and agrees that these terms shall
supercede and control over any contrary terms in the signed Letter of Credit
Financial Assurance Agreement.
   The letter of credit shall provide the following:
      1.   That the creditor guarantees funds in an amount equal to the cost,
as estimated by the subdivider’s engineer and approved by the DSD Director or
designee, Director of Tucson Water, the Pima County Regional Wastewater
Reclamation Department, and authorized representative of the electric utility,
of construction, installation, and dedication of the required improvements. The
Director or designee is authorized to require an amount that is up to one and
one-half times the estimated costs in order to provide for inflation and
increased costs that would be incurred if the city was required to complete the
improvements. If the PDSD Director or designee determines that letter of credit
is impractical method to provide assurances for a specific project, the
Director or designee shall have the discretion to require an alternate form of
assurance.
      2.   That, in the case of failure on the part of the subdivider to
complete the required improvements within the specified time period and upon
notice by the city to the subdivider, the creditor shall, without further
action, immediately pay to the city such funds as are necessary to complete the
required improvements, up to the limit of credit stated in the letter.
      3.   That the letter of credit may not be withdrawn or reduced in amount
until released by the city.
   D.   The PDSD Director or designee may, in the Director’s discretion,
approve other forms of financial assurances as appropriate and necessary to
secure completion of the required improvements.
3.3   Assurance Requirements
   The assurances described in Section
2-09.3.2, Types of Assurances, are subject to the following requirements:
   A.   The period within which the required improvements must be completed
shall be incorporated in the documents creating the assurance and should
generally not exceed two years from the date of final plat approval. However,
the PDSD Director or designee may approve one or more extensions of up to two
years each for completion of improvements where, because of incompatible
grades, inadequate connecting facilities, lack of future planning or other
reasonable cause, the completion within two years is impossible or undesirable.
   B.   The PDSD Director or designee may, at any time during the period of the
assurance, accept a substitution of principal or sureties as provided herein.
   C.   The subdivider is required to ensure that assurances remain fully in
effect until released by the city. In the event that any assurance provided to
the city expires, lapses or otherwise becomes unavailable for the purpose of
providing assurance that the required improvements will be constructed, the
PDSD Director or designee may cease issuing building permits or certificates of
occupancy for the effected subdivision.
3.4   Substitution of Assurances
   The PDSD Director or designee may approve assurances in the form provided in
Section
2-09.3.2, Types of Assurances, as substitutes for approved assurances and
thereby release the prior assurances.
3.5   Inspection and Acceptance of Improvements
   The PDSD Director and Director of Tucson Water shall provide for inspection
of required improvements. If the PDSD Director, Director of the Department of
Transportation, Director of the Pima County Regional Wastewater Reclamation
Department, and the Director of Tucson Water find upon inspection that any of
the required improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the
city’s construction standards and specifications, the subdivider shall be
responsible for completing or replacing such improvements to the specifications
of the PDSD Director, Director of the Department of Transportation or Director
of Tucson Water.
   The city will not accept improvements for maintenance or release or reduce
any assurance until the PDSD Director has received statements from the Director
of Tucson Water and the Director of the Pima County Regional Wastewater
Reclamation Department that such improvements have been satisfactorily
completed.
3.6   Reduction of Assurances
   Where a subdivider completes the required improvements for a portion of the
final plat, assurances for such improvements may be reduced only where the
improvements can be used and maintained independently of improvements required
for the entire plat. For example, temporary cul-de-sacs should be provided for
incomplete streets; water, sewer, and electric facilities should be capable of
independent operation; and adequate access for public safety vehicles should be
provided. In no event shall assurances described in Section
2-09.3.2, Types of Assurances, be reduced below 25% of the principal amount of
each assurance before completion of all required improvements. Any reduction of
the amount of assurances shall be approved in writing by the PDSD Director or
designee.
3.7   Release of Third Party Land Trust Assurance
   A.   Residential Subdivisions
   Up to 75% of the lots in any particular phase may be released prior to
completion and acceptance of the common-element improvements (i.e., sewer
lines, water lines, street improvements, etc.). Any lot(s) released must be
served by the common-element improvements. Once all non-lot specific common-
element improvements have been completed, inspected, and accepted by the
appropriate agency, partial releases greater than 75% or a final release may be
granted.
   B.   Commercial Subdivisions
   Up to 60% of the lots in any particular phase may be released prior to the
completion and acceptance of the common-element improvements (i.e., sewer
lines, water lines, street improvements, etc.). Any lot(s) released must be
served by the common-element improvements. Once the common-element improvements
have been accepted, partial releases greater than 60% or a final release may be
granted only when all the lot-specific improvements have been completed,
inspected, and accepted by the appropriate agency.
   C.   Any release of lots in accordance with this Section must be approved in
writing by the PDSD Director or designee.
3.8   Planning and Development Services Department (PDSD) Director Actions
   The PDSD Director may designate an employee under the Director to perform
any duty of the PDSD Director in Section
2-09.0.0, Financial Assurances, and in any assurance agreement.
3.9   Required Construction
   The purpose of financial assurances is to ensure that occupied structures
within the subdivision will be served by all improvements that are necessary
for the subdivided lots to function independently. The assurances do not
require the subdivider to initiate or complete construction of infrastructure
if there are not structures to be occupied or new uses on individual lots.
Where construction is suspended or terminated after there is a partial release
of assurances permitting the occupancy and use of some individual lots, the
assurances shall authorize the city to complete or direct the completion of all
construction that may be necessary for the public health and safety of the
existing developed or occupied lots. Required construction may include drainage
areas, open space, recreation and other areas without structures where
necessary for the developed or occupied lots.
3.10   Suspension of Issuance of Permits and Certificates of Occupancy
   In the event that the assurances for a subdivision expire, lapse, become
included in a bankruptcy estate or are otherwise inadequate to assure the
construction of the required improvements, the Director of the Planning and
Development Services Department is authorized to suspend the issuance of new
building permits and the approval of new certificates of occupancy for lots
within the subdivision until such time as new assurances have been provided.
The Director or designee shall notify the subdivider in writing within three
days of a suspension of permits or certificates of occupancy under this
subsection, stating the reason for the suspension and the lots that are subject
to the suspension. The subdivider may appeal the Director’s decision to the
Board of Appeal.
(Am. Admin. Directive, 11/13/2019)
SECTION 2-10.0.0: LANDSCAPE PLAN REQUIREMENTS
Section
2-10.1.0   PURPOSE
2-10.2.0   APPLICABILITY
2-10.3.0   FORMAT REQUIREMENTS
2-10.4.0   CONTENT REQUIREMENTS
2-10.1.0   PURPOSE
   This standard specifies means to demonstrate compliance with Section
7.6, Landscaping and Screening, of the Unified Development Code (UDC).
2-10.2.0   APPLICABILITY
   A landscape plan is required to be submitted with all applications for land
development, with certain exceptions as noted in Section
7.6.2, Applicability, of the UDC. Any change in design or land use requires a
new review and approval process for the landscape plan. Certificates of
Occupancy will not be issued, nor will the building be occupied, until the
landscaping on the site meets the approved landscape plan criteria.
2-10.3.0   FORMAT REQUIREMENTS
   The landscape plan shall:
3.1   Be on a 24-inch by 36-inch sheet(s);
3.2   Be drawn to a scale of no smaller than one inch equals 40 feet; and,
3.3   All lettering and dimensions shall be three-thirty-seconds inch or
greater in size.
(Am. Admin. Directive, 5/14/2013)
2-10.4.0   CONTENT REQUIREMENTS
   The landscape plan shall include the following:
4.1   Identification and Descriptive Data
   A.   All improvements and site information, such as adjacent rights-of-way
and property lines, shown on the landscape plan will be identical in size and
location to those shown on the base plan (site plan or tentative plat). Should
amendments be required to the base plan through the review process, the same
amendments will be made to the landscape plan which will then be resubmitted
along with the base plan.
   B.   The landscape plan will contain the following identification in the
lower right corner of each sheet:
      1.   Legal description and address of site;
      2.   Cross-reference to:
         a.   Rezoning case;
         b.   Subdivision case;
         c.   Board of Adjustment case;
         d.   Design Development Option case;
         e.   Development Review Board (DRB) case; and/or,
         f.   Any other relevant case number for reviews or modifications that
affect the site.
   C.   The name, address, and phone number of the individual who prepared the
landscape plan.
4.2   Proposed Landscape and Screening Improvements
   Landscape plans submitted for review do not necessarily have to be complete
working drawings ready for contractual work. However, all required landscaping
and screening will be clearly shown in sufficient detail as to readily convey
the intent to comply. Plans will include a planting plan, an irrigation plan, a
grading plan, and construction details, each with applicable legend, key,
symbols, sizes, quantities, and notes.
   The following information must be provided on the plans. Information may be
combined on one sheet if the combination of information does not obscure other
details.
   A.   Planting Plan
      1.   Vegetation Plan and Schedules
         a.   The location of individual plants one gallon or larger in size
and areas to be seeded, turfed, or planted from flats;
         b.   Sizes of plants indicated in boxes, gallon cans, or flats or by
height (palms), number of canes (ocotillo), or number of pads (opuntia);
         c.   Ultimate size of plants indicated by the spread of canopy,
circumference of shrubs, or spread of ground cover;
         d.   Both the proper and common name of each type of plant material.
They should be included for any proposed seed list, if applicable;
         e.   Location, size, and name of existing vegetation to remain in
place;
         f.   The location of oasis allowance area; and,
         g.   Material and areas of inert ground cover.
      2.   Calculations
         a.   Square footage of the site;
         b.   Square footage of the oasis allowance area and calculation;
         c.   Square footage of the vehicular use area; number of parking
spaces, including the required and provided parking space calculations; and the
calculation of the required number of canopy trees;
         d.   A shadow pattern and calculation are required in certain cases
(see Section
7.6.4.B, Vehicular Use Area, of the UDC). Provide these, if applicable;
         e.   Minimum width and square footage measured from the inside edge of
tree planters in vehicular use areas;
         f.   Length and width of landscape borders and landscape transition
borders and number of canopy trees per length; and,
         g.   Square footage of all landscaped borders and calculation of the
percentage of vegetative coverage, when applicable.
      3.   Screening
         a.   Location of screening elements;
         b.   Height of screening material and reference point for measurement;
         c.   Nature of screening material (e.g., permanent or temporary as in
phased development); and,
         d.   Type of screening material (e.g., masonry wall, wood fence,
species of plant material).
      4.   Maintenance Schedule
         a.   Pruning schedules to show that plant material will maintain
pedestrian and vehicular clearances or that the material will establish opaque
hedge screens, if required;
         b.   Replacement criteria, should plant material not survive;
         c.   Replacement or upkeep maintenance schedules for inert ground
cover materials;
         d.   Upkeep maintenance schedules for exterior hardscape materials;
and,
         e.   Maintenance and replacement schedules for irrigation systems.
   B.   Grading Information
      1.   Grade changes across the site indicated by one-foot interval contour
lines or by spot elevations;
      2.   Percent slope across the site and the direction of the slope of
paved areas;
      3.   Existing grades on adjacent rights-of-way and adjacent sites. If an
adjacent right-of-way or site is under construction, show the proposed finish
grades;
      4.   Extent of grading boundaries if a portion of the site is to be kept
in its natural undisturbed state. Indicate natural contours of undisturbed
areas;
      5.   Areas of detention/retention, depths of basins, and percentage of
side slope;
      6.   The methods by which water harvesting or storm water runoff is used
to benefit the oasis allowance area and other planting areas on the site; and,
      7.   Percent side slope of berms.
   C.   Irrigation Plan
      1.   Type of water conserving irrigation systems proposed and
differentiation between systems for the different water use zones on the site;
      2.   Source of irrigation water;
      3.   Indicate potable or reclaimed water use. Reclaimed water system
specifications, if used;
      4.   System specifications and system design and layout (Section 4-
01.4.2, Irrigation Standards, of the Technical Standards Manual);
      5.   Extent of supplementary irrigation in each planting area, provided
by water harvesting methods;
      6.   Point of drainage off roof areas, amount of flow, and disposition of
flow;
      7.   Temporary systems proposed to establish native seeded areas;
      8.   The length of irrigation duration (e.g., for native plat material,
automatic drip for two years or until established); and,
      9.   The extent to which systems are proposed within the public right-of-
way.
   D.   Construction Details
      1.   Materials and methods used to construct landscape planters;
      2.   Materials and methods used to construct plant guards and water
diverters, such as curbs, bollards, or walls;
      3.   Materials and amounts necessary for inert ground cover;
      4.   Outdoor light fixtures;
      5.   Street furniture, outdoor art/sculpture, and water features;
      6.   Materials used for walkways and paving;
      7.   Grills or tree grates; and,
      8.   Planting details, method of caliche penetration, soil amendments,
mulch cover, staking methods, and root barriers, if used.
   E.   Additional Information
      1.   Purpose and location of utility easements and facilities; and,
      2.   Locations of existing solar collectors on adjacent property.
SECTION 2-11.0.0: NATIVE PLANT PRESERVATION PLAN REQUIREMENTS
Section
2-11.1.0   PURPOSE
2-11.2.0   APPLICABILITY
2-11.3.0   PERMITTED EXCEPTIONS
2-11.4.0   SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS
2-11.5.0   SALVAGE AND MITIGATION REPORT
EXHIBIT I   NATIVE PLANT PRESERVATION WORKSHEET
2-11.1.0   PURPOSE
   This standard is established to assure that proper techniques are used in
all aspects of conforming with the Section
7.7, Native Plant Preservation, of the Unified Development Code (UDC).
2-11.2.0   APPLICABILITY
   In accordance with Section
7.7.4.A, Submittal Requirements, a Native Plant Preservation Plan is required
as provided herein.
2-11.3.0   PERMITTED EXCEPTIONS
   Requests for exceptions from the Native Plant Preservation requirements in
accordance with Sections
7.7.3.D.3 and .4 of the UDC are reviewed by the Planning and Development
Services Department (PDSD). Submittals are required to document that the site
does not contain, or the proposed project does not impact, Protected Native
Plants. Submittal requirements shall consist of one or more of the following
items:
3.1   An aerial photograph, taken within a maximum of three years of submittal,
of the site at a minimum one inch equals 100 feet that delineates the site
boundaries and clearly shows the absence of plants within those boundaries or a
site plan that clearly shows that construction will not impact any plants. Any
aerial photograph submitted, which was taken more than one year prior to
submittal, shall be accompanied by a letter stating that the site is
substantially unchanged from the date of the aerial photograph;
3.2   A signed statement from one of the plant professionals listed in Section
7.7.4.D, Professional Expertise, of the UDC who has visited the site and
verified that Viable Protected Native Plants are not located on the subject
site; or
3.3   Other documentation, acceptable to the PDSD Director, which clearly
indicates that the site does not contain, or the project will not impact,
Protected Native Plants. Such documentation includes, but is not limited to,
photographs of the site taken from all sides of the property and a signed
statement from the property owner that Protected Native Plants are not located
on the subject site.
3.4   Based on factors such as the size of the site, site location, topography,
and proximity to significant natural features, the DSD Director may require
submittal of specific items above.
2-11.4.0   SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS
   A Native Plant Preservation Plan shall consist of the information itemized
below according to the preservation and mitigation methodology chosen by the
applicant. Additional information may be required by the PDSD Director in order
to ensure that the General Provisions and Requirements of the Native Plant
Preservation ordinance, Section
7.7.4 of the UDC, are fulfilled.
4.1   Native Plant Inventory for the Plant Inventory Methodology, the Plant
Appraisal Methodology, and the Combined Methodologies (Outside of Set Aside
Areas)
   A.   A Native Plant Inventory containing the following elements:
      1.   All Viable Protected Native Plants shall be tagged with an embossed
metal, or approved equal, inventory number. Tagging is not required in those
areas that are to remain undisturbed. If the sampling method is used to
estimate Protected Native Plants, only the Protected Native Plants required to
be either Preserved in Place (PIP) or Transplanted on Site (TOS) shall be
tagged;
      2.   A list of all Protected Native Plants as designated in Section
5-02.0.0, Protected Native Plant List, of the Technical Standards Manual
located on the site including all Saguaros; all trees with a caliper of at
least four inches measured at six inches for single-trunked specimens and 12
inches for multitrunked specimens above grade level at the base of the tree,
per Section
11.4.4, Definitions - C, of the UDC; all shrubs equal to or greater than three
feet in height; all succulents equal to two feet in height or greater; and all
cacti. The list shall include the identification number, genus and species, and
size. If the Plant Inventory Methodology is chosen, then the Native Plant
Viability and Transplantability Status (see Section 2-115.4.2) of all Protected
Native Plants on the site shall be listed. If the Plant Appraisal Methodology
is chosen, then the appraisal value of each plant removed from the site shall
be listed;
      3.   An aerial photograph, taken within a maximum of three years of
submittal, at a minimum scale of one inch equals 60 feet showing the site’s
boundaries, the locations of all Protected Native Plants within those
boundaries, and the plants’ identification numbers keyed to the inventory list
in Section
2-11.4.1.A.2. Any aerial photograph submitted, which was taken more than one
year prior to submittal, shall be accompanied by a letter stating that the site
is substantially unchanged from the date of the aerial photograph;
      4.   Areas of the site containing communities of Protected Native Plants
with a low plant viability rating (as in the case of plants damaged by fire,
frost, flood, insects, disease, or other natural damage) may be evaluated as a
group without inventory. These areas shall be clearly delineated and annotated
on the aerial photograph inventory map;
      5.   Areas of the site may be sampled to estimate representative numbers
of Protected Native Plants. These sampling techniques can be applied to any of
the methodologies chosen to comply with the ordinance. Areas of the site must
be inventoried by sampling typical identifiable areas for each genus and
species and estimating representative plant numbers per square acre of the
total site area. The samples must be representative of the Viable species found
on-site and shall not be less than 20% of the total site. If various plant
associations (upland, riparian, xeroriparian, etc.) are found on one site, then
a sample of not less than 20% of each defined plant association, by its
respective site area, shall be inventoried. Under any methodology, Ironwoods
and Saguaros shall be inventoried individually and not by sampling. Staff
reserves the right to reject sampling to establish an inventory of plant
counts, on a case-by-case basis; and,
      6.   Sites that use the sampling method for inventory of Protected Native
Plants will require field tagging of those plants to be PIP or TOS. All PIP
plants must be identified on the aerial photo and must be tagged, flagged, and
fenced. In a summary, the total number of plants, by genus and species, that
must be PIP or TOS and the required mitigation numbers shall be listed. This
summary shall be located on the NPPO plan and any associated Landscape/
Mitigation Plan. Protected Native Plants to be TOS may be identified
individually or in a “pool count.” The “pool count,” or total number of
required TOS Protected Native Plants, shall match the totals in the summary and
may vary according to field conditions; and therefore, final selection will be
that of the “plant professional” and the salvage contractor. Once the total
number of plants to be TOS, by genus and species from the summary, has been
identified in the field, they must be tagged and flagged for TOS. Plants within
a designated Natural Undisturbed Open Space (NUOS) area, under any method, do
not require individual tagging or flagging since their boundaries will be
fenced.
4.2   Native Plant Viability and Transplantability Status for the Plant
Inventory Methodology
   The Native Plant Viability and Transplantability Status shall be determined
for each native plant of the minimum size and shall be used to determine
numbers and locations of plants required for preservation.
4.3   Native Plant Analysis and Objectives for the Plant Inventory Methodology
   A.   The Analysis of the inventory shall discuss in writing the criteria
used to determine which plants and groups of plants will be preserved-in-place,
salvaged and transplanted on-site, removed from the site, or destroyed,
according to the plant status determined by the Native Plant Viability and
Transplantability Status. Criteria may include, but are not limited to, health,
vigor, wildlife value, environmental value, erosion control, soil structure,
bedrock depth, slope, and the density and continuity of surrounding vegetation.
   B.   Based upon the analysis, a site plan or subdivision plat shall be
prepared to maximize achievement of the following prioritized objectives:
      1.   A site design which avoids disturbance of communities of Protected
Native Plants and promotes the preservation-in-place of individual Protected
Native Plants;
      2.   Transplanting on-site of salvaged Protected Native Plants into
common areas; landscaped areas as required by the Landscaping and Screening
Regulations (including into the future right-of-way areas identified by the
Tucson Department of Transportation (TDOT) or designee that will not be
utilized for future right-of-way improvements and with the TDOT’s Engineer or
designee’s approval); disturbed wash areas; required retention/detention areas;
disturbed landscape areas required to be revegetated, such as within Scenic
Corridor Zones; and front yards of residential lots; and,
      3.   Salvage and transplanting off-site of any surplus Protected Native
Plants which cannot reasonably be transplanted on-site.
4.4   Plant Preservation and Salvage Plan for the Plant Inventory Methodology
   A.   A Plant Preservation and Salvage Plan on an aerial photograph, taken
within a maximum of three years of submittal, at a minimum scale of one inch
equals 60 feet showing the locations of the following. Any aerial photograph
submitted, which was taken more than one year prior to submittal, shall be
accompanied by a note on the plans stating that the site is substantially
unchanged from the date of the aerial photograph.
      1.   Limits of all areas to be graded;
      2.   Location of proposed roads and utility easements;
      3.   Existing topographic contours at two-foot maximum contour intervals;
      4.   Disposition of all Protected Native Plants keyed to the inventory
list and showing the following designations:
         a.   Plants to be preserved-in-place;
         b.   Plants to be salvaged and transplanted on-site. To the extent
possible, plants should be transplanted directly to their permanent location
on-site;
         c.   Plants to be salvaged and removed from the site; and,
         d.   Plants to be destroyed.
      5.   The location of a temporary holding nursery to be used for salvaged
plants.
   B.   Salvage and Mitigation Report that details:
      1.   A summary by genus and species that details the total numbers of all
Protected Native Plants inventoried;
      2.   The calculations used to determine, by genus and species, the
numbers of replacement plants, if any, to be provided as mitigation for
Protected Native Plants transplanted on-site, removed from the site, or
destroyed. For assistance in determining these calculations, see Exhibit I,
Native Plant Preservation Worksheet. Any required landscape plans shall include
a summary of plants required for mitigation and show their site location on the
landscape plans. Any project that does not have required landscape plans shall
have a landscape mitigation plan prepared to show the disposition of PIP, TOS,
and required mitigation, as shown in the summary;
      3.   A schedule of salvage work to be accomplished including the timing
and phasing of all tree boxing, tree and cacti salvage, and grading operations
to take place on-site. See Section
2-11.5.0, Salvage and Mitigation Report;
      4.   A method and schedule for providing irrigation to salvaged plants in
a temporary holding area. A method and schedule for providing irrigation to
PIP, TOS, and mitigation plant materials. A method to provide irrigation to
plants may include water harvesting for areas that are to remain natural; and,
      5.   A method of protection from intrusion and damage for the natural
vegetation outside the graded area. Specify fencing materials and methods for
controlling access to the designated NUOS areas (minimum fencing requirements
as specified in Section
7.7.5.C.4, Fencing Standards, of the UDC).
4.5   Set Aside Submittal
   The requirements of the Environmental Resource Report shall be fulfilled in
the assessment of the area(s) of natural resource to be set aside as
undisturbed natural open space in lieu of performing a Native Plant Inventory,
Analysis, and Plant Preservation and Salvage Plan. In addition, an aerial
photograph, taken within a maximum of three years of submittal, is required at
a minimum one inch equals 100 feet delineating the natural resource values for
areas on the site and the area(s) to be set aside which will be platted and
included in Covenants, Conditions, and Restrictions (CC&Rs) as NUOS. Any aerial
photograph submitted, which was taken more than one year prior to submittal,
shall be accompanied by a note on the plans stating that the site is
substantially unchanged from the date of the aerial photograph.
2-11.5.0   SALVAGE AND MITIGATION REPORT
   These standards provide a general list of the many aspects of salvage and
transplanting which shall be addressed by a contractor. Current standards and
professional practices for the arid southwest should always be followed.
   The basic plant protection and salvage philosophy is to preserve-in-place as
much native vegetation as possible and to utilize salvaged vegetation for
landscaping in those areas that are graded or otherwise disturbed.
5.1   The salvage and transplanting operation shall be performed by a landscape
contractor licensed in the State of Arizona.
5.2   For the salvage and transplant of trees, the Salvage and Mitigation
Report should address the following items as applicable:
   A.   Season of the year;
   B.   Feasibility of successful salvage/transplant;
   C.   Pruning requirements before and after transplant;
   D.   Appropriate box size for salvaged material based on trunk diameter;
   E.   Side boxing techniques and timing;
   F.   Plant removal techniques and transportation techniques;
   G.   Maintenance in temporary holding nursery;
   H.   Permanent location planting techniques; and,
   I.   Long-term maintenance.
5.3   For the salvage and transplant of Saguaros and cacti, the Salvage and
Mitigation Report should address the following items as applicable:
   A.   Season of the year;
   B.   Orientation of the plant at the original site and in the holding
nursery. All Saguaros and cacti should be stored and transplanted in the same
north-south orientation as they naturally grow in the desert to avoid sunburn.
All Saguaros and cacti should be premarked on the south side before moving. Any
size Saguaro and cactus can be planted in full sun if it was originally growing
in full sun; otherwise, provide artificial shade for a season, or plant under a
tree or shrub. Cacti which were not in full sun must be protected by shade
cloth or other shade in the nursery;
   C.   Excavation of adequate root system;
   D.   Protection of epidermis with burlap, foam rubber, or other padding;
   E.   Support of the plant during salvage and transport;
   F.   Final planting techniques;
   G.   Maintenance in temporary holding nursery; and,
   H.   Long-term maintenance.
5.4   Protected Native Plants that do not survive the salvage process shall be
replaced on a one-to-one basis (same size and species).
   Sources of additional information include, but are not limited to:
   International Society of Arboriculture
   National Forestry Association
   Arizona-Sonoran Desert Museum
   University of Arizona Cooperative Extension
   Desert Botanical Garden, Phoenix
EXHIBIT I: NATIVE PLANT PRESERVATION WORKSHEET
This worksheet outlines the steps needed to calculate numbers for meeting the
minimum standards , preservation credits, and mitigation requirements of the
Native Plant Preservation Ordinance utilizing the Plant Inventory Methodology.
This Worksheet has been designed to assist in calculating the numbers of plants
needed for the Salvage and Mitigation Report described in Section
2-11.5.0; however, this particular Worksheet is not required as part of the
submittal but the calculations are required. Fill out a separate worksheet for
every genus and species of plant.
 
                  PIP = plants preserved-in-place
Abbreviations and TOS = plants transplanted on-site
Definitions used: RFS = plants removed from site, damaged, or destroyed
                  Mitigation = additional plants to be planted on-site
 
NAME OF PLANT (GENUS AND SPECIES)
                                                                          
STEP ONE   Minimum Requirements for PIP or TOS
      1.   Number of plants of this genus and species inventoried and rated
viable:
                               (1)
      2.   Multiply line 1 by the appropriate number below.
   When the result includes a fractional amount, .1 - .4 is rounded down to the
next
   lower whole number, and .5 - .9 is rounded up to the next higher whole
number.
Saguaros and Ironwood trees   .5 x                          =                 
Other Plants            .3 x                          =                 
   Enter the minimum number of PIP and/or TOS required here:
                                  (2)
      3.   Enter total number of plants proposed to be PIP:
                       (3)
      4.   If line 3 is less than line 2, subtract line 3 from line 2 and enter
here:                        (4)
   If line 3 is more than or equal to line 2, enter 0.
   This is the minimum number of plants required to be TOS.
      5.   Enter total number of plants proposed to be TOS:
                       (5)
      6.   Subtract line 4 from line 5 and enter here:                       
(6)
   This is the number of “excess” plants to be TOS.
      7.   Add line 3 and line 5 and enter here:                        (7)
   This is the total number of plants that will remain on the site.
      8.   Subtract line 7 from line 1 and enter here:                        
(8)
   This is the total number of plants proposed for RFS.
STEP TWO   Preservation Credits for Plants PIP
      9.   Multiply the number of plants PIP, based on plant size, by the
appropriate multiplier below and enter here. Add the total, for each plant, and
enter the total preservation credits here.                         (9)
Saguaros 6-10' high              2 x _______ = ________
Saguaros >10' high               3 x _______ = ________
Ironwood trees 6-12" in caliper  2 x _______ = ________
Ironwood trees >12" in caliper   3 x _______ = ________
Barrel Cacti >2' high            2 x _______ = ________
Other Cacti >4" high             2 x _______ = ________
Ocotillos >6' high               2 x _______ = ________
Yuccas >2' high                  2 x _______ = ________
Other Trees 6-14" in caliper     2 x _______ = ________
Other Trees >14" in caliper      4 x _______ = ________
Shrubs >6' in height or diameter 2 x _______ = ________
 
STEP THREE   Mitigation Requirements for Plants TOS and RFS
            
      10.   Enter number of plants from line 4 here:                       (10)
This is the mitigation requirement for the required number of plants TOS.
      11.   Multiply the number of plants from line 8 by the appropriate
multiplier below and enter result here:                       (11)
   This is the mitigation requirement for plants RFS.
 
Saguaros and Ironwood trees: 3 x ________ = ________
Other plants:                2 x ________ = ________
 
      12.   Add line 10 and line 11 and enter total here:
                       (12)
   This is the total number of plants required for mitigation.
STEP FOUR   Net Mitigation Requirements
This step balances the preservation credits and requirements.
      13.   Subtract line 6 from line 12 and enter here:
                       (13)
   This is mitigation requirement reduced by “excess” plants TOS.
      14.   Subtract line 9 from line 13 and enter here:
                       (14)
   This is mitigation requirement reduced by preservation credits.
      15.   If amount on line 14 is greater than 0, enter number here:
                       (15)
   If amount on line 14 is 0 or less, enter 0 here (no mitigation is required
for this plant).
   This is the number of mitigation plants that must be provided.
      16.   Add line 7 and line 15 and enter number here:
                       (16)
   This is the total number of plants (of this genus and species) that will be
on the site.
SECTION 2-12.0.0: PROTECTED DEVELOPMENT RIGHT APPLICATIONS
Section
2-12.1.0   APPLICATION SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS
2-12.2.0   PROTECTED DEVELOPMENT RIGHT PLAN REQUIREMENTS
2-12.3.0   MODIFICATIONS PROHIBITED
2-12.1.0   APPLICATION SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS
   In accordance with Section
3.12.2, Protected Development Right, of the UDC, the following must be
submitted upon application of a Protected Development Right:
1.1   Application Form
   A completed application signed by the property owner or authorized designee;
1.2   Protected Development Right Plan
   A Protected Development Right Plan in accordance with Section
2-12.2.0, Protected Development Right Plan Requirements; and,
1.3   Fees
   Fees in accordance with the Development Review Fee Schedule, Section 4-
12.0.0, Protected Development Right Plan Fees.
2-12.2.0   PROTECTED DEVELOPMENT RIGHT PLAN REQUIREMENTS
2.1   All Applications
   All applications for a protected development right plan must be for a plan
or plat approved by the city and describe with a reasonable degree of
certainty:
   A.   The proposed uses of the site;
   B.   The boundaries of the site;
   C.   Significant topographical and other natural features affecting
development of the site;
   D.   The number of dwelling units;
   E.   The location of all existing and proposed utilities and a provision for
other infrastructure on the property, including water, sewers, road, and
pedestrian walkways;
   F.   All other studies and reports required by the UDC Subdivision
Regulations and other city codes, including traffic reports, drainage reports,
and master street plans; and,
   G.   All necessary easements and dedications.
2.2   Nonphased Development
   In addition to the requirements of this standard, a plan or subdivision
plat, for a nonphased development, may be considered protected development
right plan only if the plan:
   A.   Describes with a reasonable degree of certainty the square footage,
height, and general location of the proposed buildings, structures, and other
improvements; and,
   B.   Is an approved site plan or plat.
2.3   Phased Developments
   In addition to the requirements of this standard, an application for a
protected development right plan for a phased development shall:
   A.   Include the proposed phasing plan, the boundaries of each phase, and
the schedule of development of each phase;
   B.   Include the general location on the property of the proposed buildings,
structures and other improvements for the first phase;
   C.   Include the number of dwelling units proposed for all phases of the
development;
   D.   Include the square footage and height of the proposed buildings and
other structures for the first phase;
   E.   Identify all improvements required to be constructed for each phase;
   F.   Include a phased public infrastructure schedules;
   G.   Demonstrate that each phase will be fully functional and independent at
the time of completion of that phase; and
   H.   Is an approved site plan or plat.
2-12.3.0   MODIFICATIONS PROHIBITED
   The provisions of Section
2-12.0.0, Protected Development Right Plan Standards, cannot be modified
because they are required by state law and the UDC.
SECTION 2-13.0.0: FOLDING A 24" X 36" SHEET TO 8.5" X 11" FORMAT
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3096.jpg]
 
SECTION 3: REVIEW COMMITTEE AND COMPLIANCE REVIEW TIMEFRAMES POLICY
SECTION 3-01.0.0: CITY DEVELOPMENT REVIEW COMMITTEE
Section
3-01.1.0   GENERAL
3-01.2.0   ORGANIZATION
3-01.3.0   FUNCTIONS
3-01.1.0   GENERAL
1.1   Purpose
   To establish the organization and function of the City Development Review
Committee (CDRC).
1.2   Policy
   The City of Tucson is committed to encourage and facilitate the efficient
and innovative development of land within its city limits, with a particular
interest in infill areas.
3-01.2.0   ORGANIZATION
2.1   General
   The CDRC is composed of city departments, utility companies, other
government agencies and other agencies which regulate land use within the city
limits.
2.2   Membership
   A.   Core Members
   Members in this category are the following city departments and divisions,
which are asked to review and comment in writing on submittals to the CDRC and
are invited to attend meetings, as scheduled by the CDRC office:
   Planning and Development Services (Building Code, Zoning, Landscape and
NPPO, Planning, ADA, and Engineering)
   Traffic Engineering (TDOT)
   Fire
   Environmental Services Department (Sanitation)
   Parks and Recreation
   Police Department
   B.   Utilities
   Members in this category are the utilities which are asked to review
submittals and respond in writing and may be asked to attend meetings as
scheduled by the CDRC office:
   Pima County Regional Wastewater Reclamation Department
   Southwest Gas*
   Century Link Communications*
   Tucson Electric Power Company
   Tucson Water Department
   C.   Other Public Agencies
   Public agencies under this category are asked to review submittals and
comment in writing and may be asked to attend meetings as scheduled by the CDRC
office:
   United States Postal Service*
   State of Arizona Department of Transportation
   Pima Association of Governments
   Pima County Planning & Development Services
   Pima County Addressing
   Pima County Assessor
   Tucson Airport Authority
   D.   Other Review Entities
   Other review entities under this category are asked to review submittals and
comment in writing and may be asked to attend meetings as scheduled by the CDRC
office:
   Design Professional
   Any other entity determined to be necessary by the Planning and Development
Services Director (PDSD)
* Designates an agency that does not provide written comments
2.3   Coordination
   The PDSD Director or designated representative, chairs the CDRC and is
responsible for coordinating, compiling, and maintaining a record of all the
responses generated by the CDRC members. CDRC recommendations are transmitted
to the PDSD Director, the Zoning Examiner, the City Manager, Mayor and Council,
and the applicant as applicable.
   The PDSD serves as a single point of contact and administrative review
agency to ensure the processing of submittals in an orderly and timely manner
and with the least amount of difficulty.
   As part of its coordination function, the PDSD maintains a list of
professionals, agencies, etc., which, even though they are not members of the
CDRC, have expressed interest in being informed when submittals for new
projects are made to the CDRC for review. The PDSD mails a copy of the CDRC
application to these interested parties as a courtesy when a submittal is made
to the CDRC. The recipients cannot place any requirements on the project.
2.4   Meetings
   The chair of the CDRC schedules meetings when requested by the applicant.
The chair discusses the issues with the applicant to determine which review
agencies should be invited to the meeting. Such meeting may be used to discuss
the comments generated by the CDRC members and get clarifications/explanations
regarding regulations and processes. If the project is close to approval, this
meeting may be used to approve the plans.
   CDRC meetings are open to the public, but they are not public hearings.
Members of the public are allowed only to listen and ask questions related to
the project under discussion.
2.5   Project Review Comments
   Each CDRC member reviews submittals, as appropriate, only for conformance
with the codes, ordinances, Administrative and Technical Manuals, and other
applicable regulations for which his/her department or agency is responsible
for enforcing. Each CDRC member provides the CDRC with a written response which
includes any resubmittal requirements, if applicable. Comments generated by
CDRC members shall quote the pertinent section(s) of the code(s), ordinances or
Administrative and Technical Standards Manuals. PDSD compiles and makes
available these comments to the applicant in a timely manner.
2.6   Conflicting Requirements
   The PDSD Director, or his agent, resolves any conflict that may arise among
CDRC members regarding a development requirement or process and documents the
measures taken to resolve the conflict.
3-01.3.0   FUNCTIONS
3.1   General
   A.   The CDRC serves in a technical advisory capacity for the City Manager,
the Zoning Examiner, the Planning Director, the PDSD Director, and the Mayor
and Council.
   B.   The CDRC’s primary functions are to facilitate and expedite the review
and approval of subdivision plats, development packages, and land development
standards , such as the Administrative and Technical Manuals, and to ensure
compliance with adopted codes and regulations applicable to a project.
   C.   CDRC members possess the necessary administrative authority and
expertise to properly evaluate matters before the CDRC and are obligated to
respond expeditiously and in a timely and courteous manner.
   D.   They are also expected to objectively enforce requirements established
by an adopted code, ordinance, or the Administrative and Technical Manuals and
to assist to the best of their ability in finding solutions to technical and
procedural problems.
3.2   Development Standards Information
   CDRC members provide information to individuals regarding development of
specific sites within the City of Tucson. Such information may include
explanations of regulations and design standards applicable to the proposed
development and any other land use related information including projected
capital improvements.
3.3   Technical Review
   A.   The CDRC performs formal technical review of all tentative and final
plats, development packages, and design standards , in accordance with
applicable codes, ordinances and legal requirements. Review shall minimally
include compliance with codes regulating streets, sidewalks and public
transportation access, zoning, floodplain and drainage, fire, water,
environmental services, wastewater, and other Pima County and utility company
regulations.
   B.   Once a complete application is accepted by the CDRC, the submitted
documents are distributed to the CDRC members for review and comment on all
applicable codes, ordinances, the Administrative and Technical Manual and all
other applicable regulations.
   C.   Once the review is complete, the CDRC, shall prepare a letter which
details the status of the plan review. If the plan has been approved, the
letter will detail the items that must be submitted to the CDRC office for
final approval. If the plans have been denied, the letter will detail the
resubmittal requirements and the issues that need to be addressed and remedied.
The resubmittal requirements will include the number of copies of the plans
required along with all other documents needed to complete the review. The
letter will also indicate which agencies must continue to review the plans
after the required changes have been made.
   D.   When a resubmittal is required, the applicant must, in addition to any
corrected or modified tentative plat, final plat and/or development package,
and required additional documentation, include a letter with the resubmittal
package. The letter must respond to each comment in the CDRC response letter
and explain in detail any revisions made by the applicant to the plans and/or
documents addressing those comments.
   E.   Upon receipt of a resubmittal PDSD shall distribute the revised plan,
documents, and resubmittal letter to the CDRC for review and comment. If the
resubmitted plans and documents do not resolve all comments and demonstrate
compliance with applicable requirements, then the CDRC shall again issue a
letter detailing the resubmittal requirements.
   F.   Once the CDRC office issues an approval letter and the applicant
submittals all the items detailed in the approval letter, the plans shall be
forwarded to the PDSD Director with a recommendation for approval. The PDSD
Director shall approve the plans within five working days of receipt of the
plans and required documents as long as all other processes associated with the
plan have already been approved. Rezonings, overlays, Board of Adjustment
variances, etc. can delay approval. Once approved, the applicant will received
a signed copy of the plan for use for additional reviews and permits. The CDRC
approval letter will include the expiration date of the plan.
   G.   The approval date of the plan is the date of the CDRC approval letter
unless the plan involves a rezoning. The approval date of the plan with a
rezoning is the date the rezoning is ordinanced by the Mayor and Council. Refer
to Article 8 of the Unified Development Code of information on review periods
and extensions to review periods.
   H.   PDSD review of final plats usually occurs after the tentative plat has
been approved. The applicant may submit a final plat for review after PDSD has
completed the first review of the tentative plat. The PDSD Director may give
prior approval for concurrent review of a tentative and final plat. However, in
all cases where the applicant submits a final plat prior to a tentative plat
approval the applicant must assume the risk that PDSD or the CDRC may require
changes to the tentative plat that may affect the final plat.
   I.   See Administrative Manual Section
2-07.6.0 for information on recording an approved final plat.
   J.   Informal preliminary reviews may be done by the CDRC by scheduling a
presubmittal conference with PDSD. The quality of comments generated at a
presubmittal conference is directly related to the quality and level of detail
provided by the applicant. Some processes (minor subdivisions and block plats)
require a presubmittal conference. A presubmittal conference is required for
these processes to determine whether or not there are sufficient design or
technical issues to warrant review of a tentative plat. Determination as to
whether or not a review of a tentative plat is warranted shall be by the CDRC
upon evaluation of the information. If the CDRC determines that review of a
tentative plat is not required, the presubmittal conference notes provided at
the conference must be submitted with the first submittal of the plans to the
CDRC office. The notes must indicate that the CDRC members at the presubmittal
conference concur with the process elected by the applicant.
   K.   The PDSD Director has the discretion to ask the CDRC for advice
regarding any other matter related to land development.
SECTION 3-02.0.0: COMPLIANCE REVIEW TIME FRAMES POLICY
 
Section
3-02.1.0    PURPOSE
3-02.2.0    APPLICABILITY
3-02.3.0   GOALS OF THE REVIEW PROCESS
3-02.4.0   APPLICATIONS SUBJECT TO A.R.S. § 9-831 et seq.
3-02.5.0   EXCEPTIONS
3-02.6.0   APPLICATION FORM CONTENTS
3-02.7.0   REGULATORY CLARIFICATION
3-02.8.0   REVIEW TIME FRAME REQUIREMENTS
3-02.9.0   TIME FRAME SUSPENSIONS
3-02.10.0   NOTICES OF COMPLETENESS AND SUBSTANTIVE COMPLIANCE
3-02.11.0   ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW, NOTICE
3-02.12.0   SUBSTANTIVE REVIEW, REQUESTS FOR CORRECTIONS
3-02.13.0   APPROVAL, WITHDRAWAL, DENIAL
3-02.14.0   APPLICATION RESUBMITTALS
3-02.15.0   REFUNDS
TABLE 3-02    REVIEW TIME FRAME REQUIREMENTS TABLE
3-02.1.0   PURPOSE
   Senate Bill (SB) 1598 was adopted by the Arizona Legislature in 2011. The
law, which was codified as A.R.S. § 9-831, et seq. and amended in 2013 by House
Bill 2443, applies to all Arizona municipalities and counties and flood control
districts. The law requires the City of Tucson (City) and other public entities
to which the statute applies to establish time frames for the approval or
denial of each type of license to which the law applies. The purpose of this
Compliance Review Time frames Policy (Compliance Policy) is to bring City
development review application processing procedures into compliance with the
A.R.S. § 9-831 et seq.
(Am. Admin. Directive, 5/14/2013; Am. Admin. Directive 1.02-9, rev. 4/25/2014)
3-02.2.0   APPLICABILITY
2.1   This Compliance Policy applies to the various types of City application
review procedures that produce outcomes that qualify as “licenses,” defined in
A.R.S. § 9-831(2) as “the whole or part of any municipal permit, certification,
approval, registration, charter or similar permission required by law.”
2.2   This Compliance Policy will take precedence over any time frame for a
qualifying “license” in the Unified Development Code (UDC) , Administrative
Manual, or Technical Standards Manual.
(Am. Admin. Directive 1.02-9, rev. 4/25/2014)
3-02.3.0   GOALS OF THE REVIEW PROCESS
3.1   The City has consistently supported and practiced expeditious review of
all applications, and will continue to do so under the time frames set forth in
this Policy. The Planning and Development Services Department (PDSD) will
continue to engage in process improvement to review various applications in the
most expeditious way possible and will continue to work with customers to
review their applications in a manner that:
   provides flexibility when needed;
   assures the public health and safety; and,
   allows a customer complying with the City’s development regulations to
achieve their permitting and development goals in a timely manner.
3.2   By state law, the City may not initiate discussions with an applicant
about waiving the requirements of A.R.S. § 9-831 et seq. However, if requested
to do so by the applicant, PDSD staff will be happy to answer any questions the
applicant might have regarding an alternative, more flexible review processes.
(Am. Admin. Directive 1.02-9, rev. 4/25/2014)
3-02.4.0   APPLICATIONS SUBJECT TO A.R.S. § 9-831 et seq.
   The following City of Tucson development review applications fall under the
definition of “license” under A.R.S. § 9-831:
4.1   Procedures requiring decision by the PDSD Director .
4.2   Procedures requiring decision by the PDSD Director pursuant to the 100-
foot notice procedure.
4.3   Procedures requiring decision by the PDSD Director pursuant to the 400-
foot notice procedure.
4.4   Procedures requiring Zoning Administrator’s decision.
4.5   Procedures in certain overlay districts requiring PDSD Director’s
decision.
4.6   Special exceptions requiring PDSD Director’s decision.
4.7   Special exceptions requiring Zoning Examiner’s decision.
(Am. Admin. Directive 1.02-9, rev. 4/25/2014; Am. Ord. 11732, 2/19/2020)
3-02.5.0   EXCEPTIONS
   Under A.R.S. § 9-835(N), the provisions of this Compliance Policy do not
apply to a license or permit that:
5.1   Is issued within 7 working days of application.
5.2   Expires within 21 calendar days of issuance.
5.3   Is for a Transaction Privilege Tax license.
5.4   Is necessary for the construction on, or development of a residential
lot, including swimming pools, hardscape and property walls. For purposes of
this section, “residential” means construction or development that is subject
to the International Residential Building Code (IRC) that was adopted by the
City as one of its Building Codes, and other residential development not
subject to the IRC, as determined by an administrative interpretation by the
PDSD Director .
5.5   Is for a subdivision or master planned community as those terms are
defined in A.R.S. § 9-835(O)(1) and (2).
(Am. Admin. Directive 1.02-9, rev. 4/25/2014)
3-02.6.0   APPLICATION FORM CONTENTS
   City of Tucson development review applications must include the following
information as required by A.R.S. § 9-836:
6.1   A list of all required steps in the application/approval process;
6.2   Applicable time frames;
6.3   Contact person (name and telephone. number);
6.4   Website address; and,
6.5   Notice for opportunity to clarify ordinances or regulations, or both.
(Am. Admin. Directive 1.02-9, rev. 4/25/2014)
3-02.7.0   REGULATORY CLARIFICATION
   An applicant may request from the City clarification of a regulation
pertaining to an application. A request must be in writing and include all
information required by A.R.S. § 9-839. The City may provide the requestor with
an opportunity to meet and discuss the request. In compliance with A.R.S. § 9-
839, the City must provide a written response within 30 calendar days of
receipt of the request.
(Am. Admin. Directive 1.02-9, rev. 4/25/2014)
3-02.8.0   REVIEW TIME FRAME REQUIREMENTS
8.1   A.R.S. § 9-835(A) requires the City to have in place an overall time
frame during which the City will either grant or deny license applications that
are subject to A.R.S. § 9-831 et seq. A.R.S. § 9-835(C) provides for
flexibility in structuring the license time frame process. The overall time
frame for each type of license must separately provide for (1) an
administrative time frame for application completeness, and (2) a substantive
time frame for review. The time frames will be posted on the City’s website.
The time frame requirements for overall, administrative and substantive review
for applicable types of license procedures are listed in
Table 3-02 provided below.
8.2   Any new zoning application review provisions must comply with the
Compliance Review Policy.
8.3   The beginning of an application completeness review time frame is the
date following the actual date an application is submitted to the PDSD.
8.4   The beginning date of the substantive review period is the day following
the date of the notice of application completeness.
(Am. Admin. Directive 1.02-9, rev. 4/25/2014)
3-02.9.0   TIME FRAME SUSPENSIONS
   The overall time frames listed in
Table 3-02 below are suspended for the following time periods:
9.1   From the date of a notice to the applicant of specific deficiencies in an
application, whether on review for completeness of application or substantive
review, and the date that the City receives the missing information from the
applicant.
9.2   Time for substantive review and overall completion of certain purposes,
including any or all of the following delays for:
   1.   Public hearings;
   2.   State or federal licenses;
   3.   Approvals from public utilities on residential or commercial
development  projects ; or other non-municipal licenses; or
   4.   Participation in meetings required by law.
(Am. Admin. Directive 1.02-9, rev. 4/25/2014)
3-02.10.0   NOTICES OF COMPLETENESS AND SUBSTANTIVE COMPLIANCE
   The City must review applications for both application completeness and
substantive compliance. The City must send written notice to the applicant of
the application’s status within the mandatory time frames listing all required
additional information or corrections. Written notices may be delivered by mail
or electronically (the term “notice” as subsequently used in this Compliance
Policy includes either type of notice). If the permit sought requires approval
of more than one City department, each department may issue separate notices.
(Am. Admin. Directive, 5/14/2013; Am. Admin. Directive 1.02-9, rev. 4/25/2014)
3-02.11.0   ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW, NOTICE
11.1   The City will review an application for administrative completeness. If
the City determines that an application is not administratively complete, the
City must issue a written notice with a comprehensive list of the specific
deficiencies. A.R.S. §§ 9-835(D), 9-835(E). The statute provides for additional
written notices of deficiencies based on the applicant’s submission of the
missing information.
11.2   The notices of deficiencies must cite all reference to the applicable
regulation or policy, and inform the applicant that the City’s mandatory time
frame is suspended pending receipt of the requested corrections or any missing
information. A.R.S. § 9-835(E).
11.3   If the City fails to provide notice to the applicant of administrative
completeness or deficiency, the application is then deemed complete. A.R.S. §
9-835(F).
(Am. Admin. Directive 1.02-9, rev. 4/25/2014)
3-02.12.0   SUBSTANTIVE REVIEW, REQUESTS FOR CORRECTIONS
12.1   For substantive reviews of a license application, the City may issue no
more than one comprehensive request for corrections, as that term is defined in
the A.R.S. § 9-831(7) except as listed below.
12.2   The City may make the following additional requests for corrections:
   1.   If the City subsequently identifies legal requirements that were not
included in the comprehensive request for corrections, the City may amend the
comprehensive request for corrections once to include the legal requirements
and provide the legal authority for the requirements.
   2.   If an applicant fails to resolve an issue identified in a request for
corrections, the City may make a supplemental written requests for corrections
that are limited to issues previously identified in a comprehensive request for
corrections.
   3.   If an applicant requests significant changes, alterations, additions or
amendments to an application that are not in response to the request for
corrections, the City may make one additional comprehensive request for
corrections and may have an additional fifty percent of the substantive review
time frame for the license to be granted or denied.
12.3   Nothing in the statute prohibits communication between the City and the
applicant regarding a comprehensive request for corrections. A.R.S. § 9-835(H).
12.4   The substantive and overall time frame may be extended by mutual written
or electronic agreement. The extensions may not exceed 50% of the overall time
frame. For an application requiring more time, the applicant must submit a new
application. A.R.S. § 935(I).
(Am. Admin. Directive 1.02-9, rev. 4/25/2014)
3-2.13.0   APPROVAL, WITHDRAWAL, DENIAL
13.1   The City must give notice of approval, denial or withdrawal.
13.2   The City may deem an application withdrawn if the applicant does not
provide the requested documentation or information, or an explanation why the
information cannot be provided within the established time period after:
   1.   fifteen days from date of the notice of application corrections or
deficiencies; or
   2.   thirty days after the date of the notice of a request for corrections.
13.3   If the notice is for a denial or withdrawal, the notice must include the
following:
   1.   Citations of the pertinent regulations justifying an application denial
or withdrawal; and
   2.   An explanation of the applicant’s rights to appeal the denial or
withdrawal, including the number of working days in which the applicant must
file an appeal and the telephone number of a municipal; contact person who can
answer questions regarding the appeal process; and
   3.   An explanation of the applicant’s right to resubmit the application,
the total amount of fees that will be assessed for reapplication and the method
in which those fees are calculated.
13.4   If within the substantive review time frame for a license, and after all
permitted comprehensive requests for corrections, the license request is still
not in compliance with the City regulations and policies, the application will
be denied.
(Admin. Directive 1.02-9, rev. 4/25/2014)
3-2.14.0   APPLICATION RESUBMITTALS
   Upon receiving a notice of application denial or withdrawal, the applicant
may submit a new application to the City for further reviews. If an application
is denied or has been withdrawn, and the applicant resubmits the application
for the same purpose with only revisions or corrections to the original, the
City may not assess any additional application fees that exceed the cost of
processing the resubmitted revisions or corrections. A.R.S. § 9-835(L) and (M).
(Admin. Directive 1.02-9, rev. 4/25/2014)
3-02.15.0   REFUNDS
   If the City does not send notice to an applicant regarding approval, denial,
or withdrawal within the overall time frame or any mutually agreed extension
thereof, the City must refund the all fees within 30 working days of the
expiration of the overall time frame or any mutually agreed extension of the
overall time frame, waive any additional fees for further review of the
application, and continue to process the application. A.R.S. § 9-835(K).
(Admin. Directive 1.02-9, rev. 4/25/2014)
TABLE 3-02:   REVIEW TIME FRAME REQUIREMENTS
 
PDSD DIRECTOR APPROVAL PROCESS
APPLICATION TYPES
1.   Changes of use;
2.   Downtown Area Infill Incentive District – projects within the Downtown
Core Sub-district requesting a modification of development regulations (Note:
projects within the Greater Infill Incentive Sub-district are processed in
accordance with the 400' Notice Procedure below);
3.   Electrical connections (certain types);
4.   Expansion of existing premises;
5.   Home occupations;
6.   Individual Parking Plans for projects greater than 300' from R-3 or more
restrictive zoning districts;
7.   New construction;
8.   Nonconforming same Land Use Class substitution;
9.   Nonconforming parking areas;
10.   Parking Design Modification Requests (except requests to modify the
number of bicycle or motor vehicle parking spaces);
11.   Projects within certain overlay zones;
12.   Restricted adult activities;
13.   Temporary uses or structures;
14.   Tenant improvements;
15.   Wireless Communication uses (certain types);
16.   Rio Nuevo District Zone Minor Modifications of Development Regulations
(MDR);
17.   Zoning Compliance for Site Improvements in Existence on May 1, 2005;
18.   Other applications, such as blood donor centers and circus, carnival
and tent shows; or
19.   Site plans (Site plans in Overlay Districts require different time
frames for review).
TIME FRAME
Administrative Compliance Review 20 working days  
for Application Completeness
Substantive Review               65 working days  
                                 85 working days .
                                 Note: This time period includes a second
                                 review after return of comments on the first
Overall Time frame               review, or when a development package or
                                 site plan is required. Total time is less if
                                 only one review is needed for a particular
                                 approval, or when a development package or
                                 site plan is not required.
 
 
PDSD DIRECTOR APPROVAL PROCEDURE:
100' NOTICE PROCEDURE
APPLICATION TYPES
1.   Design Development Options (DDO) in accordance;
2.   Parking Design Modification Requests to the required number of bicycle and
motor vehicle parking spaces;
3.   PDSD Director Special Exception applications;
4.   Approval of resident artisan uses in the Historic Preservation Zone;
5.   Certain wireless facilities;
6.   Requests for demolition of contributing, non-historic structures in the
HPZ.
TIME FRAMES
Administrative Compliance Review for Application Completeness 20 working days  
Substantive Review                                            35 working days
Overall Time frame                                            55 working days
 
 
PDSD DIRECTOR APPROVAL PROCEDURE:
400' NOTICE PROCEDURE
APPLICATION TYPES
1.   Mitigation plans for certain restaurants serving alcohol within
300 feet of R-3 or more restrictive zoning;
2.   Projects within the Greater Infill Incentive Sub-district of
the Downtown Area Infill Incentive District requesting a
Modification of Development Regulations; and,
3.   Individual Parking Plans for projects within 300 feet of R-3 or
more restrictive zoning districts.
TIME FRAMES
Administrative Compliance Review for Application 20 working days  
Completeness
Substantive Review                               45 working days
Overall Time frame                               65 working days
 
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR APPROVAL
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR APPROVAL
APPLICATION TYPES
1.   Compliance with certification of existing premises.
2.   Interpretations of the UDC.
3.   Planned Area Development interpretations.
4.   Zone boundary conflicts.
TIME FRAMES
                                                 Complex issues requiring
                                Regular Review  additional research or a City
                                                 Attorney opinion:
Administrative Compliance Review 20 working days 20 working days
for Application Completeness                    
Substantive Review               10 working days 25 working days
Overall Time frame               30 working days 45 working days
 
PDSD DIRECTOR APPROVAL IN CERTAIN OVERLAY ZONES
PDSD DIRECTOR APPROVAL IN CERTAIN OVERLAY ZONES
APPLICATION TYPE
Historic Preservation Zone Design Review
TIME FRAMES
Administrative Compliance Review for Application Completeness 20 working days
Substantive Review:                                            
   Full Review                                             40 working days
   Minor Review                                            25 working days
Overall Time frame:                                            
   Full Review                                             60 working days
   Minor Review                                            45 working days
APPLICATION TYPE
Rio Nuevo District Design Review
TIME FRAMES
Administrative Compliance Review for Application Completeness 20 working days
Substantive Review:                                            
   Major                                                   65 working days
   Minor                                                   50 working days
Overall Time frame:                                            
   Major Review                                            85 working days
   Minor Review                                            70 working days
APPLICATION TYPE
Neighborhood Preservation Zone Design Review
TIME FRAME
Administrative Compliance Review for Application Completeness 20 working days  
Substantive Review                                            20 working days
Overall Time frame                                            40 working days
 
 
PDSD DIRECTOR SPECIAL EXCEPTION PROCEDURE
APPLICATION TYPE
Special Exceptions requiring PDSD Director approval
TIME FRAME
Administrative Compliance Review for Application Completeness 20 working days
Substantive Review                                            25 working days
Overall Time frame                                            45 working days
 
 
ZONING EXAMINER SPECIAL EXCEPTION PROCEDURE
APPLICATION TYPE
1.   Special Exceptions requiring ZE decision under the UDC.
2.   Substitution of nonconforming uses (uses not in the same land use class).
3.   Expansion of nonconforming uses.
TIME FRAME
Administrative
Compliance
Review for     20 working days
Application
Completeness
Substantive    40 working days for administrative review
Review
               60 working days for administrative review
Overall Time   The substantive and overall time frames are suspended from overall
frame          time frame under A.R.S. § 9-835(C)(8)(c) for the required ZE Public
               Hearing
 
(Am. Admin. Directive 1.02-9, rev. 4/25/2014; Am. Ord. 11732, 2/19/2020)
 
SECTION 3-03.0.0: FLEXIBLE APPLICATION PROCESS
Section
3-03.1.0   GENERAL
3-03.2.0   DESCRIPTION OF PROCESSES
TABLE 3-03    TYPICAL TIMEFRAMES FOR COMPLIANCE REVIEW/FLEXIBLE OPTION
3-03.1.0   GENERAL
   In 2011 the Arizona Legislature passed a “Regulatory Bill of Rights” (SB
1598) requiring municipalities to establish and adhere to time frames in a
broad range of permitting processes. Under the law, cities must create an
overall permitting time frame for each process, consisting of an
“administrative completeness” time frame and a “substantive review” time frame.
The aim of this bill was to create faster, more uniform, and more transparent
processes, goals which the City of Tucson Planning and Development Services
Department (PDSD) share. However, the implementation of these time frames may
have unforeseen consequences.
   Under the SB 1598 regulatory-limits process, the city must determine whether
a permit application is complete or not during the administrative completeness
time frame. If the city fails to make this determination within established
time limits, the permit is deemed complete regardless of deficiencies.
Similarly, during the substantive review period, an application must be denied
or approved within the established time frame or the permit fee will be
refunded.
   The SB 1598 regulatory-limits process offers applicants very limited
opportunities to supplement their application with additional material after
submission. Moreover, changes to a permit application are limited to responses
to a PDSD request. Development changes proposed by the applicant do not appear
to be allowed. Upon proper denial, during either review period, applicants must
reapply with new plans and pay another permit fee.
   PDSD is committed to customer service and recognizes that applicants may not
wish to be locked into formulaic standards which do not provide an adequate
opportunity to submit additional requested materials and desired plan changes.
Thus, PDSD offers applicants the opportunity to make permit applications
according to either the SB 1598 regulatory-limits process or the more flexible
process City of Tucson PDSD customers are familiar with.
   Under the flexible application process, applicants have multiple
opportunities to alter or amend their application and to confer with city staff
for advice. This allows the applicant to adjust plans based on their own
changing development circumstances over time or on suggestions by staff.
Additionally, applicants may alter their permit applications as many times as
necessary during the process.
   Applicants are encouraged to carefully consider which application process
best meets their needs. Staff can explain the processes in more detail upon
request as well as provide you a copy of SB 1598. The following points outline
some of the highlights of each process.
3-03.2.0   DESCRIPTION OF PROCESSES
2.1   Regulatory Limits Application Process
   A.   A limited number of opportunities to confer with staff and supply
necessary information and materials. PDSD may request additional information
only once after the application is deemed administratively complete.
   B.   If city fails to meet established timeframe for review, an application
may be deemed complete although lacking essential materials. If an application
is not timely approved or denied, fees are refunded to the applicant.
   C.   During review period applicant may lose opportunity to propose
alterations to support permit approval or changes in circumstance during
development.
   D.   If permit properly denied after PDSD one-time request for more
information, applicant must reapply and pay new fee.
   E.   Denials must be explained and the applicable code provisions
identified.
   F.   Applicant may request code clarification.
2.2   Flexible Application Process
   A.   Multiple application conferences available before submittal and during
process.
   B.   During review period applicant may propose changes to support permit
approval and substantial and multiple changes may be made without
reapplication.
   C.   Same review timeframes as currently applied for the different
application types. (See
Table 3-03 below.)
   D.   No refund for a review period longer than the established timeframe.
However, PDSD meets or exceeds established permit review period in 85-90% of
applications. Complex applications or substantial changes may take longer.
   E.   Denials will be explained and the applicable code provisions
identified.
   F.   Applicant may request code clarification.
TABLE 3-03   TYPICAL TIMEFRAMES FOR COMPLIANCE REVIEW/FLEXIBLE OPTION
 
PDSD DIRECTOR APPROVAL PROCEDURE
APPLICATION TYPES
1.   Business licenses;
2.   Changes of use;
3.   Downtown Area Infill Incentive District - projects within the Downtown
Core Sub-district requesting a modification of development regulations (Note:
projects within the Greater Infill Incentive Sub district are processed in
accordance with the 400' Notice Procedure below);
4.   Electrical connections (certain types);
5.   Expansion of existing premises;
6.   Home occupations;
7.   Individual Parking Plans for projects greater than 300' from R-3 or more
restrictive zoning districts;
8.   New construction;
9.   Nonconforming same Land Use Class substitution;
10.   Nonconforming parking areas;
11.   Parking Design Modification Requests (except requests to modify the
number of bicycle or motor vehicle parking spaces);
12.   Projects within certain overlay zones;
13.   Restricted adult activities;
14.   Temporary uses or structures;
15.   Tenant improvements;
16.   Wireless Communication uses (certain types);
17.   Rio Nuevo District Zone Minor Modifications of Development Regulations
(MDR);
18.   Zoning Compliance for Site Improvements in Existence on May 1, 2005;
19.   Other applications, such as blood donor centers and circus, carnival
and tent shows;
20.   Site plans (Site plans in Overlay Districts require different time
frames for review);
21.   Subdivision tentative plat; and,
22.   Subdivision final plat.
TIMEFRAME
Administrative Compliance Review 10 working days
for Application Completeness
                                 For applications that do not require a site
                                 plan or a subdivision plat: 10 working days,
                                 or 5 working days after the date of
                                 submittal of a required recommendation by a
                                 special reviewer, board or committee.
                                  
Substantive Review               Thereafter, the same review period after
                                 each re-submittal
                                  
                                 For applications that require a site plan or
                                 subdivision plat: 20 calendar days
                                  
                                 Thereafter, 20 calendar days for each re-
                                 submittal
                                 For application that do not require a site
                                 plan or subdivision plat: 14 calendar days
                                  
Substantive Review               For applications that require a site plan or
                                 subdivision plat: 20 to 60 calendar days or
                                 more, depending upon the number of re-
                                 submittals
 
 
 
PDSD DIRECTOR APPROVAL PROCEDURE:
100' NOTICE PROCEDURE
APPLICATION TYPES
1.   Design Development Options (DDO) in accordance;
2.   Parking Design Modification Requests to the required number of bicycle and
motor vehicle parking spaces;
3.   PDSD Director Special Exception applications;
4.   Approval of resident artisan uses in the Historic Preservation Zone;
5.   Certain wireless facilities; and,
6.   Requests for demolition of contributing, non-historic structures in the
HPZ.
TIMEFRAME
Administrative Compliance Review for Application Completeness 10 working days
Substantive Review                                            30 calendar days
Overall Timeframe                                             40 calendar days
 
 
PDSD DIRECTOR APPROVAL PROCEDURE
400' NOTICE PROCEDURE
APPLICATION TYPES
1.   Mitigation plans for certain restaurants serving alcohol
within 300 feet of R-3 or more restrictive zoning;
2.   Projects within the Greater Infill Incentive Subdistrict of
the Downtown Area Infill Incentive District requesting a
Modification of Development Regulations; and,
3.   Individual Parking Plans for projects within 300 feet of R-
3 or more restrictive zoning districts.
TIMEFRAME
Administrative Compliance Review for Application 10 working days
Completeness
Substantive Review                               45 calendar days
Overall Timeframe                                55 calendar days
 
 
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR APPROVAL PROCEDURE
APPLICATION TYPES
1.   Compliance with certification of existing premises;
2.   Interpretations of the UDC;
3.   Planned Area Development interpretations; and,
4.   Zone boundary conflicts.
TIMEFRAME
Administrative Compliance Review for 10 working days
Application Completeness
                                     5 working days for most applications
                                      
Substantive Review                   Additional time is required for complex
                                     issues or interpretations that require a
                                     City Attorney legal opinion, 20-30
                                     calendar days
                                     10 working days for most applications
                                      
Overall Timeframe                    For complex issues of interpretations that
                                     require a City Attorney legal opinion, 30-
                                     40 calendar days
 
PDSD DIRECTOR APPROVAL IN CERTAIN OVERLAY ZONES
PDSD DIRECTOR APPROVAL IN CERTAIN OVERLAY ZONES
APPLICATION TYPE
Historic Preservation Zone Design Review
TIMEFRAME
Administrative Compliance Review for Application Completeness 10 working days
Substantive Review:                                            
   Full Review                                             45 calendar days
   Minor Review                                            30 calendar days
Overall Timeframe:                                             
   Full Review                                             55 calendar days
   Minor Review                                            40 calendar days
                                                              
APPLICATION TYPE
Rio Nuevo District Design Review
TIMEFRAME
Administrative Compliance Review for Application Completeness 10 working days
Substantive Review:                                            
   Major                                                   70 calendar days
   Minor                                                   55 calendar days
Overall Timeframe:                                             
   Major Review                                            80 calendar days
   Minor Review                                            55 calendar days
                                                              
APPLICATION TYPE
Neighborhood Preservation Zone Design Review
TIMEFRAME
Administrative Compliance Review for Application Completeness 10 calendar days
Substantive Review                                            20 calendar days
Overall Timeframe                                             30 calendar days
 
 
PDSD DIRECTOR SPECIAL EXCEPTION PROCEDURE
APPLICATION TYPE
Special Exceptions requiring PDSD Director decision
TIMEFRAME
Administrative Compliance Review for Application Completeness 10 working days
Substantive Review                                            15 calendar days
Overall Timeframe                                             25 calendar days
 
 
ZONING EXAMINER SPECIAL EXCEPTION PROCEDURE
APPLICATION TYPES
1.   Special Exceptions requiring ZE decision
2.   Substitution of nonconforming uses (uses not in the same land use
class)
3.   Expansion of nonconforming uses
TIMEFRAME
Administrative Compliance
Review for Application    10 working days
Completeness
Substantive Review        35 calendar days for administrative review
                          45 calendar days
                           
Overall Timeframe         The ZE Public Hearing timeframe is suspended
                          from overall timeframe under A.R.S. § 9-835(C)
                          (8)(c)
 
 
MAYOR AND COUNCIL SPECIAL EXCEPTION PROCEDURE
APPLICATION TYPE
Special Exceptions requiring Mayor and Council decision
TIMEFRAME
Administrative Compliance
Review for Application    10 working days
Completeness
Substantive Review        45 calendar days for administrative review
                          55 calendar days
Overall Timeframe          
                          The M/C Public Hearing timeframe is suspended from
                          overall timeframe under A.R.S. § 9-835(C)(8)(c)
 
(Am. Ord. 11732, 2/19/2020)
SECTION 4: DEVELOPMENT REVIEW FEE SCHEDULE
Editor’s Note:
   Ord. 12108, Section 3, Exhibit B, Year Two Revised Development Fee Schedule
(codified herein) is effective July 1, 2025. For the Year One Revised
Development Fee Schedule see Ord. 12108, Section 2, Exhibit A (effective July
1, 2024).
SECTION 4-01.0.0: GENERAL
Section
4-01.1.0   GENERAL
4-01.2.0   APPLICABLE TO ALL FEES
4-01.3.0   REFUND POLICY
4-01.4.0   TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
4-01.5.0   GENERAL FEES
4-01.6.0   HOURLY RATES
4-01.7.0   PUBLIC PROCESS REVIEW FEES
4-01.8.0   APPEALS
4-01.9.0   ASSURANCES
4-01.1.0   GENERAL
4-01.2.0   APPLICABLE TO ALL FEES
   2.1   A.    Flat rate fees and staff review fees are to be collected prior
to staff review of the application, Variable and other fees are collected at
the time of approval.
   2.2   B.   All fees are payable to the "City of Tucson."
   2.3   C.   Planning and Development Services Department Zoning fees may be
waived for a governmental agency by the City Manager.
   2.4   D.   Any request to vary, waive, or appeal a Planning and Development
Services Department fee (other than Zoning fees) is decided by the Mayor and
Council.
   2.5   E.   Amendments to the Planning and Permitting Fee Schedule requires
approval by the Mayor and Council.
   2.6   F.   Any services not listed in this Fee Schedule, to be charged at
the current staff hourly rates (see Hourly Rates section).
   2.7   G.   If any application, project or activity requires significant
additional staff time outside the regular scope of work, the City may charge
for the additional work based on the standard hourly rate.
   2.8   H.   The fee schedule has been structured to include potential future
fee items that may be listed at a $0.00 amount to be amended after a cost-of-
service study.
(Am. Ord., 9/25/2020; Am. Ord. 11954, 9/27/2022; Am. Ord. 12108, 6/18/2024)
4-01.3.0   REFUND POLICY
   3.1   A.   Staff Review Fees: 80% of staff review fees will be refunded upon
request within 180 days of fee payment if an application is withdrawn prior to
staff review beginning.
   3.2   B.   Research, Analysis and/or Interpretation Fee: 80% of research fee
will be refunded upon request within 180 days of fee payment if application is
withdrawn prior to research beginning.
   3.3   C.   Permit Fees: 80% of permit fees will be refunded upon request
within 180 days of fee payment if an application is withdrawn prior to the
first inspection.
   3.4   D.   Public Process Review Fees: Only refunded for costs not incurred.
   3.5   E.   Digital Filing Fees: Not refundable.
(Ord. 11954, 9/27/2022; Am. Ord. 12108, 6/18/2024)
4-01.4.0   TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
   4.1   A.   Staff Review includes the review of plans, renderings, designs,
layouts, calculations, proposals, and / or any other application or project-
related documents submitted to the City.
   4.2   B.   Residential projects are defined as one- and two-family dwellings
and their associated structures.
   4.3   C.   Commercial projects are defined as Commercial, Industrial, and
Multi-family buildings and their associated structures.
   4.4   D.   Historic: Any building, structure, site, or object that is 50
years of age or older, located within a local or national register historic
district or individually listed as historic, will require a Historic Review.
         Any archaeological resource that is located within a local or national
register historic district or individually listed as historic, will require a
Historic Review.
   4.5   E.   In calculating fees, all values are rounded up to the nearest fee
threshold, except for fees that are based on acreage, which are rounded off to
the nearest hundredth of an acre.
   4.6   F.   Acronyms:
         BCC - Boards Committees and Commissions
         CofO - Certificate of Occupancy
         DAIP - Development Area Implementation Plan
         DDO - Design Development Option
         HL - Historic Landmark
         HPZ - Historic Preservation Zone
         IBC - International Building Code
         ICC - International Code Council
         IID - Infill Incentive District
         LofC - Letter of Completion
         MH - Mobile / Manufactured Homes
         MITZ - Major Impact Traffic Zone
         MP&E - Mechanical, Plumbing, and Electrical
         NPZ - Neighborhood Preservation Zone
         PAD - Planned Area Development
         PCD - Planned Community Development
         PDSD - Planning and Development Services Department
         RNA - Rio Nuevo Area
         ROW - Right of Way
         SCZ - Scenic Corridor Zone
         SNU - Substitution of Non-conforming Use
         SWF - Small Wireless Facility
         SWPPP - Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan
         TCO - Temporary Certificate of Occupancy
         UOD - Urban Overlay District
(Ord. 11954, 9/27/2022; Am. Ord. 12108, 6/18/2024)
4-01.5.0   GENERAL FEES
Section Planning and Permitting Fee Schedule Flat Fees Variable Fees Comments
        Planning and
Section Permitting Fee      Flat Fees Variable Fees        Comments
        Schedule
                                                           Applies to all
                                                           activities,
                                      1% of the total fee, inclusive of
5.1     Digital Filing Fee           minimum $17.66       development
                                                           applications for all
                                                           associated City
                                                           departments.
        Administrative                                     For reviews not
5.2     Review                       $88.28 per hour      otherwise specified
                                                           in this fee schedule
        Research, Analysis
        and/or                                             Includes pre-
5.3     Interpretation Fee  $235.40                       application
        - Up to 2 hours of                                 submittals
        staff time
        Research, Analysis
        and/or                        Per hour, minimum 2  Includes pre-
5.4     Interpretation Fee           hours                application
        - More than 2 hours                                submittals
        of staff time
        Plan Re-Submittal,
5.5     beyond first two             25% of original       
        submittals prior to           staff review fee
        issuance
                                                           Extensive plan
                                      Per hour, minimum    revisions include
5.6     Plan Revision Fee            1hour, maximum 50%   more than 50% of
                                      of the total staff   project scope
                                      review fee           require new permit
                                                           application
        Staff Review                  Per hour, maximum
5.7     Extension                    50% of original       
                                      staff review fee
                                                           This fee is charged
        Expedited Staff                                    in addition to the
        Review - Review               100% of original     original staff
5.8     completed in half            staff review fee     review fee.
        of maximum standard                                Expedited review may
        review time                                        be obtained upon
                                                           staff discretion
        Re-Inspection of a
5.9     single item, beyond          Per hour, minimum 1   
        the first two                 hour
        inspections
                                                           Including
        Inspections for                                    inspections related
5.10    which no fee is              Per hour, minimum 1/ to businesses
        specifically                  2 hour               regulated per
        indicated                                          Chapter 7 of the
                                                           Tucson Code
        Inspections After
        Regular Business              Overtime hourly
5.11    Hours, Weekend and           rate, minimum 2       
        Holidays -                    hours
        Requested or
        Required
        Work started
5.12    without Required             200% of permit fee    
        Permit - Penalty
        Traffic Control
5.13    setup without                100% of permit fee    
        Required Permit -
        Penalty
                                                           Building permit fees
                                                           may be reduced no
                                                           more than 50% (not
        Use of outside                                     including Special
        agencies (3rd                                      Inspections). The
5.14    Party) to provide                                City of Tucson
        inspection services                                reserves the right
                                                           to conduct audit
                                                           inspections of
                                                           outside agency
                                                           inspections.
        Optional Dispute              Subject to current   (Am. Ord. 11068, 5/
5.15    Resolution Process           City contract        14/2013)
        Fee
5.16    Printing (first     $1.18                          
        page)
5.17    Printing            $0.29                          
        (additional page)
5.18    Printing E-plans,   $5.30                          
        per sheet
 
(Ord. 11954, 9/27/2022; Am. Ord. 12108, 6/18/2024)
4-01.6.0   HOURLY RATES
 
Section Planning and Permitting Fee Schedule Flat Fees Variable Fees Comments
6.1     Standard Hourly Rate                 $88.28                  
6.2     Overtime Hourly Rate                 $176.55                 
 
(Ord. 11954, 9/27/2022; Am. Ord. 12108, 6/18/2024)
4-01.7.0   PUBLIC PROCESS REVIEW FEES
Section Planning and Permitting Fee Schedule Flat Fees Variable Fees Comments
        Planning and
Section Permitting Fee      Flat Fees Variable Fees        Comments
        Schedule
7.1     Notification -      $88.28                         
        Mailing - 100'
7.2     Notification -      $235.40                        
        Mailing - 400'
                                                           This fee may change
        Notification -                                     depending on the
7.3     Legal Advertisement $0.00                         location and length
        - Mayor and Council                                of the
                                                           advertisement.
        Notification -                                     This fee may change
        Legal Advertisement                                depending on the
7.3     - Zoning Examiner,  $294.25                       location and length
        Planning                                           of the
        Commission, Board                                  advertisement.
        of Adjustment
                                                           Site posting is
                                                           typically done by
        Notification - Site                                the applicant. If
7.4     Posting                      Based on Actual Cost the City is
                                                           requested to do the
                                                           site posting, a fee
                                                           will be charged.
                                                           These are advisory
                                                           committees
                                                           established by the
                                                           Mayor and Council or
                                                           City Manager for the
7.5     BCC Review          $0.00                         Public Process
                                                           Review. This would
                                                           be the cost of
                                                           review by the BCC
                                                           and necessary staff
                                                           support.
                                                           For Rezonings,
                                                           Special Exceptions,
                                                           and Plan Amendments,
                                                           Mayor and Council
                                                           meetings required
                                                           for project approval
                                                           are included in the
7.6     Mayor and Council   $0.00                         base fee. Additional
        Review                                             meetings or hearings
                                                           requested by the
                                                           applicant or
                                                           necessitated by
                                                           project issues or
                                                           changes will be
                                                           charged at these
                                                           rates.
                                                           For Rezonings and
                                                           Special Exceptions,
                                                           Zoning Examiner
                                                           meetings required
                                                           for project approval
                                                           are included in the
        Zoning Examiner                                    base fee. Additional
7.7     Review              $0.00                         meetings or hearings
                                                           requested by the
                                                           applicant or
                                                           necessitated by
                                                           project issues or
                                                           changes will be
                                                           charged at these
                                                           rates.
                                                           For Plan Amendments,
                                                           Planning Commission
                                                           meetings required
                                                           for project approval
                                                           are included in the
                                                           base fee. Additional
7.8     Planning Commission $0.00                         meetings or hearings
        Review                                             requested by the
                                                           applicant or
                                                           necessitated by
                                                           project issues or
                                                           changes will be
                                                           charged at these
                                                           rates.
 
(Ord. 11954, 9/27/2022; Am. Ord. 12108, 6/18/2024)
4-01.8.0   APPEALS
Section Planning and Permitting Fee Schedule Flat Fees Variable Fees Comments
Section Planning and Permitting Flat Fees Variable Fees Comments
        Fee Schedule
        Appeal of Decision to
8.1     the Board of Adjustment $353.10                 
        - Staff Review
        Appeal of Decision to
8.2     the Board of Appeals -  $282.48                 
        Staff Review
        Appeal of Decision to
8.3     the Building Official - $141.24                 
        Staff Review
        Appeal of Decision to
8.4     Mayor and Council -     $706.20                 
        Staff Review
        Appeal to the Design
8.5     Review Board - Staff    $85.60                  
        Review
        All Appeals - Public                            Please refer to Public
8.6     Review                                        Process Review Fees
                                                        section
        All Appeals - Public                            Please refer to Public
8.7     Notification                                  Process Review Fees
                                                        section
 
(Ord. 11954, 9/27/2022; Am. Ord. 12108, 6/18/2024)
4-01.9.0   ASSURANCES
 
Section Planning and Permitting Flat Fees Variable Fees Comments
        Fee Schedule
9.1     Establishment of        $0.00                   
        Assurance
9.2     Substitution of         $107.00                (Am. Ord. 11068, 5/14/
        Assurance                                       2013)
 
(Ord. 11954, 9/27/2022; Am. Ord. 12108, 6/18/2024)
SECTION 4-02.1.0: BUILDING
Section
4-02.1.0   BUILDING
4-02.2.0   BUILDING STAFF REVIEW FEE
4-02.3.0   MODEL PLANS
4-02.4.0   BUILDING PERMIT FEES FOR NEW CONSTRUCTION
4-02.7.0   PHASED CONSTRUCTION
4-02.8.0   RESIDENTIAL AND COMMERCIAL ALTERATIONS
4-02.9.0   TRADE PERMITS
4-02.10.0   CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY AND OTHER MISCELLANEOUS FEES
4-02.11.0   DEMOLITION
4-02.12.0   MH - MANUFACTURED HOMES, MODULAR BUILDINGS, RECREATIONAL VEHICLES,
AND TINY HOUSES
4-02.1.0   BUILDING
4-02.2.0   BUILDING STAFF REVIEW FEE
 
        Planning and
Section Permitting Fee       Flat Fees Variable Fees    Comments
        Schedule
        Building Staff
        Review and Deferred            50% of building
2.1     Submittal, per IBC            permit fee        
        as amended -
        Residential
        Building Staff
        Review and Deferred            65% of building
2.2     Submittal, per IBC            permit fee        
        as amended -
        Commercial
        Use of outside
        agencies (3rd Party)                            Building staff review
2.3     to provide building                           fees may be reduced
        staff review                                    no more than 60%
        services
                                                        Including but not
                                                        limited to
        Deferred Submittal             25% of building  structural,
2.4     of Staff Review               staff review fee architectural,
                                                        energy, for
                                                        mechanical, plumbing,
                                                        and electrical work.
 
(Ord. 11954, 9/27/2022; Am. Ord. 12108, 6/18/2024)
4-02.3.0   MODEL PLANS
 
        Planning and
Section Permitting Fee       Flat Fees Variable Fees       Comments
        Schedule
                                       50% of building     Model Plans are
        Building Staff                 permit fee + $24.61 limited to new
3.1     Review and Model              for each additional residential
        Plan Activation                exterior design     construction and
                                       elevation           expire after 12
                                                           months.
        Building Staff
        Review for an active
        Model Plan approved
        in a different
3.2     subdivision or by a  $321.00                       
        jurisdiction having
        an Intergovernmental
        Agreement with the
        City of Tucson
        Site Plan Staff
3.3     Review for each use  $58.85                        
        of an active Model
        Plan
                                                           Model Plans may only
                                                           be renewed if
                                                           reviewed under the
                                                           currently adopted
                                       50% of building     building code
3.4     Model Plan Renewal            permit fee          edition. Building
                                                           Valuation must be
                                                           updated to the
                                                           current Construction
                                                           Valuation Table
                                                           prior to renewal.
 
(Ord. 11954, 9/27/2022; Am. Ord. 12108, 6/18/2024)
4-02.4.0   BUILDING PERMIT FEES FOR NEW CONSTRUCTION
4.1 Construction Valuation Table Base fee Increment per additional $1,000
4.1 Construction Valuation Table Base fee  Increment per additional $1,000
4.2 $1 to $2,000                 $89.45    $0.00
4.3 $2,000.01 to $25,000         $89.45    $22.95
4.4 $25,000.01 to $50,000        $617.30   $16.83
4.5 $50,000.01 to $100,000       $1,038.05 $9.64
4.6 $100,000.01 to $500,000      $1,520.05 $8.25
4.7 $500,000.01 to $1,000,000    $4,800.05 $7.45
4.8 $1,000,000.01 and above      $8,525.05 $5.45
 
(Ord. 11954, 9/27/2022; Am. Ord. 12108, 6/18/2024)
4-02.7.0   PHASED CONSTRUCTION
Section Planning and Permitting Fee Schedule Flat Fees Variable Fees Comments
        Planning and
Section Permitting Fee       Flat Fees Variable Fees       Comments
        Schedule
        Building Permits for new buildings may be separated into a maximum of
        two phases for Residential, and four phases for Commercial. Phased
        construction must be identified prior to submission of first plan
        package. Phases may be combined at the aggregate value of all phases
7.1     combined. The percentage identified applies to Building Staff Review
        Fee and Building Permit Fees. Phased Construction for multiple
        buildings requires a separate Building Permit for each building. A
        Letter of Completion may be obtained for initial Phases and a
        Certificate of Occupancy for the final Phase.
        Phased Projects -
7.2     Residential - Phase           25% of building fee  
        1 - Foundation
        Phased Projects -
7.3     Residential - Phase           75% of building fee  
        2 - Completion
        Phased Projects -                                  Concrete, pilings,
7.4     Commercial - Phase 1          25% of building fee caissons, shoring.
        - Foundation Only                                  No above grade
                                                           construction.
                                                           Wood, concrete, or
        Phased Projects -                                  steel framing,
7.5     Commercial - Phase 2          25% of building fee elevator shafts,
        - Superstructure                                   floors, and roof
                                                           structures
                                                           Exterior walls,
                                                           windows, glazing,
                                                           exterior wall
        Phased Projects -                                  covering,
7.6     Commercial - Phase 3          25% of building fee mechanical,
        - Building Shell &                                 plumbing, electrical
        Core                                               (no interior wall
                                                           coverings other than
                                                           fire rated
                                                           assemblies)
                                                           Interior finishes,
        Phased Projects -                                  fixtures,
7.7     Commercial - Phase 4          25% of building fee appliances,
        - Interior Fit-out                                 equipment,
                                                           furniture, millwork,
                                                           etc.
                                                        
 
(Ord. 11954, 9/27/2022; Am. Ord. 12108, 6/18/2024)
4-02.8.0   RESIDENTIAL AND COMMERCIAL ALTERATIONS
Section Planning and Permitting Fee Schedule Flat Fees Variable Fees Comments
        Planning and
Section Permitting Fee        Flat Fees Variable Fees   Comments
        Schedule
        Applicants must provide a copy of the contract signed by both
        contractor and client identifying the value of all work to be performed
        as a basis for the fee, to be charged in accordance with the current
        ICC Valuation Table. If this documentation is not available,
8.1     alterations to existing buildings shall be assigned a valuation based
        on a percentage of the total building valuation in accordance with the
        current ICC Valuation Table. The percentage used shall be determined by
        the level of alteration per the International Existing Building Code as
        detailed below:
                                                        Removal and replacement
8.2     Residential - Level 1          5% of standard  of existing materials
        Alteration                      valuation       and equipment, or
                                                        fixtures
                                                        Re-configuration of
                                                        space, the addition or
                                                        elimination of any door
        Residential - Level 2           15% of standard or window, re-
8.3     Alteration                     valuation       configuration or
                                                        extension of any
                                                        system, or the
                                                        installation of any
                                                        additional equipment
        Residential - Level 3           30% of standard Alterations where the
8.4     Alteration                     valuation       work area exceeds 50%
                                                        of the building area
                                                        Removal and replacement
8.5     Commercial - Level 1           5% of standard  of existing materials
        Alteration                      valuation       and equipment, or
                                                        fixtures
                                                        Re-configuration of
                                                        space, the addition or
                                                        elimination of any door
        Commercial - Level 2            20% of standard or window, re-
8.6     Alteration                     valuation       configuration or
                                                        extension of any
                                                        system, or the
                                                        installation of any
                                                        additional equipment
        Commercial - Level 3            35% of standard Alterations where the
8.7     Alteration                     valuation       work area exceeds 50%
                                                        of the building area
 
(Ord. 11954, 9/27/2022; Am. Ord. 12108, 6/18/2024)
4-02.9.0   TRADE PERMITS
Section Planning and Permitting Fee Schedule Flat Fees Variable Fees Comments
        Planning and
Section Permitting Fee      Flat Fees Variable Fees        Comments
        Schedule
        Trade Permits
        include items on
        the following list.
        Quantity of items
        must be identified
        for each category.
        Electric Clearance
        Only (no new work)
        Gas Clearance Only
        (no new work)
        Replace Electric                                   Includes up to 1/
        Service Panel (like                                2 hour of staff
9.1     for like; up to 400                                review and permit
       amps)                                              processing and 2
A.      Upgrade/Modify                                     inspections.
B.      Electric Service                                   Additional time to
C.      Panel (up to 400                                   review or inspect
D.      amps)                                              shall be charged at
E.      New Electrical      $125.22                       the appropriate
F.      Circuit (max two 20                                hourly rate minimum
G.      amp branches)                                      1/2 hour. Items not
H.      Air Conditioner /                                  listed may be
I.      Heater Repair /                                    required to have a
J.      Replace (max 2)                                    valuation assigned.
K.      Fixed Appliance                                    A general contractor
L.      Plumbing Fixture                                   must be identified
        Repair /Replace                                    for multiple trade
        Sewer Line/Building                                disciplines.
        Drain Repair /
        Replace
        Water Heater
        Installation (like
        for like)
        Water Heater
        Installation
        (modify fuel type)
        Water Service Line
        Repair /Replace
                                                           Time to review or
                                                           inspect shall be
                                                           charged at the
                                                           appropriate hourly
                                                           rate minimum 1/
        Trade Permits - 2             $122.52 for first    2 hour. Items not
9.2     or more items                item + $21.40 for    listed may be
                                      each additional item required to have a
                                                           valuation assigned.
                                                           A general contractor
                                                           must be identified
                                                           for multiple trade
                                                           disciplines.
                                                           Includes inverter
        Solar Permits -                                    and panel racking.
        Photovoltaic                                       Additional equipment
9.3     Electrical Systems  $116.63                       is subject to
        - 1 to 30 PV panels                                Supplementary
                                                           Equipment fees per
                                                           section 4-02.8.7.
        Solar Permits -
        Photovoltaic
9.4     Electrical Systems  $190.46                        
        - 31 - 100 PV
        panels
        Solar Permits -
        Photovoltaic                  $190.46 + $1.07 for
9.5     Electrical Systems           each panel over 100   
        - 101 or more PV
        panels
        Shade structures              Same as Building
9.6     and solar tracking           Permit Fees for New   
        equipment                     Construction
                                                           Supplementary
                                                           equipment includes
        Supplementary                                      service upgrades,
9.7     Equipment for                $26.75 for each      service panel
        Photovoltaic                  additional item      relocations,
        Electrical Systems                                 electrical vehicle
                                                           chargers and similar
                                                           equipment.
                                                           Supply lines for
        Site Utility -                                     sewer / water 5'
9.8     sewer / water                3 hours              from building
        (supply)                                           footprint to
                                                           property line.
                                                           Review of private
9.9     Private Sewer                Hourly, minimum 2    sewer plans
                                      hours                previously approved
                                                           by PDEQ.
 
(Ord. 11954, 9/27/2022; Am. Ord. 12108, 6/18/2024)
4-02.10.0   CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY AND OTHER MISCELLANEOUS FEES
Section Planning and Permitting Fee Schedule Flat Fees Variable Fees Comments
        Planning
        and
Section Permitting Flat Fees Variable Fees                                              Comments
        Fee
        Schedule
                                                                                        Staff
        CofO for                                                                        review fee
        address                                                                         will be
        without                                                                         charged at
10.1    permit     $70.62                                                              the
        issued in                                                                       standard
        prior 360                                                                       hourly
        days                                                                            rate, as
                                                                                        necessary
10.2    TCO        $695.50                                                             Valid for
                                                                                        30 days
10.3    TCO        $267.50                                                             Valid for
        Renewal                                                                         30 days
        Annual
        Permit for
        Registered
        Plants
10.4    (Per       $1,201.72                                                            
        facility)
        <
        1,000,000
        sq ft
        Annual
        Permit for
        Registered
        Plants
10.5    (Per       $2,403.43                                                            
        facility)
        >
        1,000,000
        sq ft
        Day Care -
        Home
10.6    Occupation $188.32                                                              
        (except
        child
        care)
                                                                                        Equipment
                                                                                        and
                                                                                        optional
                                                                                        components
                                                                                        such as
                                                                                        barbeques,
        Private              $695.50 + plan review fee at standard hourly rate, minimum fire pits,
10.7    Swimming            1 hour                                                     pool
        Pool                                                                            heaters,
                                                                                        etc, are
                                                                                        subject to
                                                                                        additional
                                                                                        Trade
                                                                                        Permit
                                                                                        fees.
                                                                                        Equipment
                                                                                        and
                                                                                        optional
                                                                                        components
                                                                                        such as
        Public or                                                                       barbeques,
        Semi-                $1,476.60 + plan review fee at standard hourly rate,       fire pits,
10.8    public              minimum 1 hour                                             pool
        Swimming                                                                        heaters,
        Pool                                                                            etc, are
                                                                                        subject to
                                                                                        additional
                                                                                        Trade
                                                                                        Permit
                                                                                        fees.
                                                                                        Equipment
                                                                                        and
                                                                                        optional
                                                                                        components
        Swimming                                                                        such as
        Pool                                                                            barbeques,
        having               $3,723.60 + plan review fee at standard hourly rate,       fire pits,
10.9    Valuation           minimum 1 hour                                             pool
        greater                                                                         heaters,
        than                                                                            etc, are
        $100,000                                                                        subject to
                                                                                        additional
                                                                                        Trade
                                                                                        Permit
                                                                                        fees.
                                                                                        Equipment
                                                                                        and
                                                                                        optional
                                                                                        components
                                                                                        such as
                                                                                        barbeques,
                             $321 + plan review fee at standard hourly rate, minimum ½ fire pits,
10.10   Spa                 hour                                                       pool
                                                                                        heaters,
                                                                                        etc, are
                                                                                        subject to
                                                                                        additional
                                                                                        Trade
                                                                                        Permit
                                                                                        fees.
10.11   Masonry             $16.05 + $32.10 per 500 square feet of surface area + plan  
        Walls                review fee at standard hourly rate, minimum ½ hour
        Wood and             $26.75 + $5.35 per 100 linear feet + plan review fee at
10.12   Metal               standard hourly rate, minimum ½ hour                       
        Fences
 
(Ord. 11954, 9/27/2022; Am. Ord. 12108, 6/18/2024)
4-02.11.0   DEMOLITION
 
        Planning and
Section Permitting Fee       Flat Fees Variable Fees       Comments
        Schedule
                                                           This fee applies to
                                                           the structural
                                                           review and
11.1    Billboard Demolition $176.55                      inspections.
                                                           Additional sign
                                                           review fees apply;
                                                           refer to Sign Permit
                                                           Fees section.
                                                           For exterior
                                                           demolitions, any
                                                           building, structure,
                                                           site, or object that
                                                           is 50 years or
                                                           older, located
                                       $80.25 per 5,000 sq within a local or
        Interior and/or                ft of area to be    national register
11.2    Exterior Demolition           demolished, per     historic district,
                                       floor               or individually
                                                           listed as historic,
                                                           will require
                                                           additional fees for
                                                           Historic Review, as
                                                           listed in the
                                                           Historic Fees
                                                           section.
 
(Ord. 11954, 9/27/2022; Am. Ord. 12108, 6/18/2024)
4-02.12.0   MH - MANUFACTURED HOMES, MODULAR BUILDINGS, RECREATIONAL VEHICLES,
AND TINY HOUSES
 
        Planning and
Section Permitting Fee        Flat Fees Variable Fees    Comments
        Schedule
                                                         Separate permit
        Residential MH units                             required from the
12.1    on permanent          $54.14                    State of Arizona
        foundation, per                                  Department of Housing
        foundation                                       - Manufactured Housing
                                                         Division
                                                         Separate permit
        Commercial and                                   required from the
12.2    Industrial MH         $80.25                    State of Arizona
        buildings                                        Department of Housing
                                                         - Manufactured Housing
                                                         Division
        Temporary
12.3    construction trailers $107                       
        and offices, per
        building
        Additions and                   Same as Building
12.4    Renovations to MH              Staff Review and  
                                        Permit Fee
 
(Ord. 11954, 9/27/2022; Am. Ord. 12108, 6/18/2024)
SECTION 4-03.1.0: SITE REVIEW
Section
4-03.1.0   SITE REVIEW
4-03.2.0   GRADING PLAN AND ASSOCIATED REVIEWS
4-03.3.0   FLOODPLAIN FEES
4-03.4.0   GRADING PERMITS
4-03.5.0   SITE PLAN STAFF REVIEW FEES
4-03.6.0   SPECIAL DISTRICT REVIEW FEES
4-03.7.0   HISTORIC REVIEW FEES
4-03.8.0   DESIGN DEVELOPMENT OPTION (DDO)
4-03.9.0   SUBDIVISION PLAT FEES
4-03.1.0   SITE REVIEW
4-03.2.0   GRADING PLAN AND ASSOCIATED REVIEWS
 
        Planning and
Section Permitting Fee        Flat Fees Variable Fees    Comments
        Schedule
        Grading and SWPPP                                Includes first two
2.1     Review, per sheet -   $215.39                   submissions for staff
        first two submittals                             review prior to permit
                                                         issuance
        Grading and SWPPP               $88.28 per hour,
       Review, per sheet -            minimum 1 hour    
        additional submittals
        Other Reviews, per
        each:
        i. Drainage Report
        ii. Geotechnical                                 Includes first two
        Report                                           submissions for staff
2.2     iii. Environmental    $215.39                   review prior to permit
        Resources Report                                 issuance. Fees are
        iv. Hillside                                     referenced in Chapter
        Development Zone                                 26-11.2(J)
        Review
        v. Letter of Map
        Revision
2.3     Differential Grading           $88.28 per hour,  
                                        minimum 2 hours
 
(Ord. 11954, 9/27/2022; Am. Ord. 12108, 6/18/2024)
4-03.3.0   FLOODPLAIN FEES
 
Section Planning and Permitting Flat Fees Variable Fees Comments
        Fee Schedule
                                                        Also applies to
        Floodplain Use Permit -                         Floodplain Use Permits
3.1     Staff Review            $53.50                 issued by the
                                                        Department of
                                                        Transportation.
3.2     Floodplain Delineation  $53.50                  
        - Staff Review
3.3     Floodplain Use Report - $160.50                 
        Staff Review
        Floodplain Use Report
3.4     Resubmittal - Staff     $321                    
        Review
3.5     Flood Zone Status -     $16.05                  
        Staff Review
3.6     Elevation Certificate   $42.80                  
 
(Ord. 11954, 9/27/2022; Am. Ord. 12108, 6/18/2024)
4-03.4.0   GRADING PERMITS
4-03.4.1   
Grading Permit    0 - 2 acres 2.01 - 10 acres 10.01 - 50 acres 50.01 acres or
Calculation Table                                              greater
Grading Permit      0 - 2 acres 2.01 - 10 acres 10.01 - 50 acres 50.01 acres or
Calculation Table                                                greater
1 - 1,000 cubic
yards - First 100   $117.70     $111.82         $105.93          $94.16
cubic yards
1 - 1,000 cubic
yards - Each        $44.14      $41.93          $39.73           $35.31
additional 100
cubic yards
1,001 - 10,000
cubic yards - First $514.94     $489.19         $463.45          $411.95
1,001 cubic yards
1,001 - 10,000
cubic yards - Each  $44.14      $41.93          $39.73           $35.31
additional 1,000
cubic yards
10,001 - 100,000
cubic yards - First $912.18     $866.57         $820.96          $729.74
10,001 cubic yards
10,001 - 100,000
cubic yards - Each  $176.55     $167.72         $158.90          $141.24
additional 10,000
cubic yards
100,001 cubic yards
or more - First     $2,501.13   $2,376.07       $2,251.01        $2,000.90
10,001 cubic yards
100,001 cubic yards
or more - Each      $176.55     $167.72         $158.90          $141.24
additional 100,000
cubic yards
 
(Ord. 11954, 9/27/2022; Am. Ord. 12108, 6/18/2024)
4-03.5.0   SITE PLAN STAFF REVIEW FEES
Section Planning and Permitting Fee Schedule Flat Fees Variable Fees Comments
        Planning and
Section Permitting Fee       Flat Fees Variable Fees       Comments
        Schedule
                                                           Projects that
        Site Plan - Staff                                  require no more than
5.1     Review - 0 - 2.00    $1,096.75                    6 hours of plan
        acres                                              review may be
                                                           charged at hourly
                                                           rates.
        Site Plan - Staff              $1,685.25 + $117.70
5.2     Review - 2.01 -               per acre             
        10.00 acres
        Site Plan - Staff              $3,156.50 + $88.28
5.3     Review - 10.01 -              per acre             
        50.00 acres
        Site Plan - Staff              $6,099 + $58.85 per
5.4     Review - 50.01 acres          acre                 
        or greater
                                                           Applicable when
                                                           reviewing a Privacy
                                                           Mitigation or
        All Site Plan Staff                                Architectural
5.5     Reviews - Design     $80.25                       Variation Plan
        Professional Review                                required by a
                                                           Flexible Lot
                                                           Development. (Am.
                                                           Ord. 11068, 5/14/
                                                           2013)
        Site Plan - Staff
5.6     Review - PAD         $0.00                         
        Requirements
        Site Plan - Staff
5.7     Review - HPZ / HL    $0.00                         
        Requirements
        Site Plan - Staff
5.8     Review - IID / UOD   $0.00                        Includes RNA
        Requirements
        Site Plan - Staff
5.9     Review - NPZ         $0.00                         
        Requirements
 
(Ord. 11954, 9/27/2022; Am. Ord. 12108, 6/18/2024)
4-03.6.0   SPECIAL DISTRICT REVIEW FEES
Section Planning and Permitting Fee Schedule Flat Fees Variable Fees Comments
        Planning and
Section Permitting Fee    Flat Fees      Variable Fees      Comments
        Schedule
                                                            Includes
6.1     HPZ - Minor -     $117.70                          demolition
        Staff Review                                        applications for
                                                            intrusions
6.2     HPZ - Major -     $188.32                           
        Staff Review
                                                            Any required
                                                            notifications and
        All HPZ - Public                                    BCC review will be
6.3     Notification and                                  charged according
        BCC Review                                          to the Public
                                                            Process Fees
                                                            section.
        NPZ -                                               These are
        Modifications and                                   improvements such
6.4     Improvements      $26.75                           as fences that do
        400SF Gross Floor                                   not have square
        Area - Staff                                        footage.
        Review
                                                            These are
        NPZ -                                               improvements such
        Modifications and                                   as fences that do
        Improvements                                        not have square
6.5     400SF Gross Floor               $80.25 per hour    footage. All
        Area - Design                                       projects will be
        Professional                                        charged 1 hour of
        Review                                              Design
                                                            Professional
                                                            Review.
        NPZ -
        Modifications and
        Improvements
6.6     between 401 SF    $160.50                           
        and 800 SF Gross
        Floor Area -
        Staff Review
        NPZ -
        Modifications and
        Improvements                                        All projects will
        between 401 SF                                      be charged 1 hour
6.7     and 800 SF Gross                $80.25 per hour    of Design
        Floor Area -                                        Professional
        Design                                              Review.
        Professional
        Review
                                         $160.50 for the
        NPZ -                            first B00SF of
        Modifications and                Gross Floor Area
6.8     Improvements >                  plus $80.25 for     
        800 SF - Staff                   each additional
        Review                           400SF of Gross
                                         Floor Area. Not to
                                         exceed $1,043.25.
        NPZ -                                               All projects will
        Modifications and                                   be charged 1 hour
       Improvements >                  $80.25 per hour    of Design
        800 SF - Design                                     Professional
        Professional                                        Review.
                                                            Any required
                                                            notifications and
        All NPZ - Public  Per Section 4-                    BCC Review will be
6.10    Notification and  01.7 Public                      charged according
        BCC Review        Notice                            to the Public
                                                            Process Fees
                                                            section.
6.11    IID / UOD - Minor $267.50                          Includes RNA
        - Staff Review                                      reviews
        IID /UOD - Minor
6.12    - Design                        $80.25 per hour     
        Professional
        Review
6.13    IID / UOD - Major $535                              
        - Staff Review
        IID / UOD - Major
6.14    - Design                        $80.25 per hour     
        Professional
        Review
                                                            Any required
        All IID / UOD -                                     notifications and
        Public            Per Section 4-                    BCC Review will be
6.15    Notification and  01.7 Public                      charged according
        BCC Review        Notice                            to the Public
                                                            Process Fees
                                                            section.
 
(Ord. 11954, 9/27/2022; Am. Ord. 12108, 6/18/2024)
4-03.7.0   HISTORIC REVIEW FEES
 
        Planning and
Section Permitting Fee   Flat Fees          Variable Fees Comments
        Schedule
                                                          Any building,
                                                          structure, site, or
                                                          object located
                                                          within a national
                                                          register historic
                                                          district, or
        Historic - Any                                    individually listed
7.1     applications -   $117                            or eligible for
        Staff Review -                                    listing as
        Minor                                             historic, will
                                                          require a Historic
                                                          Review. Only
                                                          applies to reviews
                                                          outside of a HPZ,
                                                          otherwise, HPZ fees
                                                          apply.
                                                          Any building,
                                                          structure, site, or
                                                          object located
                                                          within a national
                                                          register historic
                                                          district, or
        Historic - Any                                    individually listed
7.2     applications -   $188.32                         or eligible for
        Staff Review -                                    listing as
        Major                                             historic, will
                                                          require a Historic
                                                          Review. Only
                                                          applies to reviews
                                                          outside of a HPZ,
                                                          otherwise, HPZ fees
                                                          apply.
                                                          Any required
        Historic - Any                                    notifications and
        applications -   Per Section 4-01.7               BCC Review will be
7.3     Public           Public Notice                   charged according
        Notification and                                  to the Public
        BCC Review                                        Process Fees
                                                          section.
 
(Ord. 11954, 9/27/2022; Am. Ord. 12108, 6/18/2024)
4-03.8.0   DESIGN DEVELOPMENT OPTION (DDO)
 
        Planning and
Section Permitting Fee      Flat Fees          Variable Fees Comments
        Schedule
        DDO - Landscaping
8.1     and Screening -     $353.10                          
        Staff Review
        DDO - Setback and
8.2     Height - Single     $264.83                          
        Family Residential
        - Staff Review
        DDO - Setback and
8.3     Height - Multi-     $264.83                          
        Family Residential
        - Staff Review
        DDO - Setback and
8.4     Height - Commercial $264.83                          
        - Staff Review
                                                             Any required
                                                             notifications and
        All DDO - Public    Per Section 4-01.7               BCC Review will be
8.5     Notification and    Public Notice                   charged according
        BCC Review                                           to the Public
                                                             Process Fees
                                                             section.
 
(Ord. 11954, 9/27/2022; Am. Ord. 12108, 6/18/2024)
4-03.9.0   SUBDIVISION PLAT FEES
 
        Planning and
Section Permitting Fee       Flat Fees Variable Fees       Comments
        Schedule
                                                           Calculation to
        Subdivision Plat 0 -                               include the entire
9.1     2.00 acres           $1,177                       site area rounded to
                                                           the nearest one-
                                                           tenth of an acre.
                                                           Calculation to
        Subdivision Plat               $1,765 + $117 per   include the entire
9.2     2.01 - 10.00 acres            acre                site area rounded to
                                                           the nearest one-
                                                           tenth of an acre.
                                                           Calculation to
        Subdivision Plat               $2,942.50 + $88.28  include the entire
9.3     10.01- 50.00 acres            per acre            site area rounded to
                                                           the nearest one-
                                                           tenth of an acre.
                                                           Calculation to
        Subdivision Plat               $5,885 + $58.85 per include the entire
9.4     50.01 acres or more           acre.               site area rounded to
                                                           the nearest one-
                                                           tenth of an acre.
                                                           Applicable when
                                                           reviewing a Privacy
                                                           Mitigation or
        All Subdivision                                    Architectural
9.5     Plats - Design                                   Variation Plan
        Professional Review                                required by a
                                                           Flexible Lot
                                                           Development. (Am.
                                                           Ord. 11068, 5/14/
                                                           2013)
 
(Ord. 11954, 9/27/2022; Am. Ord. 12108, 6/18/2024)
SECTION 4-04.1.0: SIGN FEES
Section
4-04.1.0   SIGN FEES
4-04.2.0   SIGN PLAN STAFF REVIEW FEES
4-04.3.0   SIGN PERMIT FEES
4-04.4.0   MASTER SIGN PROGRAM
4-04.1.0   SIGN FEES
4-04.2.0   SIGN PLAN STAFF REVIEW FEES
For historic landmark signs, refer to Historic Review Fees section.
Section Planning and Permitting Fee Schedule Flat Fees Variable Fees Comments
Section Planning and Permitting Fee        Flat Fees Variable Fees Comments
        Schedule
2.1     Permanent Signs - Billboard        $176.55                 
        Demolition - Staff Review
2.2     Permanent Signs - Change of Copy - $88.28                  
        Staff Review
2.3     Permanent Signs - Repair - Staff   $264.83                 
        Review
2.4     Permanent Signs - 1 to 10 Signs -  $353.10                 
        Staff Review
2.5     Permanent Signs - More than 10     $617.93                 
        Signs - Staff Review
2.6     Sign Review - HPZ / HL             $176.55                 
        Requirements
2.7     Sign Review - NPZ Requirements     $88.28                  
2.8     Sign Review - IID / UOD            $264.83                Includes RNA
        Requirements
2.9     Sign Review - PAD Requirements     $353.10                 
2.10    Sign Review - SCZ Requirements     $353.10                 
2.13    Sign Review - Electrical           $88.28                  
        Requirements
2.14    Sign Review - Outdoor Lighting     $88.28                  
        Code Requirements
2.15    Sign Review - New Freeway Sign /   $529.65                 
        Billboard Requirements
2.16    Sign Review - Pedestrian Business  $176.55                 
        District Requirements
2.17    Sign Review - Structural           $176.55                 
        Requirements
 
(Ord. 11954, 9/27/2022)
4-04.3.0   SIGN PERMIT FEES
Section Planning and Permitting Fee Schedule Flat Fees Variable Fees Comments
Section Planning and Permitting Fee       Flat Fees      Variable Fees Comments
        Schedule
3.1     Permanent Signs - New Sign -      Fee per permit               
        Permit Valuation Table
3.2     $1 to $2,000                      $88.28                       
3.3     $2,000.01 to $5,000               $132.41                      
3.4     $5,000.01 to $8,000               $176.55                      
3.5     $8,000.01 to $12,000              $264.83                      
3.6     $12,000.01 to $15,000             $353.10                      
3.7     $15,000.01 to $20,000             $397.24                      
3.8     $20,000.01 to $30,000             $441.38                      
3.9     $30,000.01 to $40,000             $485.51                      
3.10    $40,000.01 and above              $662.06                      
3.11    Permanent Signs - Sign Repair -   $176.55                      
        Permit
        Permanent Signs - Template Fee as
3.12    a result of Master Sign Program - $264.83                      
        Permit
 
(Ord. 11954, 9/27/2022; Am. Ord. 12108, 6/18/2024)
4-04.4.0   MASTER SIGN PROGRAM
 
        Planning and
Section Permitting Fee       Flat Fees Variable Fees      Comments
        Schedule
                                                          More than one
        Master Sign Program                               modification may be
4.1     - Permanent Signs -  $353.10                     requested in the same
        Staff Review                                      application for the
                                                          same fee.
                                                          More than one
        Master Sign Program                               modification may be
4.2     - Portable Signs -   $176.55                     requested in the same
        Staff Review                                      application for the
                                                          same fee.
                                                          Any required
        Master Sign Program                               notifications and BBC
4.3     - Public                                        Review will be
        Notification and BCC                              charged according to
        Review                                            the Public Process
                                                          Fees section.
        Master Sign Program            $80.25 per hour, 4
4.4     - Design                      hours minimum       
        Professional Review
 
(Ord. 11954, 9/27/2022; Am. Ord. 12108, 6/18/2024)
SECTION 4-05.1.0: REZONING, MODIFICATIONS, PLAN AMENDMENTS, AND SPECIAL
EXCEPTIONS
Section
4-05.1.0   REZONING, MODIFICATIONS, PLAN AMENDMENTS, AND SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS
4-05.2.0   STAFF REVIEW FEE CALCULATION TABLE
4-05.3.0   REZONING, MODIFICATIONS, PLAN AMENDMENTS, AND SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS
FEES
4-05.4.0   MODIFICATION AND IN-LIEU
4-05.5.0   PROTECTED DEVELOPMENT RIGHT PLANS
4-05.6.0   TEMPORARY USE
4-05.7.0   VARIANCE - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT (B/A)
4-05.8.0   ZONING DETERMINATION, CERTIFICATION OF ZONING, NONCONFORMING USE
(CONFIRMATION AND SUBSTITUTION)
4-05.1.0   REZONING, MODIFICATIONS, PLAN AMENDMENTS, AND SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS
4-05.2.0   STAFF REVIEW FEE CALCULATION TABLE
Section Planning and Permitting Fee Schedule Flat Fees Variable Fees Comments
Section Planning and Permitting  Flat Fees Variable Fees              Comments
        Fee Schedule
2.2     SR, RX-1, RX-2, IR, RH,           $941.60 + $117.70 per acre  
        SH: Up to 30 acres
2.3     SR, RX-1, RX-2, IR, RH,           $1,765.50 + $88.28 per      
        SH: More than 30 acres             acre
2.4     R-1, MH-1, P, O-1: Up to          $2,354.00 + $205.98 per     
        30 acres                           acre
2.5     R-1, MH-1, P, O-1: More           $3,236.75 + $176.55 per     
        than 30 acres                      acre
2.6     R-2, MH-2, RV, O-2, NC,           $2,942.50 + $294.25 per     
        RVC: Up to 30 acres                acre
2.7     R-2, MH-2, RV, O-2, NC,           $4,708 + $235.40 per acre   
        RVC: More than 30 acres
2.8     R-3, O-3, C-1, MU: Up to          $3,825.25 + $353.10 per     
        30 acres                           acre
2.9     R-3, O-3, C-1, MU: More           $5,590.75 + $294.25 per     
        than 30 acres                      acre
        C-2, C-3, OCR-1, OCR-2,
2.10    Pl, I-1, I-2: Up to 30            $4,708 + $706.20 per acre   
        acres
        C-2, C-3, OCR-1, OCR-2,
2.11    Pl, I-1, I-2: More than           8,239 + $588.50 per acre    
        30 acres
2.12    HL                       $353.10                              
2.13    HPZ                               $353.10 + $53.50 per acre   
2.14    NPZ                               $353.10 + $53.50 per acre   
2.15    IID / UOD                         $353.10 + $53.50 per acre   
2.16    PAD Zone                          $23,540 + $235.40 per acre  
2.17    PCD Zone                          $23,540 + $235.40 per acre  
2.18    PCD Development Area              $23,540 + $235.40 per acre  
        Implementation Plan
 
(Ord. 11954, 9/27/2022; Am. Ord. 12108, 6/18/2024)
4-05.3.0   REZONING, MODIFICATIONS, PLAN AMENDMENTS, AND SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS
FEES
Section Planning and Permitting Fee Schedule Flat Fees Variable Fees Comments
        Planning and
Section Permitting Fee      Flat Fees Variable Fees        Comments
        Schedule
                                                           Uses identified in
        PDSD Director                                      use Table 4.8; PCD
3.1     Special Exception   $294.25                       Administrative
        Procedure                                          Modification; PAD
                                                           Minor Modification
                                                           Minor change to site
                                                           plan, condition, DP
        PDSD Directors                                     or Plat; PCD
3.2     Decision with Full  $882.75                       Development Area
        Review                                             Implementation Plan;
                                                           Rezoning minor
                                                           amendment to PDP
                                                           Uses identified in
                                                           use Table 4.8;
        Zoning Examiner               75% of staff review  Expansions of
3.3     Special Exception            fee                  nonconforming uses;
        Procedure                                          Substitutions of
                                                           nonconforming uses;
                                                           PCD Minor Amendment
        Mayor & Council               100% of staff review Uses identified in
3.4     Special Exception            fee                  use Table 4.8
        Procedure
                                                           Rezoning; PAD
                                                           rezoning; PCD
                                                           rezoning; PCD major
                                                           amendment; Overlay
        Zoning Examiner               100% of staff review Zone including
3.5     Legislative                  fee                  Historic Landmark
        Procedure                                          and HPZ Boundary;
                                                           Change of zoning
                                                           request, remanded by
                                                           M&C to ZE for new
                                                           Public Hearing
        Minor Change -                                     Rezoning minor
3.6     Mayor & Council     $1,177.00                     change to
        Public Meeting                                     conditions, site
                                                           plan, DP, plat
                                                           Rezoning Major
        Major Change -                                     Amendment to
3.7     Mayor & Council              100% of staff review Conditions or PDP,
        Public Hearing                fee                  Reactivation of
                                                           Expired Rezoning
                                                           Case
3.8     Time Extension               33% of staff review   
        Public Meeting                fee
3.9     Time Extension               75% of staff review   
        Public Hearing                fee
        Land Use Plan                 40% of staff review
3.10    Adoption and                 fee                   
        Amendment Procedure
3.11    Additional Meeting  $0                             
        / Hearing
       Refunds on Change                                 
        of Zoning Fees
        Minimal amount of
3.12    staff review                 100% of the staff     
        (within 20 days of            review fee
        application)
3.13    After staff review           60% of the staff      
                                      review fee
        After staff report            40% of the staff
3.14    but prior to public          review fee            
        hearing ad
        After public
3.15    hearing ad but               25% of the staff      
        prior to public               review fee
        hearing
        After zoning                  100% of ordinance
3.16    examiner public              display ad fee        
        hearing
 
(Ord. 11954, 9/27/2022; Am. Ord. 12108, 6/18/2024)
4-05.4.0    MODIFICATION AND IN-LIEU
 
Section Planning and Permitting Fee Schedule Flat Fees Variable Fees Comments
4.1     Parking Design Modification Request  $706.20                 
4.2     Technical Standard Modification      $706.20                 
        Request
 
(Ord. 11954, 9/27/2022; Am. Ord. 12108, 6/18/2024)
4-05.5.0    PROTECTED DEVELOPMENT RIGHT PLANS
 
        Planning and
Section Permitting Fee     Flat Fees Variable Fees        Comments
        Schedule
        Protected                    $588.50 + 30% of the
5.1     Development - Non-          original development  
        Phased Development           review fee paid
        Review
                                                          In no instance shall
                                                          the application and
        Protected                                         percentage fee for a
        Development -                $588.50 + 50% of the PDR request exceed
5.2     Phased Development          original development the amount of the
        Review                       review fee paid      original development
                                                          review fee. (Am.
                                                          Ord. 11068, 5/14/
                                                          2013)
 
(Ord. 11954, 9/27/2022; Am. Ord. 12108, 6/18/2024)
4-05.6.0   TEMPORARY USE
 
Section Planning and Permitting Flat Fees Variable Fees Comments
        Fee Schedule
        Temporary Use Permit -                          (Am. Ord. 11068, 5/14/
6.1     Staff Review -          $ 94.16                2013)
        Residential
        Temporary Use Permit -                          Includes portable
6.2     Staff Review -          $188.32                donation bins (Am. Ord.
        Commercial                                      11068, 5/14/2013)
                                                        Applies to both initial
6.3     Mobile Vendor (aka      $176.55                permit application and
        Peddler) - Staff Review                         renewals. (Ord. 11068,
                                                        5/14/2013)
 
(Ord. 11954, 9/27/2022; Am. Ord. 12108, 6/18/2024)
4-05.7.0   VARIANCE - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT (B/A)
 
Section Planning and Permitting Flat Fees Variable Fees Comments
        Fee Schedule
        Variance Involving                              More than one variance
        Construction -                                  may be requested in the
7.1     Residential - Staff     $235.40                same application for
        Review                                          the same fee. (Am. Ord.
                                                        11068, 5/14/2013)
        Variance Involving                              More than one variance
        Construction -                                  may be requested in the
7.2     Commercial - Staff      $706.20                same application for
        Review                                          the same fee. (Am. Ord.
                                                        11068, 5/14/2013)
        Variance Not Involving                          More than one variance
7.3     Construction -          $353.10                may be requested in the
        Residential/Commercial                          same application for
        - Staff Review                                  the same fee.
                                                        Any required
        All Variances - Public                          notifications and BCC
7.4     Notification and BCC                          Review will be charged
        Review                                          according to the Public
                                                        Process Fees section.
 
(Ord. 11954, 9/27/2022; Am. Ord. 12108, 6/18/2024)
4-05.8.0   ZONING DETERMINATION, CERTIFICATION OF ZONING, NONCONFORMING USE
(CONFIRMATION AND SUBSTITUTION)
 
Section Planning and Permitting Flat Fees Variable Fees Comments
        Fee Schedule
                                                        Refer to Research,
        Zoning Administrator                            Analysis and
8.1     Determination -                               Interpretation Fee
        Research, Analysis and                          under General section.
        Interpretation Fee                              (Am. Ord. 11068, 5/14/
                                                        2013)
                                                        Refer to Research,
        Certification of Zoning                         Analysis and
8.2     - Research, Analysis                          Interpretation Fee
        and Interpretation Fee                          under General section.
                                                        (Am. Ord. 11068, 5/14/
                                                        2013)
                                                        Refer to Research,
        Confirmation of                                 Analysis and
8.3     Nonconforming Use -                           Interpretation Fee
        Research, Analysis and                          under General section.
        Interpretation Fee                              (Am. Ord. 11068, 5/14/
                                                        2013)
        Medical Marijuana                               Refer to Research,
        Cultivation and                                 Analysis and
8.4     Dispensary Application                        Interpretation Fee
        - Research, Analysis                            under General section.
        and Interpretation Fee
                                                        Refer to Research,
        SNU - Same Land Use                             Analysis and
8.5     Class - Research,                             Interpretation Fee
        Analysis and                                    under General section.
        Interpretation Fee                              (Am. Ord. 11068, 5/14/
                                                        2013)
                                                        Refer to Special
8.6     SNU - Different Land                          Exceptions section.
        Use Class                                       (Am. Ord. 11068, 5/14/
                                                        2013)
 
(Ord. 11954, 9/27/2022; Am. Ord. 12108, 6/18/2024)
SECTION 4-06.1.0: FIRE
Section
4-06.1.0   FIRE
4-06.2.0   FIRE CONSTRUCTION PERMIT FEES
4-06.3.0   FIRE REVIEW FEES
4-06.4.0   AUTOMATIC EXTINGUISHING SYSTEMS
4-06.5.0   FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS
4-06.6.0   ABOVE GROUND (AST) AND UNDERGROUND (UST) STORAGE TANKS
4-06.7.0   OTHER FIRE CONSTRUCTION PERMITS
4-06.8.0   FIRE OPERATIONAL PERMITS
4-06.9.0   STATE LICENSED FACILITY OPERATIONAL PERMITS
4-06.10.0   SPECIAL EVENT OPERATIONAL PERMITS
4-06.11.0   FIRE CODE APPEAL
4-06.1.0   FIRE
4-06.2.0   FIRE CONSTRUCTION PERMIT FEES
4-06.3.0   FIRE REVIEW FEES
 
        Planning and
Section Permitting Fee       Flat Fees Variable Fees    Comments
        Schedule
        New Construction -                              Includes pre-
        Building Permits -             3% of building   submittals and
3.1     New Commercial and            permit fee       development plans.
        Commercial Additions                            Includes Multi-Family
        - Staff Review                                  Residential.
        New Construction -
        Building Permits -             2.5% of building
3.2     Commercial                    permit fee        
        Alterations - Staff
        Review
        New Construction -
        Building Permits -
3.3     New Commercial and            2% of building    
        Commercial Additions           permit fee
        and Alterations -
        Inspections
3.4     New Construction -   $267.50                   Includes review and
        Water Plan Review                               "mylar" signature.
 
(Ord. 11954, 9/27/2022; Am. Ord. 12108, 6/18/2024)
4-06.4.0   AUTOMATIC EXTINGUISHING SYSTEMS
Section Planning and Permitting Fee Schedule Flat Fees Variable Fees Comments
        Planning and
Section Permitting Fee     Flat Fees         Variable Fees Comments
        Schedule
        Special Hazard                                     Clean Agent, Dry
        System - New                                       Chemical, CO2,
4.1     Installation or    3 hours                        Carbon Dioxide, and
        Modification, per                                  other Special
        5,000 sq ft                                        Extinguishing
                                                           Systems.
        Cooking
4.2     Suppression System 2 hours                         
        - New or
        Modification
4.3     Fire Sprinkler     2 hours + $.01/sf               
        System - New
        Fire Sprinkler
4.4     System -           3 hours                         
        Underground Fire
        Line (Supply)
        Fire Sprinkler     2 hours+ $2.41/
4.5     System             head (over 20                   
        Modification       heads)
        Fire Sprinklers
4.6     13D, per 5,000 sq  3 hours                         
        ft
        Fire Sprinkler
4.7     Systems Standpipe  3 hours                         
        or In Rack Storage
        System
        Commercial Fire
4.8     Pumps and Related  6 hours                         
        Equipment
 
(Ord. 11954, 9/27/2022; Am. Ord. 12108, 6/18/2024)
4-06.5.0   FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS
 
        Planning and
Section Permitting Fee       Flat Fees        Variable Fees Comments
        Schedule
5.1     Building Fire Alarm  4 hours+ $.01/sf               
        System - New
        Dedicated Function
5.2     Fire Alarm System -  4 hours+ $.01/sf               
        New
                                                            For 21 or more fire
        Fire Alarm Systems -                                alarm devices.
5.3     Modification, < 20   2 hours                       Permit fee will be
        devices                                             treated as a new
                                                            system.
        Fire Protection
5.4     System - Monitoring  2 hours                        
        - New or
        Modification
 
(Ord. 11954, 9/27/2022; Am. Ord. 12108, 6/18/2024)
4-06.6.0   ABOVE GROUND (AST) AND UNDERGROUND (UST) STORAGE TANKS
 
Section Planning and Permitting Flat Fees Variable Fees Comments
        Fee Schedule
        Above Ground Tank, No                           Additional Trade Permit
6.1     Underground Piping -    4 hours                (s) may be required;
        Install                                         refer to Trade Permits
                                                        section.
        Above Ground Tank, With                         Additional Trade Permit
6.2     Underground Piping -    4 hours                (s) may be required;
        Install                                         refer to Trade Permits
                                                        section.
                                                        Additional Trade Permit
6.3     Above Ground Tank -     2 hours                (s) may be required;
        Removal                                         refer to Trade Permits
                                                        section.
                                                        Additional Trade Permit
6.4     Underground Ground Tank 4 hours                (s) may be required;
        - Install                                       refer to Trade Permits
                                                        section.
                                                        Additional Trade Permit
6.5     Underground Ground Tank 4 hours                (s) may be required;
        - Removal                                       refer to Trade Permits
                                                        section.
                                                        Additional Trade Permit
6.6     AST/ UST Tank -         2 hours                (s) may be required;
        Modification                                    refer to Trade Permits
                                                        section.
 
(Ord. 11954, 9/27/2022; Am. Ord. 12108, 6/18/2024)
4-06.7.0   OTHER FIRE CONSTRUCTION PERMITS
 
Section Planning and Permitting Fee Schedule  Flat Fees Variable Fees Comments
7.1     Other Construction Permits Not Listed 2 hours                 
        Above
 
(Ord. 11954, 9/27/2022; Am. Ord. 12108, 6/18/2024)
4-06.8.0   FIRE OPERATIONAL PERMITS
4-06.8.1   GENERAL OPERATIONAL PERMITS
 
Section Planning and Permitting Fee Schedule Flat Fees Variable Fees Comments
8.2     Operational Permits not Listed Below 2 hours                 
 
(Ord. 11954, 9/27/2022; Am. Ord. 12108, 6/18/2024)
4-06.9.0   STATE LICENSED FACILITY OPERATIONAL PERMITS
 
Section Planning and Permitting Flat Fees                Variable Fees Comments
        Fee Schedule
        State Licensed Facility
9.1     - Annual Hospitals,     1 hour + $10.70/bed                    
        Group Home, Behavioral
        Health Facility
        State Licensed Facility
9.2     - Annual - Care         1 hour                                 
        Facility or Preschool,
        per 50 persons
        State Licensed Schools
        - Private or Charter    2 hours+ 1 hour each
9.3     (Charters under 5,000   additional 10 classrooms               
        sq ft), per 10
        classrooms
        State Licensed Facility
9.4     - Inspections - Other   1 hour                                 
        Facilities (not listed
        above)
 
(Ord. 11954, 9/27/2022; Am. Ord. 12108, 6/18/2024)
4-06.10.0   SPECIAL EVENT OPERATIONAL PERMITS
 
        Planning and
Section Permitting Fee     Flat Fees         Variable Fees Comments
        Schedule
                                                           50% of the fee will
                                                           be waived for Non-
10.1    Special Event      2 hours                        Profits. Includes
                                                           Extension of
                                                           Premises.
        Temporary Tent,                                    Additional Trade
        Membrane                                           Permit(s) may be
10.2    Structures,        2 hours                        required; refer to
        Special Event                                      Trade Permits
        Structures                                         section.
        Temporary Tent,                                    Additional Trade
        Membrane                                           Permit(s) may be
10.3    Structures,        1 hour                         required; refer to
        Special Event                                      Trade Permits
        Structures (each                                   section.
        additional)
10.4    Fireworks Display  6 hours                         
10.5    Consumer Fireworks $89.35                          
10.6    Pyrotechnics       Per hour, minimum               
                           2 hours
 
(Ord. 11954, 9/27/2022; Am. Ord. 12108, 6/18/2024)
4-06.11.0   FIRE CODE APPEAL
 
Section Planning and Permitting Fee Schedule Flat Fees Variable Fees Comments
11.1    Fire Code Official Appeal            3 hours                 
 
(Ord. 11954, 9/27/2022; Am. Ord. 12108, 6/18/2024)
SECTION 4-07.1.0: TRANSPORTATION
Section
4-07.1.0   TRANSPORTATION
4-07.2.0   PUBLIC ROW STAFF REVIEW
4-07.3.0   PUBLIC ROW PERMIT
4-07.4.0   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY FEES
4-07.1.0   TRANSPORTATION
Section Planning and Permitting Fee Schedule Flat Fees Variable Fees Comments
        Planning
        and         Flat    Variable
Section Permitting  Fees    Fees        Comments
        Fee
        Schedule
        Applicable to all fees in Section 4-07. TRANSPORTATION. A permit shall expire for work not started within
1.1     thirty (30) days or completed within sixty (60) days after issuance of a permit. and a new permit shall be
        required before beginning or completing the work.
                            Fee per
                            Private
1.2     Fog Seal           Improvement  
                            Agreements
                            (PIA)
        Repair of
        Sidewalk by
        Abutting
1.3     Owners;     $133.75            Permit is required, but the fee is waived.
        Failure to
        Repair
        Permit
        Home
        Developer,          $80.25
        Driveways           barricade
1.4     and                fee+        Includes review, barricades, and excavation
        Sidewalks -         ($48.15 x
        Annual              Number of
        Permit, per         lots)
        lot
        Utilities -                     Public utilities may apply for and receive an annual permit for short-term
1.5     Annual      $12,840            multiple location work for a one-time annual payment of $12,840 per year.
        Permit
1.6     Scooters -  $15,525            Currently pro-rated as a 6-month fee
        Annual Fee
        Short-term
        bicycle
1.7     parking in  $107                
        lieu, per
        space
        Long-term
        bicycle
1.8     parking in  $214                
        lieu, per
        space
        Private
        Improvement
1.9     Agreement   $0.00              Includes first two submissions for staff review prior to permit issuance
        Plan
        Review, per
        sheet
                            5% of the
        Private             estimated
        Improvement         improvement
1.10    Agreement -        cost as     The fee for a Private Improvement Agreement shall be paid prior to final
        Inspection          certified   approval of the agreement by the City. (Am. Ord. 11068, 5/14/2013)
        Fee                 by the
                            engineer of
                            record
                                        The city may request a permit holder to report the project's completion
1.11    Barricade   $80.25/            status every thirty (30) days. Projects with an estimated completion time
        Fee         30 days             beyond a multiple of thirty (30) days shall be rounded to the next highest
                                        multiple of thirty (30) days for permitting purposes.
        Expedited           100% of     If the request for permit is submitted less than seventy-two (72) hours in
1.12    Staff              review fee  advance of the proposed commencement of the work. (Ord. No. 10140, § 2, 4-
        Review                          12-05)
 
(Ord. 11954, 9/27/2022; Am. Ord. 12108, 6/18/2024)
4-07.2.0   PUBLIC ROW STAFF REVIEW
Section Planning and Permitting Fee Schedule Flat Fees Variable Fees Comments
        Planning and
Section Permitting Fee      Flat Fees         Variable Fees Comments
        Schedule
2.1     Staff Review - 1-   $5.35                           
        200 Lineal Feet
2.2     Staff Review - 201  $5.35                           
        - 500 Lineal Feet
2.3     Staff Review - 500- $5.35                           
        2,500 Lineal Feet
2.4     Staff Review - Over $5.35                           
        2,500 Lineal Feet
2.5     Staff Review - Bike $5.35                           
2.6     Staff Review - Bus  $5.35                           
        Staff Review -      $53.50 without
2.7     Floodplain /        report, $214 with               
        Drainage            report
        Staff Review -
2.8     Irrigation/         $5.35                           
        Vegetation
2.9     Staff Review -      $5.35                           
        Landscape
2.10    Staff Review -      $5.35                           
        Parking
2.11    Staff Review - Real $5.35                           
        Estate
2.12    Staff Review -      $5.35                           
        Streetcar
        Staff Review -
2.13    Stripe / Sign or    $5.35                           
        Traffic Engineering
2.14    Staff Review -      $5.35                           
        Traffic Calming
                                                            In cases where a
                                                            traffic control
                                                            plan is required by
        Staff Review -                                      the MUTCD, a
2.15    Traffic Control     $53.50                         traffic control
        Plan                                                plan review fee of
                                                            $53.50 shall be
                                                            collected in
                                                            addition to the
                                                            permit fee.
        Major Impact
2.16    Traffic Zone (MITZ) $5.35                           
        District/ ROW
        Management
 
(Ord. 11954, 9/27/2022; Am. Ord. 12108, 6/18/2024)
4-07.3.0   PUBLIC ROW PERMIT
 
        Planning and
Section Permitting Fee Flat Fees           Variable Fees      Comments
        Schedule
3.1                   1 - 500 Lineal Feet 500 - 2,500 Lineal Over 2,500 Lineal
                                           Feet               Feet
3.2     30 Days        $133.75             $149.80            $171.20
3.3     90 Days        $401.25             $449.40            $513.60
3.4     Annual         $1,605              $1,797.60          $2,054.40
 
(Ord. 11954, 9/27/2022; Am. Ord. 12108, 6/18/2024)
4-07.4.0   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY FEES
Section Planning and Permitting Fee Schedule Flat Fees Variable Fees Comments
        Planning and
Section Permitting Fee      Flat Fees Variable Fees        Comments
        Schedule
        Collocation -                                      Pro-rated first
4.1     Annual Fee, per SWF $53.50                        year. State Mandated
                                                           - Per SWF
        Collocation -
4.2     Application Fee - 1 $107                          State Mandated - Per
        to 5 applications,                                 SWF 1-5
        per SWF
        Collocation -                                      State Mandated - Per
4.3     Application Fee - 6 $53.50                        SWF 6-25 (ARS 9-593
        to 25 applications,                                (K))
        per SWF
        New Monopoles,
        Wireless
        Facilities, or                                     State Mandated - Per
4.4     Utility Poles not   $1,070                        site (ARS 9-594(E)
        exempt under ARS 9-                                (3))
        592(I, J) or 9-593
        (C), per site
        New, Replacement or
4.5     Modified Authority  $802.50                       State Mandated - Per
        Utility Pole, per                                  site (ARS 9-592(L))
        site
        Pole Attachment -                                  State Mandated - Per
4.6     Annual Fee, per     $53.50                        Authority Utility
        Authority Utility                                  Pole used (ARS 9-592
        Pole used                                          (C))
4.7     Pole Reservation    $535                          For 90 days
        Power Sharing
4.8     Electrical          $535                           
        Inspection
                                      Total Power
                                      Reimbursement = (
        Annual Power                  (MPR (KWH)*Wireless
4.9     Sharing Fees                 Provider Usage) /     
                                      Total Annual Usage))
                                      *Total Annual Cost*
                                      1.15
4.10    Revision of Issued  $401.25                        
        Permit
4.11    Public ROW Permit   $133.75                        
        for Small Cell
 
(Ord. 11954, 9/27/2022; Am. Ord. 12108, 6/18/2024)
SECTION 5: DEFINITIONS
Development Package documents. Development package documents as referred to in
this standard are graphic representations of proposed development submitted in
support of an application for a building permit, subdivision plat, or to
demonstrate compliance with rezoning or other conditions.
Standards. Design principles, criteria, and specifications which describe the
manner in which development and related improvements are accomplished in order
to obtain development approval.
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Ordinances
Ord. No. Adopted Section(s) Affected
Ord. No. Adopted    Section(s) Affected
                    4-01.2.0,
                    4-01.4.0,
                    4-01.6.0,
                    4-01.11.0,
                    4-01.12.0,
                    4-01.13.0,
                    4-01.14.0,
11068    5/14/2013  4-01.15.0,
                    4-01.16.0,
                    4-01.17.0,
                    4-01.18.0,
                    4-01.19.0,
                    4-01.20.0,
                    4-01.21.0,
                    4-01.22.0,
                    4-01.23.0
11150    3/18/2014  4-01.7.0
11320    11/17/2015 2-06.5.0
                    3-02.4.0,
11732    2/19/2020  Table 3-02;
                    Table 3-03;
                    4-01.13.2
—      9/25/2020  4-01.1.0
                    4-01.1.0 -
                    4-01.9.0,
                    4-02.1.0 -
                    4-02.12.0,
                    4-03.1.0 -
                    4-03.9.0,
11954    9/27/2022  4-04.1.0 -
                    4-04.4.0,
                    4-05.1.0 -
                    4-05.8.0,
                    4-06.1.0 -
                    4-06.11.0,
                    4-07.1.0 -
                    4-07.4.0
                    4-01.1.0 -
                    4-01.9.0,
                    4-02.1.0 -
                    4-02.12.0,
                    4-03.1.0 -
                    4-03.9.0,
12108    6/18/2024  4-04.1.0 -
                    4-04.4.0,
                    4-05.1.0 -
                    4-05.8.0,
                    4-06.1.0 -
                    4-06.11.0,
                    4-07.1.0 -
                    4-07.4.0
                   
 
References to Administrative Directives
 
No.    Adopted    Section(s) Affected
                  2-03.4.0,
                  2-06.3.0,
                  2-06.4.0,
—    5/14/2013  2-07.1.0,
                  2-07.5.0,
                  2-10.3.0,
                  3-02.1.0,
                  3-02.10.0
                  1-01.2.0,
                  1-01.5.0,
                  3-02.1.0,
                  3-02.2.0,
                  3-02.3.0,
                  3-02.4.0,
                  3-02.5.0,
                  3-02.6.0,
1.02-9 4/25/2014  3-02.7.0,
       (Rev.)     3-02.8.0,
                  3-02.9.0,
                  3-02.10.0,
                  3-02.11.0,
                  3-02.12.0,
                  3-02.13.0,
                  3-02.14.0,
                  3-02.15.0,
                  Table 3-02
                  2-07.5.0,
—    11/13/2019 2-07.6.0,
                  2-09.3.0
                 
 
TECHNICAL STANDARDS MANUAL
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-17.jpg]
 
Supplement to the Unified Development Code
Adopted – October 9, 2012
Effective – January 2, 2013
Last Revision — June 4, 2025
SECTION 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
1-01.1.0   Establishment
1-01.2.0   Purpose
1-01.3.0   Maintenance and Publication
1-01.4.0   Enforcement
1-01.5.0   Procedure to Establish or Amend the Technical Standards Manual
1-01.6.0   Technical Standards Modification Requests
SECTION 2: EXCAVATING & GRADING
SECTION 3: FLEXIBLE LOT DEVELOPMENT - MAXIMUM DENSITY OPTION
SECTION 4: HYDROLOGY
4-01.0.0   Commercial Water Harvesting
4-02.0.0   Floodplain, WASH and ERZ Standard
4-03.0.0   Stormwater Detention/Retention Manual*
4-04.0.0   City of Tucson Standards Manual for Drainage Design and Floodplain
Management in Tucson, Arizona*
SECTION 5: LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING STANDARDS
5-01.0.0   Landscaping and Screening
5-02.0.0   Landscape Plant Materials
5-03.0.0   Protected Native Plant List
SECTION 6: MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY AND DISPENSARY
OFF-SITE CULTIVATION USES -
REQUIRED SETBACK FROM CERTAIN PARKS
SECTION 7: PEDESTRIAN ACCESS
SECTION 8: SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLE DISPOSAL, COLLECTION, AND STORAGE
SECTION 9: SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS
9-01.0.0   Hillside Development Zone
9-02.0.0   Historic Preservation Zone
9-03.0.0   Sound Attenuation within the Airport Environs Zone
SECTION 10: TRANSPORTATION
10-01.0.0   Street Technical Standard
10-02.0.0   Pavement Cut Criteria
SECTION 11: UTILITIES
11-01.0.0   Abandonment of Easements
SECTION 12: DEFINITIONS
* Due to the size of this manual, it is unable to be accommodated within the
Technical Standards Manual. The manual is, therefore, printed and bound as an
individual booklet and is available as a separate purchase item from the City
of Tucson Engineering Division. For your information, the Table of Contents is
included.
SECTION 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 1-01.0.0: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
1-01.1.0   Establishment
1-01.2.0   Purpose
1-01.3.0   Maintenance and Publication
1-01.4.0   Enforcement
1-01.5.0   Procedure to Amend the Technical Standards Manual
1-01.6.0   Technical Standard Modification Requests
1-01.1.0   ESTABLISHMENT
   The City of Tucson Technical Standards Manual (“Technical Manual”) is
established as Administrative Directive 1.02-9, under the City of Tucson
Administrative Directives. The Technical Standards Manual is a supplemental
document to the City of Tucson Unified Development Code.
1-01.2.0   PURPOSE
   The purpose of the Technical Standards Manual is to establish standards for
the following:
1.1   Excavating and grading ;
1.2   Flexible Lot Development - Maximum Density Option;
1.3   Hydrology;
1.4   Landscaping;
1.5   Medical Marijuana - Parks Requiring Setbacks;
1.6   Pedestrian Access;
1.7   Solid Waste and Recycle Disposal, Collection, and Storage;
1.8   Special Development Districts (e.g. Hillside Development Zone, Historic
Preservation Zone, Rio Nuevo District, etc.);
1.9   Transportation; and,
1.10   Utilities.
1-01.3.0   MAINTENANCE AND PUBLICATION
   The Planning and Planning and Development Services Department (PDSD) is
responsible for maintaining and publishing the Administrative Manual. The
Administrative Manual is available as a public record in the City Clerk’s
Office, the PDSD, and the agency responsible for their initiation and/or
review. The Administrative Manual is also available on the PDSD website.
1-01.4.0   ENFORCEMENT
   The department and/or agency responsible for the adopted Administrative
Manual section are responsible for its implementation.
1-01.5.0   PROCEDURE TO AMEND THE TECHNICAL STANDARDS MANUAL
5.1   Purpose
   The purpose of this section is to establish the procedure for amending the
Technical Standards Manual.
5.2   Initiation
   Only the Mayor and Council, City Manager, or the Director of any city
department or non-city agency involved in development review may initiate
amendments to the Technical Standards Manual.
5.3   Review
   The review procedure is as follows:
   A.   Proposed amendments are submitted to the Planning and Development
Services Department (PDSD) Director for review and are coordinated by the PDSD;
and,
   B.   The PDSD Director will transmit for review the proposed amendment to
the City Development Review Committee (CDRC ), and/or any other city department
or non-city agency involved in the review of development applications.
Additionally, the PDSD Director will notify interested and affected parties of
the proposed amendment and make the proposed amendment available for their
review and comment.
5.4   CDRC Recommendation
   The CDRC shall make a recommendation to the PDSD Director on the proposed
amendment. The CDRC may use the comments received from the interested and
affected properties when developing their recommendation.
5.5   Director Recommendation
   The director of the initiating department shall make a recommendation on the
proposed amendment. In making a recommendation, the director may revise the
proposal based on comments from interested and affected parties, the CDRC , and
other review agencies. The director may also forward the revised proposal to
the CDRC for further review and recommendation.
5.6   City Manager Decision
   A.   The City Manager may approve, deny, remand the proposed amendment to
the director of the initiating department for further review, or forward the
proposed amendment to the Mayor and Council for consideration and action.
   B.   Except when the proposed amendment is forwarded to the Mayor and
Council for consideration and action, the City Manager’s decision is final and
the amendment becomes effective upon the signature of the City Manager. When
the proposed amendment is approved through adoption of an ordinance by the
Mayor and Council, the effective date of the ordinance applies.
5.7   Notice of Decision
   The PDSD Director shall notify the CDRC , affected governmental and non-
governmental agencies, and interested and affected properties of the decision
on the proposed amendment.
(Am. Admin. Directive 1.02-9, rev. 4/25/2014)
1-01.6.0   TECHNICAL STANDARD MODIFICATION REQUESTS
6.1   General
   A.   The director of the department responsible for the review or
enforcement of the applicable technical standard may allow modifications and
exceptions to the application submittal requirements and technical standards in
accordance with the procedure and findings provided below.
   B.   The process of modifying the Technical Standards is known as the
Technical Standards Modification Request (TSMR).
   C.   Requests to modify the technical standards are submitted to the
Planning and Development Services Department (PDSD) Director for review and are
coordinated by the PDSD.
   D.   Each Technical Standard indicates the intent of each requirement and
standards relating to health, life, and safety. The provisions of the Technical
Standards are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of
construction not specifically prescribed by the Technical Standards. The
director of the responsible department may approve alternate materials and/or
methods of construction provided that the proposed alternate meets the intent
of the prescribed Technical Standard and addresses any health, life, and safety
considerations.
   E.   Requirements of the Unified Development Code restated in the Technical
Standard Manual may not be modified by this process.
6.2   Application and Fees Required
   A.   Applicants must submit a Technical Standards Modification Request
application, which are available at the PDSD office, along with eight copies of
the plan which clearly indicates the area(s) of the project affected by the
request to the PDSD Department. Additionally, the applicant is responsible for
supplying whatever information is necessary to demonstrate that there are
practical difficulties resulting from the strict application of the Technical
Standard.
   B.   Except for modification requests to the application submittal
requirements, fees are required in accordance with Section
4-01.0.0 of the Administrative Manual. Fees are not required for modification
requests to the application submittal requirements.
6.3   Review
   A.   Modification Requests to the Application Submittal Requirements
   Modification to the application submittal requirements contained in the
Technical Standards Manual are processed in accordance with the Section
2-01.0.0, Permitted Modifications to the Application Submittal Requirements, of
the Administrative Manual.
   B.   Modification Requests to the Technical Standards
   The department responsible for the review or enforcement of the applicable
technical standard shall review the request. The director of the responsible
department may ask the City Development Review Committee for input on the TSMR.
6.4   Decision
   A.   The director of the department responsible for the review or
enforcement shall decide whether to approve, approve with conditions, or deny a
TSMR. Approvals must be based upon a finding provided below. Approval of the
request does not represent the department's endorsement or approval of the
overall project. The director may place conditions upon approval of a TSMR
necessary to effectuate the purpose of the Technical Standard. The decision
must be forwarded to the PDSD Director.
   B.   A decision on a TSMR must be made within five working days from the
application date.
   C.   The PDSD Director shall notify in writing of the decision on the TSMR
to the applicant, all CDRC members, and any party requesting a copy.
   D.   The PDSD shall maintain a permanent record of TSMRs.
6.5   Notice of Decision
   Notice of the director's or the Mayor and Council's decision, whichever is
applicable, is sent to the affected governmental and non-governmental agencies
and individuals who have requested to be notified of amendments to the
Administrative Manual.
6.6   Findings
   A director may approve a TSMR based upon the request meeting all of the
following findings:
   A.   The intent of the purpose statements of the applicable plan policies,
zone , overlay, subdivision , site plan , and other development  standards are
met;
   B.   When applicable, the TSMR complies with any additional modification
provisions required by the affected technical standard;
   C.   There are practical difficulties which prevent the strict application
of the Technical Standards;
   D.   The modification is in conformity with the intent and purpose of the
Technical Standard and such modification addresses health, life, and safety
considerations; and,
   E.   The strict application of the Technical Standard fails to accomplish
the intent of the Technical Standard due to such reasons as existing
conditions, the character of the area, or existing site or location
constraints.
6.7   Effect of TSMR Approval or Denial
   Each modification request and the decision on the request are site and
development specific. The approval or denial of a TSMR in one case shall not be
a precedent for the granting/denying of a modification request in another case.
6.8   Appeal of Decision
   Appeals to TSMR decisions are heard by the Zoning Examiner. The appeal shall
be processed as follows:
   A.   Submittal
   The appeal is submitted in writing to the PDSD within 14 days of the
issuance of the decision being appealed. An appeal may be submitted by the
applicant and/or representative or by any member of the CDRC affected by the
TSMR. The filing of an appeal stays processing of the subdivision plat,
development plan, or building permit, whichever is applicable.
   B.   Notice
   Mailed notice is sent to the party submitting the appeal and to the
department responsible for the review or enforcement of the technical standard
affected by the TSMR. The mailed notice shall provide: the name of the
applicant and/or representative and the mailing address; the assigned title and
file number of the TSMR; the modification request, including the reasons for
the request; the date, time, and location the appeal will be considered by the
Zoning Examiner; and the address and telephone number of PDSD.
   C.   Zoning Examiner Hearing
   The appeal is considered by the Zoning Examiner in an administrative hearing
within 30 days of the filing of the appeal but no earlier than 15 days after
the mailed notice is sent. During the review of the appeal, the Examiner
considers testimony presented by those entities/persons noticed of the appeal
or determined to be affected by the TSMR. The Zoning Examiner may continue the
hearing for a period of not longer than 30 days.
   D.   Decision
   The Zoning Examiner shall decide whether to approve, approve with
conditions, or deny a TSMR. Approvals must be based upon the same findings
provided above. The Zoning Examiner may place conditions upon approval of a
TSMR necessary to effectuate the purpose of the Technical Standard. The Zoning
Examiner's decision is final.
   E.   Notice of Decision
   Notice of the Zoning Examiner's decision is sent to the appellant, affected
governmental and non-governmental agencies, and the PDSD Director.
   F.   Issuance of Permits/Approvals
   Permits or development approvals dependent on the modification shall not be
issued until the 14-day appeal period has expired.
(Am. Admin. Directive 1.02-9, rev. 4/25/2014)
SECTION 2: EXCAVATING AND GRADING
SECTION 2-01.0.0: EXCAVATING AND GRADING
Section
2-01.1.0   General
2-01.2.0   Permits Required
2-01.3.0   Hazards
2-01.4.0   Grading Permit Requirements
2-01.5.0   Grading Fees
2-01.6.0   Bonds
2-01.7.0   Cuts
2-01.8.0   Fills
2-01.9.0   Setbacks
2-01.10.0   Drainage and Terracing
2-01.11.0   Erosion Control
2-01.12.0   Grading Inspection
2-01.13.0   Completion of Work
2-01.1.0   GENERAL
1.1   Purpose
   The purpose of this standard is to safeguard life, limb, property and the
public welfare by regulating grading on private property.
1.2   Scope
   This appendix sets forth rules and regulations to control excavation ,
grading and earthwork construction, including fills and embankments;
establishes the administrative procedure for issuance of permits; and provides
for approval of plans and inspection of grading construction.
2-01.2.0   PERMITS REQUIRED
2.1   Permits
   A.   Except as specified in Section
2-01.2.2, Exceptions, no person shall do any grading  without first having
obtained a grading  permit from the Planning and Development Services
Department (PDSD).
   B.   No person shall do any grubbing on any site or portion thereof without
first having obtained a grading permit from PDSD. No grubbing shall occur on
any land except where grading has been approved.
   C.   Grading permits may be issued for single or multiple building sites ,
not to exceed 35 acres per permit.
   D.   The grubbing /grading and construction of a site shall be continuous
until the grubbing/grading and construction on that building site are
completed.   
2.2   Exceptions
   A grading permit is not required for the following:
   A.   When approved by PDSD, grading in an isolated, self-contained area if
there is no danger to private or public property;
   B.   An excavation below finished grade for basements and footings of a
building, retaining wall or other structure authorized by a valid building
permit. This shall not exempt any fill made with the material from such
excavation or exempt any excavation having an unsupported height greater than
five feet (1,524 mm) after the completion of such structure;
   C.   Cemetery graves;
   D.   Refuse disposal sites controlled by other regulations;
   E.   Excavations for wells or tunnels or utilities;
   F.   Mining quarrying, excavation , processing stockpiling of rock, sand,
gravel, aggregate or clay where established and provided for by law, provided
such operations do not affect the lateral support or increase the stresses in
or pressure upon any adjacent or contiguous property, “except as such
activities are regulated by code or other regulations of this jurisdiction”;
   G.   Exploratory excavations under the direction of soil engineers or
engineering geologists;
   H.   An excavation which (1) is less than two feet (610 mm) in depth, or (2)
which does not create a cut slope greater than five feet (1,524 mm) in height
and steeper than one unit vertical in one and one-half units horizontal (66.7%
slope ); and,
   I.   A fill less than one foot (305 mm) in depth and placed on natural
terrain with a slope flatter than one unit vertical in five units horizontal
(20% slope ), or less than three feet (914 mm) in depth, not intended to
support structures, which does not exceed 50 cubic yards (38.3 m3) on any one
lot and does not obstruct a drainage course.
   NOTE: Exemption from the permit requirements of this chapter shall not be
deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in
violation of the provisions of this chapter or any other laws or ordinances of
this jurisdiction.
2.3   Reseeding
   A.   For any site one acre or greater or portion thereof which has been
wholly or partially grubbed or wholly or partially graded, construction shall
commence and shall be continuous within 60 days after grubbing . Should
construction or grading not commence or be continuous within the required 60-
day period, the site shall be native seeded or dust abatement applied within 30
days following the expiration of the required 60-day period. When approved by
the Director of Planning and Development Services Department (PDSD), a time
extension may be granted for conditions beyond the control of the permitted for
items such as flooding or the discovery of historic artifacts.
   B.   Any site which has been graded or grubbed without a permit shall in
addition to other penalties provided by law be revegetated to its preexisting
condition.
   C.   The provisions of paragraphs A and B do not apply to infrastructure
where the proposed infrastructure does not exceed 20 acres in land coverage.
2-01.3.0   HAZARDS
   Whenever the Director of PDSD determines that any existing excavation or
embankment or fill on private property has become a hazard to life and limb, or
endangers property, or adversely affects the safety, use or stability of a
public way or drainage canal, the owner of the property upon which the
excavation or fill is located, or other person or agent in control of said
property, upon receipt of notice in writing from the building official, shall
within the period specified therein repair or eliminated such excavation or
embankment so as to eliminate the hazard and be in conformance with the
requirements of this code.
2-01.4.0   GRADING PERMIT REQUIREMENTS
4.1   Permits Required
   Except as provided in Section
2-01.2.0, Exceptions, no person shall do any grading  without first obtaining a
grading  permit from PDSD. A separate permit shall be obtained for each site ,
and may cover both excavations  and fills .
   A.   Application
   The provisions of the Uniform Administrative Code Section 302.1 (UAC) are
applicable to grading and in addition the application shall state the estimated
quantities of work involved.
   B.   Grading  Designation
   Grading in excess of 5,000 cubic yards (3,825 m3) shall be performed in
accordance with the approved grading plan prepared by a civil engineer, and
shall be designated as “engineered grading ”. Grading involving less than 5,000
cubic yards (3,825 m3) shall be designated “regulated grading ” unless the
permittee chooses to have the grading performed as engineered grading , or the
Director determines that special conditions or unusual hazards exist, in which
case grading shall conform to the engineered grading .
   C.   Engineered Grading  Requirements
   Application for grading permit shall be accompanied by two sets of plans and
specifications, and supporting data consisting of a soils engineering report
and engineering geology report. The plans and specifications shall be prepared
and signed by an individual licensed by the state to prepare such plan or
specifications when required by PDSD. Specifications shall contain information
covering construction and material requirements. Plans shall be drawn to scale
upon substantial paper or cloth and shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate
the nature and extent of the work proposed and show in detail that they will
conform to the provisions of this code and all relevant laws, ordinances, rules
and regulations. The first sheet of each set of plans shall give location of
the work, the name and address of the owner and the person by whom they were
prepared.
   The plans shall include the following information:
      1.   General vicinity of the proposed site .
      2.   Property limits and accurate contours of existing ground and details
of terrain and area drainage.
      3.   Limiting dimensions, elevations or finish contours to be achieved by
the grading , and proposed drainage channels and related construction.
      4.   Detailed plans of all surface and subsurface drainage devices,
walls, cribbing, dams and other protective devices to be constructed with, or
as a part of, the proposed work together with a map showing the drainage area
and the estimated runoff of the area served by any drains.
      5.   Location of any building or structures on the property where the
work is to be performed and the location of any building or structures on land
of adjacent owners which are within 15 feet (4,572 mm) of the property or which
may be affected by the proposed grading operations.
      6.   Recommendations included in the soils engineering report and the
engineering geology report shall be incorporated in the grading plans or
specifications. When approved by PDSD, specific recommendations contained in
the soils engineering report and the engineering geology report, which are
applicable to grading , may be included by reference.
      7.   The dates of the soils engineering and engineering geology reports
together with the names, addresses and phone numbers of the firms or
individuals who prepared the reports.
   D.   Soils Engineering Report
   The soils engineering report required by the International Building Code
Section 1802.6 (IBC) shall include data regarding the nature, distribution and
strength of existing soils, conclusions and recommendations for grading
procedures and design criteria for corrective measures, including buttress
fills , when necessary, and opinion on adequacy for the intended use of sites
to be developed by the proposed grading as affected by soils engineering
factors, including the stability of slopes .
   E.   Engineering Geology Report
   The engineering geology report required by the IBC Section 1802.6 shall
include adequate description of the geology of the site , conclusions and
recommendations regarding the effect of geologic conditions on the proposed
development, and opinion on the adequacy for the intended use of sites to be
developed by the proposed grading , as affected by geologic factors.
   F.   Regular Grading  Requirements
   Each application for a grading permit shall be accompanied by a plan in
sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and extent of the work.
   The plans shall give the location of the work, the name of the owner and the
name of the person who prepared the plan. The plan shall include the following
information:
         a.   General vicinity of the proposed site ;
         b.   Limiting dimensions and depth of cut and fill ; and,
         c.   Location of any buildings or structures where work is to be
performed, and the location of any buildings or structures within 15 feet
(4,572 mm) of the proposed grading .
   G.   Issuance
   The provisions of UAC 303 are applicable to grading permits. PDSD may
require that grading operations and project designs to be modified if delays
occur which incur weather-generated problems not considered at the time the
permit was issued. PDSD may require testing by the soils engineer . When PDSD
has cause to believe that geologic factors may be involved, the grading will be
required to conform to engineered grading .
2-01.5.0   GRADING FEES
5.1   General
   Fees shall be assessed in accordance with the provisions of this section or
shall be as set forth in the fee schedule adopted by the jurisdiction. “For
excavation and fill on the same building site , the fee shall be based on the
volume of excavation or fill , whichever is greater.”
5.2   Plan Review Fees
   When a plan or other data are required to be submitted, a plan review fee
shall be paid at the time of submitting plans and specifications for review.
Said plan review fee shall be as set forth in Section
4-01.0.0, Development Review Fee Schedule, of the Administrative Manual.
Separate plan review fees shall apply to retaining walls or major drainage
structures as required structures as requires elsewhere in this code. For
excavation  or fill , whichever is greater.
5.3   Grading Permit Fees
   A fee for each grading permit shall be paid to PDSD as set forth in Section
4-04.1.5, Grading Plan Review and Permit Fees, of the Administrative Manual.
Separate permits and fees shall apply to retaining walls or major drainage
structures as required elsewhere in the Technical Standards. There shall be no
separate charge for standard terrace drains and similar facilities.
2-01.6.0   BONDS
   The Director of PDSD may require bonds in such form and amounts as may be
deemed necessary to assure that the work, if not completed in accordance with
the approved plans and specifications, will be corrected to eliminate hazardous
conditions. In lieu of a surety bond the applicant may file a cash bond or
instrument of credit with PDSD in an amount equal to that which would be
required in the surety bond.
2-01.7.0   CUTS
7.1   General
   Unless otherwise recommended in the approved soils engineering or geology
report, cuts shall conform to the provisions of this section. In the absence of
an approved soils engineering report, these provisions may be waived for minor
cuts not intended to support structures.
7.2   Slope
   The slope of cut surfaces shall be no steeper than is safe for the intended
use and shall be no steeper than one unit vertical in two units horizontal (50%
slope ) unless the permittee furnishes a soils engineering or an engineering
geology report, or both, stating that the site has been investigated and giving
an opinion that a cut at a steeper slope will be stable and not create a hazard
to public or private property.
2-01.8.0   FILLS
8.1   General Requirements Criteria for Fill
   This criteria applies to all non-residential developments, and all
residential developments with lots that are less than 24,000 square feet, that
are adjacent to an existing residential development or residentially zoned
property (excepting multifamily developments greater than single story), or
unsubdivided non-commercial property. This criteria does not apply to phase
boundaries within a master planned development or to individual lots within the
interior of a residential development, or to small swales and drainage rills.
   A.   Placement of fill in excess of two feet [or a finished floor elevation
(FFE) in excess of two feet plus the slab thickness] above existing grade at
any location in the outer 100 feet of the developing site (less any intervening
non-developable property outside of the site ) shall require:
      1.   Written justification based on engineering/technical reasons;
      2.   Written permission of the Director of the PDSD;
      3.   Notification of the property owner(s) adjacent to the fill  site
(with copies to the Council Office and the Director of PDSD) prior to the
approval of a grading plan. Said notification shall include reference to this
ordinance, the justification presented as the basis for the excess fill , the
approval letter from PDSD, and the name, address, and phone number of the
owner/developer and the engineer of record. This notification shall occur early
in the development process; and,
      4.   Preparation of a mitigation plan (i.e. additional setbacks,
terracing, enhanced buffering/landscaping, etc.) acceptable to a simple
majority of the notified property owners. The acceptability of the mitigation
plan by the notified property owner(s) must be documented and made a part of
the approved grading plan and permit. If the owner/developer and the notified
property owner(s) cannot reach consensus on a mitigation plan within 15 working
days of receipt of the property owners, the Director of PDSD shall review the
issues and information and then render a final decision. Monitoring of grading
activities shall be the responsibility of the engineer of record and
certification of FFE’s shall be done by a registered land surveyor hired by the
permittee. Regulation, inspection, control of work, and enforcement of the
above criteria shall be the responsibility of the Director of PDSD as stated in
DS 2-01.13.
8.2   Preparation of Ground
   Fill  slopes shall not be constructed on natural slopes steeper than one
unit vertical in two units horizontal (50% slope ). The ground surface shall be
prepared to receive fill by removing vegetation, non-complying fill , topsoil
and other unsuitable materials scarifying to provide a bond with the new fill
and, where slopes are steeper than one unit vertical in five units horizontal
(20% slope ) and the height is greater than five feet (1,524 mm), by benching
into sound bedrock or other competent material as determined by the soils
engineer . The bench under the toe of a fill on a slope steeper than one unit
vertical in five units horizontal (20% slope ) shall be at least ten feet
(3,048 mm) wide. The area beyond the toe of fill shall be sloped for sheet
overflow or a paved drain shall be provided. When fill is to be placed over a
cut, the bench under the toe of fill shall be at least ten feet (3,048 mm) wide
but the cut shall be made before placing the fill and acceptance by the soils
engineer or engineering geologist or both as a suitable foundation for fill .
8.3   Fill Material
   Detrimental amounts of organic material shall not be permitted in fills .
Except as permitted by PDSD, no rock or similar irreducible material with a
maximum dimension greater than 12 inches (305 mm) shall be buried or placed in
fills .
   Exception: PDSD may permit placement of larger rock when the soils engineer
properly devises a method of placement, and continuously inspects its placement
and approves the fill stability. The following conditions shall also apply:
   A.   Prior to issuance of the grading permit, potential rock disposal areas
shall be delineated on the grading plan.
   B.   Rock sizes greater than 12 inches (305 mm) in maximum dimension shall
be ten feet (3,048 mm) or more below grade , measured vertically.
   C.   Rocks shall be placed as to assure filling of all voids with well-
graded soil.
8.4   Compaction
   All fills shall be compacted to a minimum of 90% of maximum density.
8.5   Slope
   The slopes of fill surfaces shall be no steeper than is safe for the
intended use. Fill  slopes shall be no steeper than one unit vertical in two
units horizontal (50% slope ).
2-01.9.0   SETBACKS
9.1   General
   Cut and fill  slopes shall be set back from site boundaries in accordance
with this section. Setback dimensions shall be horizontal distances measured
perpendicular to the site boundary.
9.2   Top of Cut Slope
   The top of cut slopes shall not be made nearer to a site boundary line than
one fifth of the vertical height of cut with a minimum of two feet (610 mm) and
a maximum of ten feet (3,048 mm). The setback may need to be increased for any
required interceptor drains.
9.3   Toe of Fill  Slope
   The toe of fill  slope shall be made not nearer to the site boundary line
than one half of the height of the slope with a minimum of two feet (610 mm)
and a maximum of 20 feet (6,096 mm). Where a fill  slope is to be located near
the site boundary and the adjacent off-site property is developed, special
precautions shall be incorporated in the work as PDSD deems necessary to
protect the adjoining property from damage as a result of such grading . These
precautions may include but are not limited to:
   A.   Additional setbacks;
   B.   Provisions for retaining or slough walls;
   C.   Mechanical or chemical treatment of the fill  slope surface to minimize
erosion ; and,
   D.   Provisions for the control of surface waters.
9.4   Modification of Slope Location
   The PDSD may approve alternate setbacks. The PDSD may require an
investigation and recommendation by a qualified engineer or engineering
geologist to demonstrate that the intent of this section has been satisfied.
2-01.10.0   DRAINAGE AND TERRACING
10.1   General
   Unless otherwise indicated on the approved grading plan, drainage facilities
and terracing shall conform to the provisions of this section for cut or fill
 slopes steeper than one unit vertical in three units horizontal (33.3% slope
). “All drainage structures are to be constructed as designed and shall conform
to plans approved by the jurisdiction, and in no case shall the drainage be
altered as to how the water enters the property from the adjacent parcel or
exits the construction site without written approval from the design engineer
and government agencies.”
10.2   Terrace
   Terraces at least six feet (1,829 mm) in width shall be established at not
more than 30-foot (9,144 mm) vertical intervals on all cut or fill  slopes to
control surface drainage and debris except that where only one terrace is
required, it shall be at midheight. For cut or fill  slopes greater than 60
feet (18,288 mm) and up to 120 feet (3,6576 mm) in vertical height, one terrace
at approximately mid-height shall be 12 feet (3,658 mm) in width. Terrace
widths and spacing for cut and fill  slopes greater than 120 feet (3,6576 mm)
in height shall be designed by the civil engineer and approved by PDSD.
Suitable access shall be provided to permit proper cleaning and maintenance.
Swales or ditches on terraces shall have a minimum gradient of 5% and must be
paved with reinforced concrete not less than three inches (76 mm) in thickness
or an approved equal paving. They shall have a minimum depth at the deepest
point of one foot (305 mm) and a minimum paved width of five feet (1,524 mm). A
single run of swale or ditch shall not collect runoff from a tributary area
exceeding 13,500 square feet (1,254.2 m2) (projected) without discharging into
a down drain.
10.3   Subsurface Drainage
   Cut and fill  slopes shall be provided with subsurface drainage as necessary
for stability.
10.4   Disposal
   All drainage facilities shall be designed to carry waters to the nearest
practicable drainage way approved by the PDSD or other appropriate jurisdiction
as a safe place to deposit such waters. Erosion of ground in the area of
discharge shall be prevented by installation of non-erosive downdrains or other
devices. Building pads shall have a drainage gradient of 2% toward approved
drainage facilities, unless waived by the Director of PDSD.
   EXCEPTION: The gradient from the building pad may be 1% if all of the
following conditions exist throughout the permit area.
      1.   No proposed fills are greater than ten feet (3,048 mm) in maximum
depth.
      2.   No proposed finish cut or fill  slope faces have a vertical height
in excess of ten feet (3,048 mm).
      3.   No existing slope faces, which have a slope face steeper than one
unit vertical in ten units horizontal (10% slope ), have a vertical height in
excess of ten feet (3,048 mm).
10.5   Interceptor Drains
   Paved interceptor drains shall be installed along the top of all cut slopes
where the tributary drainage area above slopes toward the cut and has a
drainage path greater than 40 feet (12,192 mm) measured horizontally.
Interceptor drains shall be paved with a minimum of three inches (76 mm) of
concrete or gunite and reinforced. They shall have a minimum depth of 12 inches
(305 mm) and a minimum paved width of 30 inches (762 mm) measured horizontally
across the drain. The slope of drain shall be approved by the Director of PDSD.
2-01.11.0   EROSION CONTROL
11.1   Slopes
   The faces of cut and fill  slopes shall be prepared and maintained to
control against erosion . This control may consist of effective planting. The
protection for the slopes shall be installed as soon as practicable and prior
to calling for final approval . Where cut slopes are not subject to erosion due
to the erosion -resistant character of the materials, such protection may be
omitted.
11.2   Other Devices
   Where necessary, check dams, cribbing, riprap or other devices or methods
shall be employed to control erosion and provide safety.
2-01.12.0   GRADING INSPECTION
12.1   General
   Grading operations for which a permit is required shall be subject to
inspection by PDSD. Professional inspection of grading operations shall be
provided by the civil engineer, soils engineer and the engineering geologist
retained to provide such services for engineered grading and as required by the
Director PDSD for regular grading .
12.2   Civil Engineer
   The civil engineer shall provide professional inspection within such
engineer’s area of technical specialty, which shall consist of observation and
review as to the establishment of line, grade and surface drainage of the
development area. If revised plans are required during the course of the work,
they shall be prepared by the civil engineer.
12.3   Soils Engineer
   The soils engineer shall provide professional inspection within such
engineer’s area of technical specialty, which shall include observation during
grading and testing for required compaction . The soils engineer shall provide
sufficient observation during the preparation of the natural ground and
placement and compaction of the fill to verify that such work is being
performed in accordance with the conditions of the approved plan and the
appropriate requirements of this chapter. Revised recommendations relating to
conditions differing from the approved soils engineering and engineering
geology reports shall be submitted to the permittee, the Director of PDSD and
the civil engineer.
12.4   Engineering Geologist
   The engineering geologist shall provide professional inspection within such
engineer’s area of technical specialty, which shall include professional
inspection of the bedrock excavation to determine if conditions encountered are
in conformance with the approved report. Revised recommendations relating to
conditions differing from the approved engineering geology report shall be
submitted to the soils engineer .
12.5   Permittee
   The permittee shall be responsible for the work to be performed in
accordance with the approved plans and specifications and in conformance with
the provisions of this code, and the permittee shall engage consultants, if
required, to provide professional inspections on a timely basis. The permittee
shall act as a coordinator between the consultants, the contractor and
theDirector. In the event of changed conditions, the permittee shall be
responsible for informing the Director of PDSD of such change and shall provide
revised plans for approval .
12.6   Planning and Development Services Department
   The PDSD shall inspect the project at the various stages of work requiring
approval to determine that adequate control is being exercised by the
professional consultants.
12.7   Notification of Non-Compliance
   If, in the course of fulfilling their respective duties under this chapter,
the civil engineer, the soils engineer , or the engineering geologist finds
that the work is not being done in conformance with this chapter or the
approved grading plans, the discrepancies shall be reported immediately in
writing to the permittee and to theDirector of PDSD.
12.8   Transfer of Responsibility
   If the civil engineer, the soils engineer , or the engineering geologist of
record is changed during grading , the work shall be stopped until the
replacement has agreed in writing to accept their responsibility within the
area of technical competence for approval upon completion of the work. It shall
be the duty of the permittee to notify the Director of PDSD in writing of such
change prior to the recommencement of such grading .
2-01.13.0   COMPLETION OF WORK
13.1   Final Reports
   Upon completion of the rough grading work and at the final completion of the
work, the following reports and drawings and supplements thereto are required
for engineered grading or when professional inspection is performed for regular
grading , as applicable:
   A.   An as-built grading plan prepared by a civil engineer showing original
ground surface elevations, as-graded ground surface elevations, lot drainage
patterns, and the locations and elevations of surface drainage of facilities
and of the outlets of subsurface drains is required. As-constructed locations,
elevations and details of subsurface drains shall be shown as reported by the
soils engineer . Civil engineers shall state that to the best of their
knowledge the work within their area of responsibility was done in accordance
with the final approved grading plan.
   B.   A report prepared by a soils engineer including locations and
elevations of field density tests, summaries of field and laboratory tests,
other substantiating data, and comments on any changes made during grading and
their effect on the recommendations made in the approved soils engineering
investigations report is required. Soils engineers shall submit a statement
that, to the best of their knowledge, the work within their area of
responsibilities is in accordance with the approved soils engineering report
and applicable provisions of this chapter.
   C.   A report prepared by a engineering geologist including a final
description of the geology of the site and any new information disclosed during
the grading and the effect of same on recommendations incorporated in the
approved grading plan is required. Engineering geologists shall submit a
statement that, to the best of their knowledge, the work within their area of
responsibility is in accordance with the approved engineering geologist report
and applicable provisions of this chapter.
   D.   The Engineer of Record shall submit in a form prescribed by the
Director of PDSD a statement of conformance to said as-built plan and the
specifications.
13.2   Notifications of Completion
   The permittee shall notify the PDSD when the grading operation is ready for
final inspection. Final approval shall not be given until all work, including
installation of all drainage facilities and their protective devices, and all
erosion -control measures have been completed in accordance with the final
approved grading plan, and the required reports have been submitted.
SECTION 3: FLEXIBLE LOT DEVELOPMENT (FLD) -
MAXIMUM DENSITY OPTION STANDARDS
SECTION 3-01.0.0: FLEXIBLE LOT DEVELOPMENT (FLD) -
MAXIMUM DENSITY OPTION STANDARDS
Section
3-01.1.0   General
3-01.2.0   Historic Preservation Requirements
3-01.3.0   Green Building Requirements
3-01.1.0   GENERAL
   The following technical standards apply to applicants proposing Flexible Lot
Development projects utilizing a Historic Preservation or Green Building
Maximum Density Option.
3-01.2.0   HISTORIC PRESERVATION REQUIREMENTS
   UDC Section
8.7.3.C.3.b(3) allows an FLD to be developed with a density increase if the
project includes preservation of a historical site , structure, or landmark or
if the project leads to preservation or scientific study and documentation of a
historical site , structure, or landmark. To qualify for the Maximum Density
Option, an archaeological study is required to determine the potential for
designation as a prehistoric or historic site or structure.
   In the study, the following steps must be completed for each individual site
within the project, unless determined unnecessary as outlined within this
criterion. The information contained in these steps will include: the extent of
such sites or structures; the extent of data collection on each site ; and the
potential for preservation of each site , including methods or plans for such
preservation. This criterion is considered satisfied upon approval by the city
of a report, completed by a qualified archaeologist, which provides evaluation
of all steps.
   The steps in an archaeological study are as follows:
   Step 1.    A preliminary study to determine the presence of prehistoric or
historic sites . This is accomplished by a thorough walk-through survey of the
project site prior to any disturbance. The result of this step is an evaluation
of the potential for prehistoric or historic sites within the project site ,
according to Step 2.
   Step 2.    A testing of possible sites identified during the preliminary and
grading studies. This is usually accomplished by a more detailed survey, with
collection of surface artifacts; digging of test pits in possible sites ; or
trenching to determine the depth of a site , the approximate number of features
in the site , and more specific identification of the extent of the site . The
result of this step is a more detailed evaluation of site potential in terms of
area extent, possible age, complexity (such as multiple occupations), and
number of features (such as the number of pit houses, extramural features,
storage houses, or ball courts in Hohokam villages).
   Step 3.    Excavation of site features to retrieve maximum data about the
site . Excavation is done within the context of a scientific research design or
plan and prior to destruction of the site for development. The research design
or plan specifies questions to be answered by the excavating, lists methods of
getting answers (including the percent of the site to be excavated), and gives
special techniques to be used (such as radio carbon dating, pollen analysis,
dendrochronology, etc.). The result of this step is a report on the excavation
, an analysis of the material collected, and a synthesis of results into
scientific literature or prehistoric reconstruction.
   If a site or structure is identified by the archaeological study as being of
significant magnitude and meeting the eligibility criteria for the National
Register of Historic Places, it is to be preserved. Preservation may be pursued
in a number of ways, such as, but not limited to: incorporation into the
project design as common area; dedication as a conservation easement to the
appropriate governmental or nonprofit agency; offer of sale, at appraised
value, to the appropriate governmental agency; or dedication at nominal cost to
the appropriate governmental agency. Such dedicated property may be used to
calculate densities.
3-01.3.0   GREEN BUILDING REQUIREMENTS
   UDC Section
8.7.3.C.3.b(8) allows an FLD to use the Maximum Density Option if the project
is designed and located to comply with the requirements listed below. The
requirements are grouped into three categories: infrastructure , siting, and
design. These three categories list a total of 31 criteria. Projects meeting a
minimum of 20 criteria of the 31 comply with the requirements of this
provision.
   The Green Building Maximum Density Option requirements may not be modified
through the Technical Standard Modification Request process. A request to
deviate or waive a Green Building Maximum Density Option requirement must be
submitted to the Board of Adjustment for approval .
3.1   Infrastructure
   A.   The project boundary is within one-fourth mile of an existing bus line.
   B.   The project is located in a low water-lift zone (below an elevation of
2,700 feet).
   C.   The project qualifies as urban infill, e.g., there is an existing R-
1 subdivision or more intense development within one-fourth mile of the project
boundaries on all sides.
   D.   The project is located within 1,000 feet of existing water, electric,
and natural gas distribution lines of sufficient capacity to serve the project.
   E.   The project is a mixed commercial and residential use, either designed
as a consolidated project or by its relation to adjacent commercial projects.
   F.   The project is located within one mile of the University of Arizona or
the Downtown District.
   G.   The project is located within 2,000 feet of:
      1.   An existing neighborhood shopping center;
      2.   Property for which a final or conditional ordinance has been adopted
rezoning the property for such use; or,
      3.   Property for which a building permit has been issued, and is still
current, for the construction of such use.
   H.   The project is located within 4,000 feet of:
      1.   An existing regional shopping center;
      2.   Property for which a final or conditional ordinance has been adopted
rezoning the property for such use; or,
      3.   Property for which a building permit has been issued, and is still
current, for the construction of such use.
   I.   The project is located within 3,500 feet of an existing or reserved
neighborhood park, regional park, or other public recreational or community
facility.
   J.   The project is located within 1,000 feet of a school which meets all
the requirements of the compulsory education laws of the State of Arizona.
   K.   The project boundary is 30% or more contiguous to an existing R-
1 subdivision or more intense development.
   L.   The project is located within 3,000 feet of a major employment center.
   M.   The project is located within one-half mile of a public bikeway, bike
lane , or bike path and incorporates pathways which connects to these.
3.2   Siting
   A.   Buildings are designed with windows oriented to provide at least five
hours of solar access on December 21 between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 4:00
p.m.
   B.   Buildings are designed to provide complete shade to all windows on June
21. On new construction, shading devices which require manual operation to
accomplish the shading do not qualify as building design that provides shade.
   C.   Building design and deciduous landscaping at maturity are integrated
into the project to provide shade to 80% of the east and west facing walls on
June 21. On new construction, landscaping alone does not satisfy this
criterion.
   D.   Paved areas, such as sidewalks and parking areas, are shaded with
deciduous shade trees or architectural shading elements, such as trellises,
roofs, etc. Principal sidewalks are those which provide access from parking to
each unit and from each unit to all common areas. Shade trees in a parking area
are to be within a protected landscaped area with a minimum width of five feet
and at a ratio of two trees for every 3,000 square feet of parking area.
   E.   Eighty percent of all buildings are located and constructed to provide
at least five hours of solar access to three-fourths the height of the south
wall on December 21. This requirement must take into account walls and
vegetation which could block solar access.
   F.   Eighty percent of the buildings within the project are positioned with
the longer axis, if any, oriented within 22 degrees of a true east/west
direction.
3.3   Design
   A.   At least 80% of the dwelling units are constructed with common walls.
   B.   All buildings are earth sheltered, partially protected by earth berms,
or built into an existing hillside or slope .
   C.   All buildings are constructed with insulation at foundations and floor
slabs at grade .
   D.   All building envelopes have an overall average thermal resistance value
(R value) of 24 or greater.
   E.   Buildings have windows that can be opened and which are oriented
between 20 and 70 degrees of prevailing diurnal wind patterns to provide
natural through ventilation. The windows are to be double glazed and spaced at
least three feet apart.
   F.   Individual units feature a minimum area of glass, to be less than 10%
of the exterior wall area.
   G.   At least 80% of the residential buildings do not have windows on the
east facade.
   H.   At least 80% of the residential buildings do not have windows on the
west facade.
   I.   The residential buildings include overhangs on the south facade to
provide shading during the summer months.
   J.   At least 80% of the units in the project have screened porches.
   K.   At least 80% of the dwelling units are designed to provide a private
unroofed outdoor space for sleeping, such as a rooftop deck or sun porch.
   L.   At least 80% of all buildings are constructed with light-colored roofs
and walls.
SECTION 4: HYDROLOGY
SECTION 4-01.0.0: COMMERCIAL RAINWATER HARVESTING
Section
4-01.1.0   General
4-01.2.0   Design Considerations and Technical Requirements
4-01.3.0   Rainwater Harvesting Plan
4-01.4.0   Landscape and Irrigation Requirements
4-01.5.0   Maintenance
4-01.6.0   Compliance
4-01.7.0   Enforcement
Exhibits
4-01.1.0   GENERAL
1.1   Introduction
   Harvesting rainwater is a useful strategy for providing supplemental
irrigation water to commercial landscapes, making more efficient use of the
desert’s most limited resource – water. The City of Tucson Mayor and Council
adopted the Commercial Rainwater Harvesting Ordinance on October 14, 2008 to
increase the use of harvested rainwater at commercial sites in Tucson and to
decrease use of potable and reclaimed water supplies. The ordinance takes
effect June 1, 2010.
1.2   Purpose
   This Technical Standard has been prepared to facilitate effective use of
available rainwater resources for landscape irrigation in commercial
development as a means of reducing dependency on potable and reclaimed water
sources. It clarifies requirements for compliance with Ordinance No. 10597, the
Commercial Rainwater Harvesting Ordinance (ordinance), including the key
requirement of meeting 50% of landscape water demand using harvested water.
This standard provides:
   A.   Design considerations and technical requirements for passive and active
water harvesting systems;
   B.   Requirements and guidelines for the preparation and implementation of
Rainwater Harvesting Plans;
   C.   Requirements for landscape and irrigation at water harvesting  sites ;
   D.   Recommended maintenance steps;
   E.   Elements required for compliance with the ordinance;
   F.   Enforcement provisions;
   G.   Water budget assumptions and calculations (Exhibit A); and,
   H.   Annual reporting form (Exhibit B).
1.3   Applicability
   This standard applies to all commercial development plans submitted after
June 1, 2010.
4-01.2.0   DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS AND TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS
   Two primary strategies for harvesting water are commonly used in the
southwest US to support landscape water needs. Passive water harvesting is
accomplished by infiltrating stormwater runoff directly into Water Harvesting
Infiltration Areas . Active water harvesting stores harvested water in
containment systems located above or below ground so the stored water is
available for later beneficial use. The commercial facility may determine the
strategy or strategies most appropriate for their site . Design considerations
and technical requirements for passive and active water harvesting systems are
described in the sections below.
2.1   Passive Water Harvesting
   Passive water harvesting consists of the collection of stormwater directly
in Water Harvesting Infiltration Areas without the temporary storage of water
in containment systems . Passive water harvesting functions through gravity-
flow of stormwater . It requires no tanks, piping, metering, pumps or other
infrastructure associated with containment systems . However, in passive water
harvesting , infrastructure components may be needed to route overflow water,
pass water under roads or parking lots, or for other purposes conducive to the
effective functioning of the passive systems.
   A.   Passive Water Harvesting  Design Considerations
   An array of techniques and designs are available to accomplish passive water
harvesting . Whatever techniques or designs are used, the items listed below
should be considered to create safe, efficient and effective passive water
harvesting systems.
      1.   Use Water Harvesting Infiltration Areas , where feasible, to offset
the size of a retention/detention basin that may be needed at a site . Consult
Appendix C of the City of Tucson Water Harvesting Guidance Manual for
information on the allowed offset.
      2.   The area and depth of Water Harvesting Infiltration Areas should be
determined according to the anticipated volume of harvested water that will
enter these areas and the infiltration characteristics of the underlying soil.
      3.   Plants with similar water demands should be placed in the same areas
within Water Harvesting Infiltration Areas .
      4.   Soils within Water Harvesting Infiltration Areas should be modified
as needed to counteract the effects of mechanical compaction and/or poor soil
infiltration conditions in order to ensure appropriate water infiltration.
      5.   The edge of Water Harvesting Infiltration Areas should be set back
from building foundations or other structures to allow for positive drainage of
water. Consult a soils professional where necessary.
      6.   Planting areas that harvest water should be recessed below the grade
of adjacent hardscapes. Hardscape surfaces should be sloped toward adjacent
recessed planting areas.
      7.   Pedestrian circulation should be designed to discourage cutting
across recessed planting areas to avoid soil compaction , erosion , and damage
to plants and to minimize the risk of injury to pedestrians.
      8.   Maximum reveal at the edge of public sidewalks and pedestrian
circulation paths should be two inches or less to minimize the risk of injury
to pedestrians. A minimum 12-inch wide shoulder with a maximum 2% cross-slope
away from a public sidewalk or pedestrian circulation path should be provided
where possible.
      9.   Water Harvesting Infiltration Areas should be stabilized for dust
control purposes. Techniques could include spreading one-half inch or larger
rock, hydroseeding with native seed mixes, or using other stabilizing
techniques and materials. Fine-grained particles that could block water
infiltration by clogging soil pores should be washed from materials prior to
placement. Avoid the use of fine-grade decomposed granite within or directly
adjacent to Water Harvesting Infiltration Areas due to the potential for shed
silts and clays to reduce water infiltration.
      10.   Organic mulch is appropriate for reducing evaporation, controlling
dust and increasing soil quality in Water Harvesting Infiltration Areas in
those locations where the vegetation, water collection, erosion conditions, and
slope characteristics are amenable to its use.
   B.   Passive Water Harvesting  Technical Requirements
   The following technical requirements apply to all passive water harvesting
systems.
      1.   Water Harvesting Infiltration Areas shall be designed so that water
infiltrates into soil within 24 hours.
      2.   Water Harvesting Infiltration Areas shall be designed to minimize
ponding in areas that may create a nuisance for pedestrians. Ponding is not
allowed on or over public sidewalks or required pedestrian circulation paths.
      3.   Materials for erosion control shall be specified where they are
necessary due to erosion potential. The ground surface treatment of spillways
and other areas that convey water flows shall be able to withstand scouring.
2.2   Active Water Harvesting
   Active water harvesting stores harvested water in containment systems
located above or below ground so the stored water is available for later
beneficial use. Active water harvesting systems include the tanks, piping,
metering, pumps and other infrastructure elements needed to store and transmit
water to a beneficial use. Active water harvesting systems might be gravity-
flow based or use pumps depending on the size and needs of the site .
   A.   Active Water Harvesting  Design Considerations
   An array of techniques and designs are available to accomplish active water
harvesting . Whatever techniques or designs are used, the items listed below
should be considered to create safe, efficient and effective active water
harvesting systems.
      1.   Tanks may be constructed of metal, plastic, masonry, reinforced
concrete, fiberglass, or other suitable PDSD-approved material designed to
store water.
      2.   The dimensions of tanks may be determined by the applicant based on
site -specific design needs.
      3.   Above-ground tank construction material or coating should be opaque
to prevent sunlight from inducing algae growth. Any portion of a subsurface
tank that is exposed to sunlight should be opaque to prevent sunlight from
inducing algae growth.
      4.   A “first flush device” is intended to prevent the dust, grit, leaves
and other materials that may accumulate on a roof from being washed into a
water harvesting tank. This is accomplished by deflecting the first flush of
stormwater from entering the tank inlet line. The installation of first flush
devices is strongly recommended.
      5.   Inlet piping may convey water overhead from a roof to a tank, or in
a U-shaped configuration that conveys water to a lower entry point on the tank.
The U-shaped configuration should be designed to hold standing water, and must
be pressure rated and sealed to prevent leaks.
      6.   Designs that involve water falling freely through the air before
entering a tank may be allowed provided the design minimizes the entry of light
and mosquitoes into the tank.
   B.   Active Water Harvesting  Technical Requirements
   The following technical requirements apply to all active water harvesting
systems:
      1.   Materials must be installed per manufacturer’s specifications.
      2.   Tanks shall have a base or foundation that meets manufacturer’s
specifications. If no specifications are provided by the manufacturer, the base
shall be designed by an engineer.
      3.   Locations of containment systems shall be in accordance with
applicable codes.
      4.   Consult the International Building Code for applicable regulations.
      5.   Sub-surface storage tanks shall be constructed of materials designed
for holding water underground. Below-ground tanks must be designed and
installed under the guidance of a civil or structural engineer and/or tanks
must be installed per manufacturer’s specifications regarding bedding , setting
the tank, strapping or other anchoring device, load bearing characteristics and
backfill requirements.
      6.   If debris screening is used for inlets to tanks, screening must be
configured in such a way that an unmaintained screen cannot block inlet pipes
to a tank. Obstructed screens can prevent water harvesting and back water up on
the roof creating unsafe weight load conditions on the roof.
      7.   There must be a structured overflow device installed with the tank
to automatically allow excess infill water to exit the tank safely.
      8.   An overflow mechanism, separate from that provided inside the tank,
shall be provided to ensure that water cannot back up on a roof. Roof overflow
drains shall not be connected to tanks.
      9.   Outlets for overflow pipes shall be positioned so as not to
compromise the foundations of buildings or other structures.
      10.   Tanks and covers shall be constructed of materials appropriate for
use for storing water.
      11.   Tanks must have an inspection port of sufficient size to conduct
any necessary visual inspection, maintenance, cleaning, repair, and other tasks
as described in the manufacturer’s specifications.
      12.   If a manhole is provided with the intent of allowing human access
into a tank, it must meet any applicable size and safety requirements.
      13.   A means should be provided to enable particulate materials that
accumulate in the bottom of tanks to be cleaned out or flushed out if needed.
      14.   Containment systems shall be designed, maintained and operated to
prevent mosquito harboring and/or breeding.
      15.   A reduced-pressure backflow-preventer assembly is required when
connecting irrigation from an active water harvesting system to a potable water
irrigation system in order to protect the public water system and/or building
water system.
      16.   Hose bibs connected to an active water harvesting system shall be
keyed and shall be posted “NON-POTABLE, DO NOT DRINK.”
4-01.3.0   RAINWATER HARVESTING PLAN
   A Rainwater Harvesting Plan shall be submitted with all applications for
commercial developments at which landscaping is required. The Rainwater
Harvesting Plan shall consist of two elements: a Site Water Budget and a Water
Harvesting Implementation Plan. Preparation of the Rainwater Harvesting Plan
elements requires coordination between project managers, site engineers and
landscape architects from the inception of the project. The two elements of the
Rainwater Harvesting Plan shall illustrate how water harvesting will meet 50%
of annual landscape water demand, as required by the ordinance.
3.1   Site Water Budget
   The Site Water Budget shall detail the landscape water demand and the
harvested water supply needed to meet 50% of landscape demand. The Site Water
Budget and the Water Harvesting Implementation Plan shall be consistent with
one another.
   A water budget format is shown in Exhibit A, along with the background data
and assumptions used to develop it. This water budget format is available to
applicants as an Excel spreadsheet at <http://www.tucsonaz.gov/PDSD/What_s_New/
what_s_new.html>. Applicants may use this water budget format to enter site -
specific data to develop their Site Water Budget. Alternatively, applicants may
develop their own Site Water Budget format. Whichever format is used, the
submitted Site Water Budget shall incorporate and provide the information
below.
   A.   Water Demand
   Applicants shall use plant water demand categories and data provided in
Exhibit A unless alternative assumptions are provided and satisfactorily
justified.
   B.   Water Supply
   Applicants shall use the effective monthly rainfall assumptions shown in
Exhibit A unless alternative assumptions are provided and satisfactorily
justified.
   C.   Output
   Output of the Site Water Budget shall include calculations showing how 50%
of landscape water demand as an average across the site will be met using
harvested rainwater , and shall include assumptions and supporting calculations
as necessary to document these outputs. Output of the Site Water Budget shall
include total water demand and rainwater supply calculations for each Water
Harvesting Infiltration Area at the site .
3.2   Water Harvesting Implementation Plan
   The Water Harvesting Implementation Plan (Implementation Plan) shall consist
of a separate sheet with a plan view layout of the site . The format and design
of the Implementation Plan shall be consistent with the base plan, be it a
Development Package (DS 2-01), Plat (DS 2-03), Site Plan (DS 2-04), Development
Plan (DS 2-05), or their successor documents, as applicable. The Implementation
Plan shall include all details necessary and appropriate to convey the
technical concept of the water harvesting system design and to facilitate
proper installation and maintenance of the water harvesting system in
compliance with the ordinance and this standard.
   Submittal of the Implementation Plan shall be made concurrently with the
Development Plan and Landscape Plan. Revision of the Implementation Plan may be
required in conjunction with preparation of the Grading Plan in order to
coordinate the construction details and specifications.
   A.   General Information
   The following general information will be provided on the Implementation
Plan.
      1.   The case number located in the lower right corner of the plan;
      2.   The means by which monthly rainfall data will be obtained and
recorded;
      3.   The means by which monthly irrigation data will be obtained and
recorded;
      4.   Soil pretreatment techniques, locations and schematics;
      5.   Maintenance notes; and,
      6.   Monitoring and Annual Reporting Requirements.
   B.   Tabulated Data
   The Implementation Plan shall include a table detailing information for each
identified Water Harvesting Infiltration Area (WHIA) at the site , and for the
site as a whole, as described below.
      1.   General WHIA information:
         a)   WHIA identifier;
         b)   Spatial size (square feet) of WHIA;
         c)   Average depth (feet) of WHIA;
         d)   Capacity (gallons) of WHIA; and,
         e)   Type and general location where any sensors that control the
irrigation system will be placed.
      2.   Plant canopy information:
         a)   Plant canopy area (square feet) that is served by each WHIA,
consisting of the sum of understory, midstory and overstory plant canopies at
60% of the mature plant sizes;
         b)   Plant water demand category; and,
         c)   Total annual plant water demand (gallons).
      3.   Information about passive and/or active water harvesting systems
serving each WHIA:
         a)   For the Subwatershed passively serving each WHIA:
            i.   Subwatershed identifier;
            ii.   Spatial size (square feet) of the subwatershed;
            iii.   Material the subwatershed is made of or covered with; and,
            iv.   Percent of annual plant water demand provided by this
subwatershed to the WHIA.
         b)   For the containment system actively serving each WHIA:
            i.   Tank identifier;
            ii.   Tank capacity (gallons);
            iii.   Tank location; and,
            iv.   Percent of annual plant water demand provided by this tank to
the WHIA.
         c)   Any additional information needed to document how 50% of
irrigation demand will be met using harvested water.
         d)   Data tabulated for the entire site :
            i.   Percent of annual landscape water demand met using harvested
water; and,
            ii.   Water harvesting capacity that will offset standard
retention/detention basin size, if applicable.
         e)   Additional plan information may be requested or required by the
Planning and Development Services Department (PDSD) Director to evaluate
rainwater -harvesting Implementation Plan
   C.   Mapped Data
   The Implementation Plan shall graphically show the following information
drawn from tabulated data.
      1.   For the WHIA:
         a)   Indicate the boundary of each WHIA and show its identifier;
         b)   Use arrows to show water flow directions within WHIA, including
flow direction at inlets and outlets; and,
         c)   Show location where any sensors that control the irrigation
system will be placed.
      2.   Indicate the boundary of the plant canopy area to be served by each
WHIA;
      3.   Information about Passive and/or Active Water Harvesting Systems
serving each WHIA:
         a)   Passively supplied water:
            i.   Indicate the Subwatershed Area serving each WHIA and show its
identifier;
            ii.   Use arrows to indicate the flow path water will take from
source to WHIA;
            iii.   Indicate spot elevations for the bottoms of water harvesting
structures, at spillways, and to define other grades as needed; and,
            iv.   Indicate the location of all surface or subsurface
infiltration structures, pipelines, spillways, French drains, scuppers, curb
cuts and other infrastructure elements needed to convey, store or overflow
passively supplied water, or to control erosion .
         b)   Actively supplied water:
            i.   Show tank and show its identifier;
            ii.   Label tank as delivering water by gravity flow or pump;
            iii.   Use arrows to indicate flow path water will take from source
to WHIA; and,
            iv.   Show additional piping, pump and other infrastructure needed
to store, overflow, and convey water to WHIA.
   D.   Additional Information
   Additional notes shall be provided on the Implementation Plan to ensure
current and subsequent site owners and operators are informed of the inspection
and maintenance required in Section
4-01.6.0, Compliance.
4-01.4.0   LANDSCAPE AND IRRIGATION REQUIREMENTS
4.1   Landscape Requirements
   A.   Soil pretreatment
   Due to construction site  compaction , the soils in planting areas might
need to be pretreated to ensure adequate infiltration of harvested water. Soil
Pretreatment techniques, locations and schematics should be provided on the
Implementation Plan.
   B.   Plant selection and placement
   Plants selected for use within discreet Water Harvesting Infiltration Areas
should have compatible water needs. Drought tolerant plants native to Tucson
are adapted to the seasonal rainfall patterns present in the Sonoran Desert and
present an advantage over low-water-use plants from other climates. Plants
should be positioned to account for the level of expected inundation. They may
be placed on the bottoms or sides of recessed areas or the tops of adjacent
soil where their roots can grow toward adjacent moist soil. Other placement
considerations should include sun exposure, maintenance requirements, shape,
form, and aesthetics.
   C.   Mulch placement
   Mulch shall be positioned away from the base of plant trunks to avoid
excessive moisture there.
4.2   Irrigation Requirements
   A.   Irrigation Control
   Irrigation systems shall be fitted with irrigation controllers and shall be
capable of monitoring and responding to plant water needs through the use of
soil moisture gauges, tensiometers, weather stations, and/or evapotranspiration
data. The irrigation technology chosen should be capable of preventing the
irrigation system from running if sufficient soil moisture is present to
support the vegetation. All systems shall include rain shut-off devices.
Instruments shall be correctly placed to ensure plants are kept healthy using a
combination of harvested and non-harvested water and to ensure the stated
water-saving goal of the ordinance is met.
   B.   Irrigation Timers
   Irrigation timers, where used, shall be used in conjunction with other
irrigation controls to ensure compliance with the provisions of this technical
standard.
   C.   Water-Use Calculations
   Irrigation Plans must include calculations for estimated water use based on
assumptions about plant water demand and canopy size used in the Site Water
Budget.
   D.   Drip System Efficiency
   Drip irrigation systems shall meet and maintain a minimum 80% emission
uniformity.
4-01.5.0   MAINTENANCE
5.1   Maintenance Requirements
   All Passive and Active Water Harvesting System components, Water Harvesting
Infiltration Areas , and other site improvements necessary for the water
harvesting system to function properly, should be regularly inspected and
maintained. The following maintenance requirements should be addressed on the
Implementation Plan.
   A.   All systems.
   Periodically inspect and clean gutters, leaf screens, and filters. Inspect
systems following heavy rains to check for leaks and/or overflow problems.
Periodically inspect and maintain Water Harvesting Infiltration Areas to ensure
proper infiltration, overflow, and prevention of erosion , if occurring. Repair
and correct problems.
   B.   Passive Systems.
   In addition to requirements for all systems, to ensure proper functioning of
Passive Water Harvesting Systems, periodically inspect and maintain
Subwatershed surfaces and infrastructure associated with the system such as
French drains, spillways, scuppers, and other elements. Repair and correct
problems as needed.
   C.   Active Systems.
   In addition to requirements for all systems, to ensure proper functioning of
Active Water Harvesting Systems periodically inspect tanks, access hatches and
associated locks, overflow devices, pipes, pipe joints and connectors, pumps,
vents, controllers, and other associated infrastructure . Empty first flush
devices as needed after rainfalls to ensure correct operation in the next
rainfall. Inspect systems following heavy rains to check for leaks and/or
overflow problems. Determine whether sludge should be removed from tanks.
Repair and correct problems as needed.
   D.   Irrigation systems.
   Irrigation systems and associated controllers, soil moisture sensors,
tensiometers, weather stations, and any other associated instruments shall be
properly maintained and replaced as needed to ensure the potable and reclaimed
water-saving goal of the ordinance is met.
4-01.6.0   COMPLIANCE
6.1   Monitoring
   Monitoring of water use and related information at the site shall be the
responsibility of the property owner. Monitoring is required to verify
compliance with the approved Water Harvesting Implementation Plan. Monitoring
data shall be compiled, along with other necessary information, into an annual
report to be submitted to the city by January 30 of each year. The site
conditions described below shall be monitored.
   A.   Monthly Water Use
   Monthly water use for landscape irrigation shall be monitored.
      1.   Monitoring of monthly potable water use for irrigation of landscape
plants is required at sites subject to the ordinance. Sites shall monitor water
use with a Tucson Water Irrigation Service Meter, an equivalent meter from
another water provider, or a private sub-meter that meets Accuracy Standards
for Private Sub-meters.
      2.   Monitoring of monthly water use for irrigation of landscape plants
is required at sites served by private wells or reclaimed water. Sites shall
monitor water use with a private submeter that meets Accuracy Standards for
Private Sub-meters.
   B.   Monthly Rainfall
   Monthly rainfall shall be monitored using an on-site rain gauge, or a
monthly rainfall estimate shall be developed using data from the closest
available rain gauge recorded at www.rainlog.org.
6.2   Annual Reporting
   An Annual Report shall be submitted to the Tucson Water Conservation Office
by January 30 of each year, on a form provided by that Office (Exhibit B). Each
Annual Report shall, at a minimum, contain the following information for the
previous calendar year:
   A.   Name and contact information for site and owner;
   B.   Name, title and contact information for person who prepares the annual
report;
   C.   Source of rainfall data (on-site gauge or www.rainlog.org);
   D.   Sources of metered irrigation water other than harvested rainwater used
at the site ;
   E.   Monthly and total annual readings of the following: rainfall, projected
landscape water demand shown in the approved Rainwater Harvesting Plan, actual
metered water use, difference between these amounts;
   F.   Explanation for any exceedence of annual metered irrigation water use
projected in the approved Rainwater Harvesting Plan;
   G.   Changes to the landscape or irrigation system in the reporting year;
and,
   H.   Other information as deemed necessary.
4-01.7.0   ENFORCEMENT
   The steps described below are required to ensure the site is constructed
according to the requirements of the approved Implementation Plan.
7.1   Inspections
   A.   All site -scale grading related to water harvesting Subwatersheds and
Water Harvesting Infiltration Areas must be inspected and accepted by PDSD
prior to application of any surface treatment (e.g., concrete, asphalt, rock,
etc.) to verify that slopes , recessed areas, overflows, and other design
elements have been properly graded.
   B.   All landscape-scale grading in Water Harvesting Infiltration Areas
where planting will be conducted must be inspected and accepted by PDSD prior
to plant installation and application of organic mulch or rock to verify they
have been properly graded.
   C.   PDSD will inspect the site for compliance with the provisions of the
Rainwater Harvesting Plan prior to issuance of a final certificate of
occupancy.
7.2   Audits and Reporting
   A.   Landscape Irrigation Audit
   In the event the site fails to meet the percent water harvesting in a
reporting year required in the approved Rainwater Harvesting Plan, Tucson Water
may request that additional information or documentation be submitted to assist
in determining the cause of the violation. A site visit and a landscape
irrigation audit may be required to verify the Rainwater Harvesting Plan is
being adhered to and all components are properly functioning.
   B.   Non-Compliance
   Sites determined to be in non-compliance may be required to submit
monitoring reports monthly and may be required to provide Owner’s annual
certification of continued maintenance and proper operation of water harvesting
systems and the irrigation system and associated controls.
7.3   Drought Contingency
   The 50% landscape budget provision shall not apply in any calendar year in
which the annual precipitation has fallen below nine inches at the site , as
reported in the site ’s annual report.
EXHIBITS
   
Exhibit A   Site Water Budget Assumptions and Calculations
   
Exhibit B   Annual Report Form for Commercial Water Harvesting  Sites
EXHIBIT A. SITE WATER BUDGET ASSUMPTIONS AND CALCULATIONS
   Designing water harvesting systems at a commercial site requires
coordination between site developers, site engineers and landscape architects
from the inception of the site design process. The information below is
provided to inform site designers and engineers of the assumptions and methods
the city recommends for use in designing and engineering water harvesting for a
commercial site . This approach can be used both in preparation of the two
components of the Rainwater Harvesting Plan: the Site Water Budget and the
Water Harvesting Implementation Plan.
   Preparing a Site Water Budget that meets the requirements of Commercial
Rainwater Harvesting Ordinance and Technical Standard 4-01 requires projecting
yearly plant water demand for the site landscape then determining how much
harvested water supply is needed to meet at least 50% of this demand. Sites may
choose to use passive water harvesting (earthworks), active water harvesting
(tanks), or a combination of both methods to accomplish this goal. Because most
sites will be able to accomplish the 50% goals with passive water harvesting
alone, the site design calculations provided at the end of this exhibit focus
on data for passive water harvesting sites. An example Site Water Budget is
shown in
Table A-1. This example is provided to serve as a model for sites undertaking
water-harvesting design. An excel spreadsheet of this water budget is available
from <http://www.tucsonaz.gov/PDSD/What_s_New/what_s_new.html> for use by site
designers in preparing their Site Water Budget. This information in turn should
be used to prepare the Water Harvesting Implementation Plan. Calculations
1.0   WATER DEMAND ASSUMPTIONS
   Multiple techniques can be used to determine how much water is needed to
support plants at a site . For purposes of complying with city requirements,
the methods and assumptions described below are recommended.
1.1   Reference Evapotranspiration
   To determine how much water plants need, a measurement of how much water
plants consume through evapotranspiration is needed. Evapotranspiration is the
transfer of water from land surface to the atmosphere through the combination
of evaporation and plant transpiration. In the Reference Evapotranspiration
Method (ETo Method), water use by plants is estimated for a high-water-use
grass cover crop (such as alfalfa) for which evapotranspiration can be directly
measured. Monthly Reference ETo values for a high-water-use grass crop in
Tucson have been tabulated in
Table A-2.
Table A-2. Reference Evapotranspiration (ETo) for Tucson
 
MONTHLY REFERENCE EVAPOTRANSPIRATION (Inches)
Jan Feb  Mar Apr  May  Jun   Jul  Aug  Sep  Oct  Nov  Dec
3.0 3.72 6.0 8.04 9.96 10.56 9.36 7.92 7.20 5.76 3.60 2.64
 
Table A-1. Site Water Budget Format
     DESCRIPTIONS OF WATER BUDGET SOURCES FOR EACH WATER
Line COMPONENT                    HARVESTING INFILTRATION AREAS  EXAMPLE WHIA
                                  (WHIAs)
    PLANT WATER DEMAND            
     DESCRIPTIONS OF WATER BUDGET   SOURCES FOR EACH WATER
Line COMPONENT                      HARVESTING INFILTRATION AREAS  EXAMPLE WHIA
                                    (WHIAs)
    PLANT WATER DEMAND              
1    Individual WHIA identifier     APPLICANT PROVIDES             WHIA - 1
2    Plant water demand category    APPLICANT PROVIDE USING ADWR   low
     for this WHIA                  PLANT LIST
     Plant canopy area (square
     feet) for this WHIA. Add the
     canopies of understory,        APPLICANT PROVIDE. CAN BE
3    midstory and overstory plant   BASED ON LANDSCAPE PLAN OR     1250
     areas to get total canopy for  PLANT LIST
     each WHIA. Assume 60% of
     mature plant size
     Plant water demand per year    APPLICANT USES APPROPRIATE
4    (vertical feet of water per    NUMBER BASED ON PLANT WATER    1.7
     year per square foot of        DEMAND CATEGORY FOR THIS WHIA
     canopy) for this WHIA
     CALCULATE: Annual plant water  = line 3 times line 4 times
5    demand for this WHIA based on  7.48 gallons/cubic foot of     15,895
     plant canopy area  (gallons)   water
6    OVERALL WATER HARVESTING        
     SUPPLY 
7    WHIA area (square feet)        APPLICANT PROVIDE              1000
8    WHIA average depth (feet)      APPLICANT PROVIDES             0.5
9    CALCULATE: WHIA capacity       line 7 times line 8 times 7.48 3,740
     (gallons)                      gallons/cubic foot of water
10   If Passive water harvesting is  
     used:
11   Subwatershed identifier        APPLICANT                      S-1
     Ratio of subwatershed area to
     plant canopy area  needed to
     meet plant water demand in     APPLICANT USES APPROPRIATE
12   this WHIA in July through      NUMBER BASED ON PLANT WATER    3.85
     March (use March plant water   DEMAND CATEGORY FOR EACH WHIA
     demand as the indicator month)
     (no units)
     CALCULATE: Total catchment
13   area ideally needed to meet    = line 3 x line 12             4,813
     plant water demand in March
     (square feet)
     Actual total catchment area
14   designed for this WHIA         APPLICANT PROVIDE              1500
     including the WHIA area itself
     (square feet)
15   CALCULATE: Actual catchment    = line 14 divided by line 3    1.20
     ratio for this WHIA
     CALCULATE: Actual percent of   = 64% times line 15 divided by
16   plant water demand that will   line 12                        20%
     be met for this WHIA
17   If Active water harvesting is   
     used:
18   Tank identifier                APPLICANT PROVIDES             T-1
19   above or below ground?         APPLICANT PROVIDES             above
20   tank height (feet)             APPLICANT PROVIDES             8
21   tank diameter (feet)           APPLICANT PROVIDES             6
22   tank capacity (gallons)        APPLICANT PROVIDES             1619
23   tank location                  APPLICANT PROVIDES             East corner
     CALCULATE: Percent of plant    (Assume tank will be filled
24   water demand for this WHIA met and emptied 4 times per year). 41%
     by this tank                   Total water provided = 4 times
                                    line 22 divided by line 5
     CALCULATE: Percent of plant
     water demand for this WHIA met
25   using harvested rainwater from = line 16 + line 24            61%
     passive systems and active
     systems (as applicable)
26   TOTAL SITE INFORMATION          
     Percent to total site  annual  Prorate percent of water
27   landscape demand met using     harvesting supply based on     61%
     harvested water                area of each WHIA
     Water harvesting capacity
28   offsetting retention basin     APPLICANT PROVIDES
     size capacity
 
1.2   Plant Coefficients
   Four categories of plant types are typically used in Tucson. These
categories are established based on their water use characteristics (
Table A-3). Plant coefficients are an estimate of the water needed by each
plant type expressed as a fraction of the water needed for the reference high-
water-use grass crop. Plant types and corresponding plant coefficients are
shown in
Table A-3.
Table A-3. Plant Coefficients for use in Tucson
 
PLANT TYPE         PLANT COEFFICIENT
Very low water use 0.13 times monthly Reference ETo
Low water use      0.26 times monthly Reference ETo
Moderate water use 0.45 times monthly Reference ETo
High water use     0.65 times monthly Reference ETo
 
1.3   Plant Water Demand
   Plant water demand is the water needed over a given period of time to
support a landscape. The first step in determining plant water demand is to
calculate the inches of water needed per year for each square foot of plant
canopy (as seen from a bird’s eye view). This is calculated by multiplying
Tucson’s monthly reference ETo by the plant coefficient for each plant type to
be used at a site (
Table A-4). Add monthly amounts to get the total annual plant demand per square
foot of canopy (
Table A-4).
Table A-4. Plant water demand per square foot of plant canopy for Tucson
 
                                                                       ANNUAL
PLANT TYPE MONTHLY PLANT WATER DEMAND (Inches)                         DEMAND
                                                                       (Inches)
           Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  Jun  Jul  Aug  Sep  Oct  Nov  Dec
Very low   0.39 0.48 0.78 1.05 1.29 1.37 1.22 1.03 0.94 0.75 0.47 0.34 10.11
water use
Low water  0.78 0.97 1.56 2.09 2.59 2.75 2.43 2.06 1.87 1.50 0.94 0.69 20.22
use
Moderate   1.35 1.67 2.70 3.62 4.48 4.75 4.21 3.56 3.24 2.59 1.62 1.19 34.99
water use
High water 1.95 2.42 3.90 5.23 6.47 6.86 6.08 5.15 4.68 3.74 2.34 1.72 50.54
use
 
   To calculate various plant water demands for large planted areas, the inches
of water needed per square foot of one type of plant canopy is multiplied by
the total canopy area for that plant type to get plant water demand. Plant
Water Demand should be calculated for each individual Water Harvesting
Infiltration Areas . These can then be added together to get total plant water
demand for the site .
1.4   Alternative Calculations
   Applicants wishing to use alternative values and methods from those
described above may do so. Along with the alternative calculations, they should
provide justification for deviation from the assumptions and methods
recommended above.
2.0   RAINWATER SUPPLY ASSUMPTIONS
2.1   Factors Affecting Rainfall
   Rainfall in the Sonoran Desert is highly variable. Between 1993 and 2008,
Tucson’s annual rainfall ranged from 7.62 inches to 14.99 inches and averaged
12.17 inches per year. Tucson sites experience localized differences in
rainfall primarily due to widely spaced summer monsoon storms. Winter rains
tend to cover larger areas with more even distribution of rainfall. The amount
of water that can be harvested also depends on how much rain falls each time it
rains. Very light rains might not create sufficient runoff to reach
waterharvesting basins, while runoff from heavy rains might overflow basins.
2.2   Effective Average Annual Rainfall
   To comply with the city’s Commercial Rainwater Harvesting Ordinance, average
rainfall for Tucson should be adjusted to a lower effective average rainfall.
Two adjustments should be made: reduce average rainfall by 25% to address
localized variability and reduce average rainfall by an additional 25% to
remove very light and very heavy rainfall events from monthly rainfall.
Tucson’s average rainfall and the calculation of effective average rainfall are
shown in
Table A-5 month-by-month and totaled for the year.
Table A-5. Effective average rainfall for Tucson for use in Site Water Budget
calculations
 
RAINFALL                                                              ANNUAL
ASSUMPTIONS MONTHLY AVERAGE RAINFALL (Inches)                         TOTAL
                                                                      (inches)
            Jan Feb Mar  Apr  May  Jun  Jul  Aug  Sep  Oct  Nov  Dec
Average     0.9 0.8 0.81 0.28 0.24 0.24 2.07 2.3  1.45 1.21 0.67 1.03 12.17
rainfall    9   8
Effective   0.5 0.4
Average     0   4   0.41 0.14 0.12 0.12 1.04 1.15 0.73 0.61 0.34 0.52 6.09
Rainfall
 
2.3   Alternative Calculations
   Applicants wishing to use alternative values and methods from those
described above may do so. Along with the alternative calculations, they should
provide justification for deviation from the assumptions and methods
recommended above.
3.0   DETERMINING WATER HARVESTING CATCHMENT NEEDS FOR PASSIVE WATER HARVESTING
3.1   Definition of Catchment Area and Catchment Ratio
   Because most commercial sites should be able to accomplish the ordinance’s
50% water harvesting goal using passive water harvesting strategies alone, the
following information focuses on data for passive water harvesting  sites .
   Passive water harvesting  sites typically consist of an array of Water
Harvesting Infiltration Areas , each served by a catchment area that provides
harvested water to support the plants within it. To meet the city ordinance
requirements, the site needs to be designed so that 50% of annual plant water
demand is met with harvested rainwater as an average across the site . If the
50% goal cannot be met at some Water Harvesting Infiltration Areas due to site
conditions, then other Water Harvesting Infiltration Areas should be designed
to exceed the 50% goal in order to achieve 50% overall.
   Catchment areas are locations at a site from which water is harvested for
beneficial use. These locations include areas where rain falls directly into
earthen basins and infiltrates into the ground (these are known as Water
Harvesting Infiltration Areas . Catchment areas also include locations where
rain falls on rooftops, sidewalks, parking lots, driveways and other hard
surfaces then flows toward Water Harvesting Infiltration Areas where the water
infiltrates into the soil.
   The catchment ratio for any given Water Harvesting Infiltration Area is the
ratio between the water harvesting  catchment area serving it and the canopy
area of the plants located within it. As one example, runoff from 100 square
feet of sloped parking lot and soil drains to a Water Harvesting Infiltration
Area that is planted with trees that have a canopy area of 20 square feet (as
seen from a bird’s eye view). The catchment ratio for this example is 100 to
20, which can be simplified as five to one.
3.2   Calculation of Catchment Areas
   In Tucson, different types of plants need different amounts of water each
month because rainfall and temperature vary from month-to-month (
Table A-4).
Table A-6 shows the catchment area needed to provide harvested water for each
square foot of plant canopy area for different plant types in different months.
The data on
Table A-6 was calculated using the following equation for each month and each
plant type:
   Catchment area needed = Monthly water demand per square foot of plant type
   Effective monthly rainfall
Table A-6 . Catchment area needed to meet monthly plant water demand in Tucson
 
PLANT TYPE      SQUARE FEET OF CATCHMENT AREA NEEDED TO MEET WATER DEMAND FOR
                EACH SQUARE FOOT OF CANOPY AREA
                Jan Feb Mar Apr  May  Jun  Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec
Very low water  0.8 1.0 1.8 7.1  10.3 10.9 1.1 0.9 1.2 1.2 1.3 0.6
use
Low water use   1.5 2.1 3.7 14.2 20.6 21.8 2.2 1.7 2.5 2.4 2.7 1.3
Moderat e water 2.6 3.6 6.3 24.6 35.6 37.7 3.9 3.0 4.3 4.1 4.6 2.2
use
High water use  3.8 5.2 9.2 35.6 51.4 54.5 5.6 4.3 6.1 5.9 6.7 3.2
 
3.3   Calculation of Catchment Ratios
   In Tucson, plants need around 37% of their annual water supply in the hot
dry months of April, May and June. The remainder of their annual water supply,
about 63%, is needed in July through March. Figure A-1 illustrates the
relationship between plant water demand and effective rainfall supply in
Tucson. In April, May and June there is a large gap between plant water demand
and effective rainfall supply. There is a smaller, but still substantial gap
between demand and supply in March. The rest of the year, rainwater supply lags
behind demand, but not as much as in March through June.
   By designing a site that has catchment areas sized to fully meet March plant
water demand, the harvested water supply would typically exceed plant water
demand in July through February (Figure A-2). This design strategy provides a
cushion in meeting the 50% goal for the site and is recommended by the city as
a general approach.
   Based on
Table A-6, a landscape composed of low water use plant types would need a
catchment ratio of 3.7 to 1 to meet March water demand. This means that for
each square foot of plant canopy area (as seen from a bird’s eye view), 3.7
square feet of catchment area is needed to collect rainwater from. This area
includes the dirt Water Harvesting Infiltration Area the plants are located in,
and any parking lot, roof-top, or other hard surface around the plant that
drains to that area.
   It is best to locate plants of the same type in a Water Harvesting
Infiltration Area, though sites may have different plant types in other Water
Harvesting Infiltration Areas .
Table A-6 can be used to determine appropriate catchment ratios for the plant
types used in Tucson.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3098.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3100.jpg]
ATTACHMENT B. ANNUAL REPORT FORM FOR COMMERCIAL WATER HARVESTING  SITES
Annual Water Use Report
Reporting period (month/day/year): from _______________ to
_____________________
Project Name
Project Address
Owner name
Report Preparer name Preparer title
Preparer address
Preparer email Preparer phone
Source of rain data (check all that apply): ____on site  raingage ___
www.rainlog.org station: note the closest cross streets
___________________________________________________
Source of metered irrigation water (check all that apply): ___Tucson Water,
acct # _______________
____ water from another water utility ____well water ____ reclaimed water
                                    IRRIGATION WATER USE
                                    Projected
MONTHS                    RAINFALL  landscape water
              (inches)  demand shown in  Actual metered Difference
                                    the Rainwater    use (gallons)  (gallons)
                                    Harvesting Plan
                                    (gallons)
January         � �                                    
February                                              
March          � �                                     
April          � �                                     
May           � �                                      
June                                                  
July                                                  
August                                                
September        � �                                   
October         � �                                    
November                                              
December                                              
ANNUAL TOTAL                                           
Explanation for any exceedence of annual irrigation water use projected in the
approved Rainwater  Harvesting Plan:
Changes to the landscape or irrigation system in the reporting year:
AREA BELOW FOR STAFF USE ONLY
Drought conditions exist at the site :
Compliance with Rainwater  Harvesting Plan:
Audit required/date/outcome
 
SECTION 4-02.0.0: FLOODPLAIN, WASH AND ERZ STANDARDS
Section
4-02.1.0   General
4-02.2.0   Development Standards
4-02.3.0   Application Requirements and Review
4-02.4.0   Modifications
4-02.1.0   GENERAL
1.1   Purpose
   This standard has been established for the purpose of informing applicants
of the preparation, submittal, and review procedures for development within
areas that have environmentally valuable habitat in conformance with Article 1,
Division 1, Floodplain and Erosion Hazard Area Regulations, Chapter 26, Tucson
Code; Article VIII, Watercourse Amenities, Safety and Habitat (WASH), Chapter
29, Tucson Code; and Section
5.7, Environmental Resource Zone (ERZ), Unified Development Code (UDC), Chapter
23, all of the Tucson Code; so that proper and adequate information is
presented in a consistent manner, thereby providing the basis for an efficient
and timely review.
   This standard is further to insure that the adopted policies of the Mayor
and Council and adopted recommendations of the city’s Stormwater Advisory
Committee are accurately reflected in the implementation of existing
regulations.
   The areas subject to regulation under this technical standard include the
floodplain and floodway fringe areas as defined in Section 26-2, and the
adjacent banks and associated riparian habitat as provided in Section 26-5.2(3)
and (4), which are established as the “regulated areas”. If there is no
encroachment within these regulated areas, the documentation requirements,
development restrictions and mitigation requirements do not apply.
   Where the regulated areas are based upon maps prepared for the TSMS Phase II
Stormwater Master Plan, the Critical and Sensitive Wildlife Habitat Map, or
similar maps prepared by Pima County, there is a presumption that riparian
habitat that should be preserved has been documented on the property. Any
development must therefore comply with this standard to establish the precise
location of riparian habitat. It is, however, the actual documentation of the
location of the habitat pursuant to this standard that will determine where the
development may occur, not the maps.
   If there is encroachment into the regulated areas, the standard requires
that the riparian habitat be identified and delineated as the “protected
riparian area”. This will include the submittal of an Environmental Resource
Report that will document (1) the areas that contain riparian and wildlife
habitat that is to be preserved and (2) those areas without such habitat.
Development is permitted within the regulated areas that are outside the
protected riparian areas. Development within the protected riparian area is
limited as set forth in this standard.
   It is the intent of this standard that the protected riparian area
incorporate the Critical Riparian Habitat in ERZ watercourses, the Resource
Areas in WASH watercourses, and riparian habitat within the undesignated
regulatory floodplains so that there is a single process for review with
consistent criteria for application.
   This standard does not waive any applicable city regulations or codes.
1.2   Application and Exceptions
   This standard applies to all applications accepted for review after November
7, 2006. Exceptions to this applicability include:
   A.   This standard does not apply to single family residential lots with
dwellings constructed in accordance with the building permits issued before
November 7, 2006.
   B.   This standard does not apply in a manner that conflicts with a rezoning
or special exception approved by the Mayor and Council after November 7, 2001.
   C.   This standard may apply to an exempt application at the request of the
applicant.
4-02.2.0   DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
2.1   Plan Requirements
   The information required as part of a submittal under this standard will be
shown graphically or provided as notes on a plan, as appropriate. The required
information is in addition to the plan or plat requirements of the applicable
process, such as, but not limited to, a plat, a development plan, a site plan,
or a plot plan.
2.2   Regulated Areas Subject to Review
   The regulated areas are listed below:
   A.   ERZ Watercourses
   The regulated area for ERZ watercourses includes the 100-year floodplain for
all watercourses. ERZ watercourses include:
      1.   Watercourses zoned as ERZ;
      2.   Watercourses that have been designated for preservation in the
Tucson Stormwater Management Study and are delineated as proposed for ERZ
designation or as under review for ERZ designation shall be considered as ERZ
watercourses; or
      3.   The designated, proposed and under review watercourses are shown on
the Hydrologic Data and Wash Information maps on the Tucson Department of
Transportation internet web site.
   B.   WASH Watercourses
   The regulated area for WASH watercourses includes channel and banks of a
watercourse and the area within 50 feet of the top of the bank, or where there
is no defined bank, 50 feet from the ten-year flood boundary. WASH watercourses
include:
      1.   Watercourses designated by name in the Watercourse Amenities, Safety
and Habitat regulations in Article VIII of Chapter 29.
      2.   Watercourses that have been designated for preservation in the
Tucson Stormwater Management Study and delineated as proposed for WASH
designation or as under review for WASH designation shall be considered as WASH
designated watercourses.
      3.   The designated, proposed and under review watercourses are shown on
the Hydrologic Data and Wash Information maps on the Tucson Department of
Transportation internet web site.
      4.   The regulated area for watercourses under this technical standard 4-
02.2.2.B.2 and 3 above shall not extend beyond the 100-year floodplain.
   C.   Regulatory Floodplain Watercourses
   Within floodplains that are not designated as an ERZ or WASH watercourses in
accordance with Sections
4-02.2.2.A or B above, the regulated area is the area within the 100-year
floodplain for watercourses with flows of 100 cfs or more including, by not
limited to, those areas which contain any of the following:
      1.   Hydroriparian, Mesoriparian, or Xeroriparian Types A, B or C
habitats as delineated by Pima County as part of Article X of the Pima County
Floodplain and Erosion Hazard Ordinance.
      2.   Hydroriparian, Mesoriparian, or Xeroriparian High or Xeroriparian
Intermediate Habitats as delineated in the TSMS Phase II Stormwater Master
Plan.
      3.   Xeroriparian Low Habitats as delineated in the TSMS Phase II
Stormwater Master Plan or Type D habitat as delineated by Pima County for
connectivity between higher habitat classes, if low-volume, high-value habitats
are present, including tabosa swales or similar habitats.
      4.   Unclassified or undocumented riparian habitat of equivalent value to
the above criteria.
2.3   Protected Riparian Area (PRA)
   The protected riparian area is the area that has riparian habitat that is to
be preserved. Except for watercourses designated by ordinance as subject to ERZ
and WASH regulations, the protected riparian area shall not exceed the 100-year
floodplain. protected riparian areas include areas that provide habitat
structure, wildlife food and shelter, and that also aid in supporting wildlife
connectivity, erosion control and help to improve stormwater quality. Riparian
habitat may include the vegetative resources, mapped areas and wildlife habitat
and corridors listed below where such habitat is riparian in nature and
function.
   A.   Vegetative Resources
   Vegetative Resources are groups of three or more individual plants in close
proximity to each other representing any of the plant species (and any
combination of associated vegetative structure) listed below.
      1.   Mesoriparian plant species, including Arizona walnut, Fremont
cottonwood, Goodding (black) willow, Arizona sycamore, Arizona ash.
      2.   Over-story vegetation consisting of closely spaced, perennial, woody
(e.g., mesquite, foothill palo verde, Mexican palo verde, ironwood, netleaf
hackberry), that are generally six feet or more in total height, and where the
distance between canopy margins of individuals of the predominant over-story
plant species is less than two times the height of the tallest individuals.
      3.   Understory vegetation consisting of closely spaced, perennial woody
plants (e.g., catclaw and whitethorn acacia) that are generally six feet in
total height, or less, and where the distance between canopy margins of
individuals of the predominant understory plant species is generally less than
two times the height of the tallest individuals, excluding nearly pure stands
of understory vegetation consisting of the following perennial woody plants:
burrow bush, creosote bush, desert broom, or triangle-leaf bursage.
      4.   Combinations of overstory and understory vegetation that together
constitute valuable habitat, and tobasa swales.
   B.   Mapped Areas shown on the Critical and Sensitive Wildlife Habitat Maps
which contain:
      1.   Major segments of desert riparian habitat extending from public
preserves;
      2.   Major segments of desert riparian habitat not extending directly
from a public preserve but containing a high density and diversity of plant and
animal species;
      3.   Deciduous riparian woodlands;
      4.   Mesquite bosques; and,
      5.   Lakes, ponds, or wetlands.
   C.   Wildlife includes, but is not limited to, the wildlife and areas
identified in the public draft or final City of Tucson Habitat Conservation
Plan applicable to the regulated area.
2.4   Identification of Regulated Areas and Protected Riparian Areas
   All tentative plats, site plans, plot plans or other plans providing for
approval of development within property that includes any regulated area as
defined in Section
4-02.2.2.A, ERZ Watercourses, shall identify and delineate the regulated areas
and the protected riparian area on the property and shall comply with this
standard. The boundary of the regulated area and the protected riparian area
should be clearly depicted on applicable submittal documents.
2.5   Development Restrictions
   The intent of this Technical standard is to preserve natural and existing
drainage and 100% of the habitat areas within the protected riparian areas. To
accomplish this, the regulations provide for two options: (1) no encroachment
into the regulated area or (2) if encroachment is proposed into the regulated
area, submittal of an environmental resource report in conformance with this
section, and, if encroachment is proposed into the protected riparian areas,
development in conformance with development restrictions and mitigation
requirements in this section.
   A.   No Encroachment in Regulated Areas
   For projects where there will be no encroachment within the regulated areas,
development is not restricted by this section except as provided herein and
except that the regulated areas shall be identified on the site plan, plat or
development plan in a surveyable manner. This plan, or a separate plan, shall
also indicate the proposed location of the temporary fencing which is required
to protect the protected riparian areas during construction. The conditions for
development with no encroachment are as follows:
      1.   ERZ Watercourses. Applications within the ERZ watercourses described
in Section
4-02.2.2.A, ERZ Watercourses, above that propose a project with no encroachment
into the regulated area are required to indicate the 100-year floodplain on the
plans submitted through the applicable process, accompanied by a floodplain
report verifying the floodplain limits.
      2.   WASH Watercourses. Applications for WASH watercourses as described
in Section
4-02.2.2.B, WASH Watercourses, above that propose a project with no
encroachment into the regulated area, are required to indicate the top of bank
or ten-year flood boundary and the 50-foot study area beyond those lines on the
plans submitted through the applicable process, accompanied by a floodplain
report verifying the floodplain limits.
      3.   Regulatory Floodplain Watercourses. Applications within the
regulatory floodplain watercourses described in Section
4-02.2.2.C, Regulatory Floodplain Watercourses, above that propose a project
with no encroachment into the regulated area are required to indicate the 100-
year floodplain on the plans submitted through the applicable process,
accompanied by a floodplain report verifying the floodplain limits.
      4.   Floodplain Restoration. Revegetation, restoration or enhancement
under this subsection shall not constitute “encroachment” under applicable
codes. A Floodplain Restoration Plan must be prepared and approved in
conformance with this subsection in order to undertake floodplain revegetation,
restoration or enhancement. For areas within the regulated areas that are to
remain as open space after development, revegetation and restoration of the
open spaces areas is encouraged, but not required, to enhance the riparian
resources within the regulated area as follows:
         a.   Voluntary revegetation, restoration or enhancement should create
or restore the riparian habitat through the planting of native trees, shrubs,
and understory species and the distribution of seed mix native to the site or a
comparable reference site to the extent possible. Additional native species may
be used in the restoration effort if they are typical of intact riparian
habitat in areas similar to the site .
         b.   Revegetation, restoration or enhancement efforts should include
native plant material salvaged from the site or preserved in place.
         c.   Development and revegetation, restoration or enhancement efforts
shall conform to the city’s policies regarding water harvesting .
   B.   Encroachment in Regulated Areas
   If the project proposes encroachment within the regulated areas, it shall
conform to the following.
      1.   Environmental Resource Report. Applicants are required to submit an
Environmental Resource Report as defined in Section
11.4.6 of the UDC. The supporting material for preparation of the Environmental
Resource Report is based on information from the Hydrologic Data and Wash
Information maps on the Tucson Department of Transportation internet web site:
The Critical and Sensitive Wildlife Habitat Map and Report, the Mayor and
Council Interim Watercourse Improvement Policy and subsequent adopted policies,
the Tucson Stormwater Management Study, the following Basin Management Plans:
1) West Branch, Santa Cruz; 2) Houghton East; 3) Este Wash; and 4) Arroyo
Chico. the Tucson Stormwater Management Study, Phase II and field observation.
An application may request that an element listed below be waived or that the
report address only a specified area where a full report is not applicable to
the proposed encroachment. DSD may grant such waivers where the elements or
full report are not required by code. The Environmental Resource Report must
include:
         a.   A table of contents, indicating all information by page or map
number;
         b.   The location of the 100-year floodplain on, adjacent to, and a
minimum of 200 feet upstream and downstream of the proposed development;
         c.   Soil conditions in and adjacent to the watercourse, and the
erosion potential;
         d.   Existing rights-of-way or easement dedication along the wash for
a distance of 500 feet upstream and downstream of the proposed development;
         e.   The existing and proposed ownership of any drainageway facilities
on or adjacent to the site and identification of the persons responsible for
the maintenance of such facilities;
         f.   Previous hydraulic/hydrology studies or maps prepared for the
watershed and relevant floodplain studies, delineations, LOMR applications and
approvals affecting the project site ;
         g.   Groundwater recharge potential at this location;
         h.   Sediment transport characteristics along the watercourse centered
on this location;
         i.   Existing and proposed utilities to and across the site ;
         j.   Any other elements that may be characteristic of the watercourses
on or adjacent to the site ;
         k.   A map indicating the boundaries of the proposed development and
its relationship to any watercourses designated on the Hydrologic Data and Wash
Information maps on the Tucson Department of Transportation internet web site;
         l.   An aerial photograph no more than two years old, with flight
date, north arrow, project site boundaries, floodplain delineation, protected
riparian area and a scale no smaller than one inch equals 200 feet. DSD staff
may request an aerial photograph with topographic information;
         m.   Ground level photographs from points identified on submitted
plans that document the protected riparian area and any areas within the
protected riparian area to be disturbed;
         n.   Any applicable Basin Management Plan, which recommends that
watercourses remain in a natural state, shall be referenced in the Report;
         o.   A map identifying the type, location and extent of all riparian
resources and plant associations, including but not limited to, hydroriparian
habitat, mesoriparian habitat, xeroriparian habitat, tobosa grass habitat,
mesquite bosques, individual cacti and trees with a caliper of four inches or
greater, and all saguaros, regardless of size. The identification of riparian
habitat shall cover the entire site and is not limited to the regulated areas;
         p.   Delineation of the proposed protected riparian area and a
statement of the total area of the site , the total area of the protected
riparian area, the area within the regulated area, and the total of any areas
proposed to be disturbed within the protected riparian areas;
         q.   Delineation of the riparian resources and any proposed open space
linkages or facilities recommended by parks, recreation, open space, and trails
plan, for a distance of 500 feet or one-half times the length of the
watercourses on the property, whichever is greater, both upstream and
downstream from the property. This shall be based on information that is
available from aerial photographs, the Hydrologic Data and Wash Information
maps on the Tucson Department of Transportation internet web site and other
public sources;
         r.   A Plant Inventory and aerial photographs of individual woody
plants and cacti rooted within the encroachment area. Both living and dead
plants and cacti should be inventoried. The Plant Inventory List shall include
an identification number, genus and species, and size of all plants having
basal trunk diameters greater than two inches. All plants inventoried are to be
shown on an aerial photograph at a minimum scale of one inch equals 60 feet;
         s.   A delineation, map and assessment on an aerial photograph of
habitat types noted on the Critical and Sensitive Wildlife Habitat Map;
         t.   A written or mapped assessment of significant densities of
wildlife by species;
         u.   A description of the impact of the encroachment on riparian
resources within the property and on the adjacent property as identified in
subsection q above;
         v.   A written statement from the regional office of the Arizona Game
and Fish Department regarding any impacts to fish and wildlife;
         w.   A draft Mitigation Plan in conformance with subsection 3 below if
development is proposed within the protected riparian areas; and,
         x.   Other landscaping requirements established in Chapter 23 of the
Tucson Code.
      2.   Development Restrictions. All development within the protected
riparian area shall be reviewed to insure that there is no unnecessary
disturbance of the riparian resources. Development that is outside of the
protected riparian area but within the regulated area is not subject to this
subsection. Necessary development shall include only the crossing of riparian
habitats with roadways, bikeways, paved walkways and utilities as listed below
where there is no viable alternate crossing available and the crossing is
necessary for the reasonable development of the property. A written explanation
as to why the development is necessary shall be submitted with the appropriate
plans. Development that is permitted as necessary is subject to the following
conditions:
         a.   Roadway, bike path, and paved walkway improvements and utility
encroachments will cross the riparian habitat areas, not to run parallel to the
protected riparian areas;
         b.   Encroachments that cross the protected riparian area shall be
located and constructed to minimize disturbance of the habitat and wildlife
movement;
         c.   All utilities in protected riparian area areas will be located
underground; utilities will be placed either in proposed or existing public
right of way along roadway, bike path, or paved walkway improvements or within
approved easements.
         d.   Any roadway, bike path, or paved walkway improvement must be
constructed in such a manner as to provide means for safe and accessible
passage for wildlife.
         e.   Concrete, rock veneer and soil cement bank treatment for the
culvert and associated drainage may be permitted within the public right of way
upon approval of the City Manager.
         f.   For WASH watercourses, concrete, rock veneer and soil cement bank
treatment for the culvert that is outside of the proposed or existing public
right of way shall be permitted only with the approval of the Mayor and
Council. For all other watercourses, concrete, rock veneer and soil cement
should not be used where there is any practicable alternative.
         g.   Where a roadway, paved walkway, or bike path improvement or
utility encroachment occurs within the protected riparian area, mitigation in
conformance with Section
4-02.2.5.B.3, Mitigation Plans, shall be provided.
         h.   Temporary Fencing Required. No grubbing , grading , or
construction will occur on a project site which includes areas designated as
protected riparian area to be retained in a natural state until those
designated areas are temporarily fenced. The temporary fencing shall remain in
place during all phases of construction that could affect the protected
riparian area.
      3.   Mitigation Plan. Where any development, except planting solely for
revegetation, restoration or enhancement with an approved Floodplain
Restoration Plan, encroaches within the protected riparian areas, mitigation
will be required. A mitigation report shall be submitted with the Environmental
Resource Report demonstrating that the proposed mitigation is in conformance
with this subsection and applicable codes.
         a.   Mitigation Plans shall address the following:
      1.   Revegetation should recreate the lost functions and values of the
riparian habitat through the planting of native trees, shrubs, understory
plants and seed mix native to the site which will result in comparable habitat
that is equal to the predisturbance habitat in area, plant density, diversity,
and volume on the net site . Revegetation should be conducted over a sufficient
area to accomplish the following mitigation ratios while accomplishing the
specified plant density, diversity and volume of the impacted area.
         i.   Trees with basal trunk diameters ranging from two to four inches
and shrubs should be replaced at a two to one ratio.
         ii.   Trees with basal trunk diameters larger than four inches should
be replaced at a three to one ratio.
         iii.   Cacti, except cholla or prickly pear, should be replaced at a
two to one ratio.
         iv.   Cottonwood, willow, walnut, sycamore, arizona ash, ironwood and
canyon hackberry (Celtis reticulata) should not be removed. If removal is
unavoidable and no other practicable alternative exists, then these plants
shall be replaced by large, boxed trees at a three to one ratio and provided
with at least three years of supplemental irrigation and care to ensure healthy
establishment. Replacement trees shall be in 36-inch boxes and shall be at
least eight to ten feet tall and at least two and one-half inches in diameter,
measured three feet above the ground.
      2.   Mitigation can be designed to provide native riparian habitat that
is appropriate for the location and soil conditions, even where that may be
enhanced beyond the predisturbance habitat in terms of native habitat area,
plant density, diversity and volume on the net site .
      3.   Revegetation should include native plant material salvaged from the
site .
      4.   Development and revegetation shall conform to the city’s policies
regarding water harvesting .
         b.   Mitigation Plans shall include:
      1.   A development plan/site plan, including landscape plans, indicating
proposed development; floodplain encroachment locations; location of mitigation
areas; techniques used for mitigating impacts to, or preservation of, natural
areas; specifications for restoration and revegetation of disturbed areas; and
general compliance with the applicable standards;
      2.   Landscape plans that document compliance with the mitigation plan
requirements. A summary of mitigation and preservation requirements shall be
included on the plans; and,
      3.   A description of the maintenance program that provides for
revegetated/restored or enhanced areas. The program shall include irrigation to
establish native plants, provide for regular inspection, removal of invasive
species, and native plant replacement as necessary to successfully establish
the mitigation habitat. All mitigation plantings and related improvements shall
be maintained for at least three years following installation.
2.6   Ownership of PRA
   Ownership of the protected riparian area shall be provided in one or more of
the methods set forth below to insure continued preservation of the area. Forms
of ownership of protected riparian areas include:
   A.   protected riparian area Areas for proposed subdivisions may be either
publicly owned, owned by a common association, or owned by a non-profit
association which provides for conservation management.
   B.   Privately owned individual residential lots of 24,000 square feet or
less may include protected riparian area where (i) there is a conservation
easement prohibiting private development within the protected riparian areas,
(ii) no more than 10% of the total area of the protected riparian area is
included within individual private lots and (iii) no walls or fences are
constructed within the protected riparian areas. The common ownership and the
location of any portion of the protected riparian area within individual lots
and applicable legal restrictions shall be included in a note on the final plat
or development plan.
   C.   Privately owned individual residential lots that are greater than
24,000 square feet may include protected riparian area where (i) the protected
riparian area is delineated on the plat providing a surveyed description of the
location within each lot, and (ii) there is a note on the plat requiring that
each purchaser of a lot shall sign a disclosure form acknowledging the
prohibition upon development in the protected riparian area and (iii) no walls
or fences are constructed within the protected riparian areas.
   D.   Where the protected riparian area is on property that remains under the
ownership of a single person or entity following the development, the protected
riparian area shall be protected through a conservation or public easement or
other legal restriction upon further development.
2.7   Compliance with other Code Provisions
   All development within regulated areas must comply with all other applicable
code provisions, including obtaining floodplain use permits where necessary.
Washes zoned as ERZ washes or named in the WASH regulations are reviewed in
accordance with Section
3.3.3, PDSD Director Approval Procedure.
4-02.3.0   APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS AND REVIEW
3.1   Application
   Applications for review of projects affected by this technical standard
shall be submitted to the CDRC Section at PDSD. Review staff will evaluate
submitted information for completeness and shall accept or reject the
application within five days of the date of submittal. The applicant will be
notified if the application is found to be incomplete.
3.2   Submittal Requirements
   Copies of all required plans, documents, and reports are to be submitted to
the CDRC staff at PDSD, who will coordinate the hydrologic and resource reviews
with the appropriate staff. Plans are to be folded to an eight and one-half
inch by 11-inch size.
3.3   Review
   Plans are reviewed for compliance with this standard in accordance with
Section
3.3.3, PDSD Director Approval Procedure.
3.4   Stormwater Advisory Committee (SAC) Review
   Development which encroaches within the protected riparian areas, except for
development limited to revegetation or restoration in accordance with an
approved Floodplain Restoration Plan, shall be reviewed by the Stormwater
Advisory Committee (SAC) as follows:
   A.   All watercourses subject to adopted ERZ or WASH regulations are
reviewed by SAC as part of Section
3.3.3, PDSD Director Approval Procedure.
   B.   All watercourses designated to be treated consistent with the ERZ or
WASH regulations under this technical standard and regulatory floodplain
watercourses may be reviewed by SAC upon either the request of the applicant or
upon the determination by the PDSD Director that such review is appropriate.
   C.   Review by SAC shall focus upon whether the application correctly
defines, delineates and describes the protected riparian area and complies with
Section
4-02.2.5.B.2 and 3, Development Restrictions and Mitigation Plan, respectively.
4-02.4.0   MODIFICATIONS
4.1   A minor encroachment modification may be requested for necessary
development in addition to the roadway, bike path, paved trail and utility
improvements as provided in Technical Standard
4-02.2.5.B.2 above. A minor encroachment under this subsection shall be
approved if the loss of riparian resources does not impair the function of the
habitat and the mitigation provides riparian resources of greater value if the
request is granted. A modification under this subsection shall not exceed 5% of
the total area of the protected riparian area on the site . The mitigation
shall be provided on a three to one ratio of new habitat for disturbed habitat.
The mitigation shall be within the protected riparian area or an area that
directly connects with the protected riparian areas. The mitigation shall be
integrated with, and function as a part of, the protected riparian areas. The
requirements for the Environmental Resource Report may be modified by PDSD
staff as may be appropriate to document a minor encroachment under this
subsection.
4.2   Technical Standard Modification Requests are processed in accordance with
Section
1-01.6.0.
4.3   Either the applicant or the PDSD Director can refer a Technical Standard
Modification Request to this standard to the Stormwater Advisory Committee or
the Stormwater Technical Advisory Committee for recommendation.
SECTION 4-03.0.0: DESIGN STANDARDS FOR STORMWATER DETENTION AND RETENTION
Due to the size and nature of this manual, it is unable to be accommodated
within the Technical Standards Manual. The manual is available online as the
Pima County Regional Flood Control District Design Standards for Stormwater
Detention and Retention, June 2014 version (Last Revised February 2015).
City of Tucson Amendments to the Pima County Regional Flood Control District
Design Standards for Stormwater Detention and Retention, June 2014 version
(Last Revised February 2015)
Section 1.1 Purpose
The following paragraph;
1.   Require first-flush retention that should be located throughout the
development. The retained volume may also be used to meet all or part of the
project's detention volume requirement;
Revise to read;
1.   Require first-flush retention that may be located throughout the
development. The retained volume may also be used to meet part of the project's
detention volume requirement;
Section 1.2 Ordinance Overview and Detention Requirements
Section 1.2.2
The following paragraph;
b.   New Development located within a Critical Basin must provide a sufficient
combination of retention and detention to reduce the post-develop 2-,10-, and
100- year peak discharge rates to 90% of the pre-developed peak discharge
rates. Other reductions may be specified by the Floodplain Administrator
Revise to read;
b.   New Development located within a Critical Basin must provide a sufficient
combination of retention and detention to reduce the post-develop 2-,10-, and
100- year peak discharge rates to 85% of the pre-developed peak discharge
rates. Other reductions may be specified by the Floodplain Administrator
Add the following paragraph;
c.   Properties within the City of Tucson that are currently in undesignated
basins, shall be treated as balanced basins
Section 2.4.1 Stormwater Harvesting Basins
The following paragraph;
The maximum effective retention depth is 9 inches. If the basin is sloped, the
depressed area may contain internal berms or check dams to pond water in
multiple cells with planting areas on the upstream side of the berm. Each cell
shall not retain greater than 9 inches of water.
Revise to read;
Without infiltration testing the maximum depth of retention in detention basins
is 9 inches. If the basin is sloped, the depressed area may contain internal
berms or check dams to pond water in multiple cells with planting areas on the
upstream side of the berm. Retention depths greater than 9" require
infiltration testing to verify that the draw down time is in accordance with
section 4.5
Section 2.5 Retention within Detention Basins
The following paragraph;
Detention basins with uniform side slopes and no terraces may incorporate
retention for a maximum depth of 9" below the lowest outlet elevation. The
volume provided below the outlet can be counted as retention volume.
Revise to read;
Detention basins with uniform side slopes and no terraces may incorporate
retention for a maximum depth of 9 inches below the lowest outlet elevation.
The volume provided below the outlet can be counted as retention volume. If
infiltration testing is provided, the retained depth may be increased.
The following paragraph
Terraces may be proposed within a detention basin in order to meet riparian
habitat or native plant requirements. When vegetated terraces and bioretention
areas are proposed, the maximum retention depth may be increase to 18 inches.
Section 5.8 contains standards for retention within detention basins.
Revise to read;
Terraces may be proposed within a detention/retention basin in order to meet
riparian habitat or native plant requirements Section 5.8 contains standards
for retention within detention basins.
Section 3.1 Peak Discharge Rate Reduction Requirements
The following paragraph;
Within a Critical Basin, post-developed peak discharge rates shall not exceed
90% of pre-developed peak discharge rates at the project boundary, unless a
different percentage is specified by the Floodplain Administrator.
Revise to read;
Within a Critical Basin, post-developed peak discharge rates shall not exceed
85% of pre- developed peak discharge rates at the project boundary, unless a
different percentage is specified by the Floodplain Administrator.
Section 3.2.1 Pre- Developed Conditions
The following paragraph;
The pre-developed conditions peak discharge rates for each return period (Qpre
-rp) shall be established using the modeling methods described in the
District's Technical Policy, TECH-015, Acceptable Methods for Determining Peak
Discharges, and Technical Policy, TECH-018, Acceptable Model Parameterization
for Determining Peak Discharges, and any other technical policies as specified
by the Floodplain Administrator. The District's Technical Policies are
available through the Rules and Procedures page of the District's web page.
Revise to read;
The pre-developed conditions peak discharge rates for each return period (Qpre
-rp) may be established using the City of Tucson STANDARDS MANUAL FOR DRAINAGE
DESIGN AND FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT, modeling methods described in the District's
Technical Policy, TECH-015, Acceptable Methods for Determining Peak Discharges,
and Technical Policy, TECH-018, Acceptable Model Parameterization for
Determining Peak Discharges, and any other technical policies as specified by
the Floodplain Administrator. The District's Technical Policies are available
through the Rules and Procedures page of the District's web page.
Section 4.9.1 Outlet Structure Standards
Add the following as paragraph 8.
8.   A bleed pipe or other outlet may be added to the basin provided that its
discharge rate and invert elevation meets the requirements of section 9. Unless
a waiver has been granted per Section 9, the bleed pipe shall be capped and for
maintenance purposes only.
Section 4.13.2 Underground Storage Prohibitions
The following paragraph;
3.   Providing first flush retention underground is prohibited
Revise to read;
3.   Providing first flush retention underground is prohibited, without prior
approval of the Floodplain Administrator
Section 5.8 Retention within a Detention Basin
The following paragraph;
3.   A maximum of 9 inches of retention is allowed, unless designed as describe
below. The depth is measured from the lowest elevation on the basin floor to
the lowest outlet invert elevation
a.   The retention depth of up to 18 inches may be allowed if the following
conditions are met. See Figure 5.5
Revise to read;
3.   A maximum of 9 inches of retention is allowed, unless designed as
described below. The depth is measured from the lowest elevation on the basin
floor to the lowest outlet invert elevation
a.   A retention depth of greater than 9 inches may be allowed if the following
conditions are met. See Figure 5.5
The following paragraph;
iv.   The remaining 50% of the basin area may be constructed so that the
maximum retention depth is 18 inches. This area shall meet the construction
requirements of part 1 of this Section.
Revise to read;
iv.   The remaining 50% of the basin shall meet the construction requirements
of Part 1 of this section
Section 9 DETENTION WAIVER REQUEST AND PAYMENT OF IN-LIEU FEE
The following section Title;
Section 9 DETENTION WAIVER REQUEST AND PAYMENT OF IN-LIEU FEE
Revise to read;
Section 9 DETENTION/RETENTION WAIVER REQUEST AND PAYMENT OF IN-LIEU FEE
Add the following as the first paragraph;
A waiver for retention may be requested for situations where the volume of
retention cannot be contained within the development property or where tests
show that the soils have poor infiltration. The waiver may request a reduction
in retention volume or the transference of design consideration from retention
to detention with a maximum discharge rate of 1-cfs for sites in critical
basins or 3-cfs for sites in balanced basins. These maximum discharge rates may
be achieved by using a bleed pipe or weir in which the invert of the bleed pipe
or weir is a maximum of 6 inches above the basin floor. The waiver may be
granted by the engineering reviewer as part of the development review process.
The approved waiver request will be included in the Drainage Report or Drainage
Statement for the project.
Section 11.2.2 General and Permitting Notes
The following paragraphs;
3.   When a project has drainage and grading improvements that are required to
mitigate off-site adverse impacts to the proposed development, an As-Built
Certification or plan shall be prepared and submitted to the Floodplain
Administrator. The As-Built Certification or plan requires approval prior to
the issuance of any building permits, except for model home permits and any
permits necessary to build drainage infrastructure.
Provide the following Permitting Note to disclose this requirement:
"Prior to issuance of any building permits an As-Built Certification (Plan) of
the drainage and grading improvements that are required to mitigate off-site
adverse impacts to the project shall be prepared and submitted to the
Floodplain Administrator. Upon approval of the as-built plan by the Floodplain
Administrator, the hold to issuance of building permits can be removed."
Revise to read;
3.   When a project has drainage and grading improvements that are required to
mitigate off-site adverse impacts to the proposed development, an As-Built
Certification or plan shall be prepared and submitted to the Floodplain
Administrator.
Provide the following Permitting Note to disclose this requirement:
"An As-Built Certification (Plan) of the drainage and grading improvements that
are required to mitigate off-site adverse impacts to the project shall be
prepared and submitted to the Floodplain Administrator."
(Am. Res. 23289, 1/5/2021)
SECTION 4-04.0.0: CITY OF TUCSON STANDARDS MANUAL FOR DRAINAGE DESIGN AND
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT IN TUCSON, ARIZONA
Due to the size and nature of this manual, it is unable to be accommodated
within the Technical Standards Manual. The manual is available online.
(Am. Res. 23289, 1/5/2021)
SECTION 5: LANDSCAPING
SECTION 5-01.0.0: LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING
Section
5-01.1.0   Purpose
5-01.2.0   Oasis Locational Standards
5-01.3.0   Landscaping in Vehicular Use Areas
5-01.4.0   Landscape Borders
5-01.5.0   Plant Size, Location, and Spacing
5-01.6.0   Crime Prevention and Safety Guidelines
5-01.7.0   Standards for Trees in Sight Visibility Triangles
5-01.8.0   Screening Safety Standards
5-01.9.0   Maintenance
5-01.10.0   Figures
5-01.1.0   PURPOSE
   The purpose of this section is to supplement the landscaping and screening
standards provided in the Section
7.6 of the Unified Development Code.
5-01.2.0   OASIS LOCATIONAL STANDARDS
   2.1   Minimizing evaporation potential by choosing locations sheltered from
wind and heat; and,
   2.2   Incorporating water harvesting system and storm water runoff design
with oasis areas.
5-01.3.0   LANDSCAPING IN VEHICULAR USE AREAS
3.1   Planter Area
   A.   The measurement must always be within the planter area and may not
include any material that defines the outer edge of the unpaved area.
   B.   The unpaved area may be covered with a permeable material or with
grillwork, but air and moisture must be able to penetrate the soil.
   C.   Inert or vegetative ground cover must be used in planter areas not
otherwise occupied by trees, shrubs, or grillwork.
3.2   Shading of Paved Areas
   Canopy trees planted within and adjacent to vehicular use areas should be
planted in a manner that at maturity they afford the greatest amount of shade
to the paved areas.
3.3   Vehicle Overhangs
   A.   Parking spaces may be designed so that the front of a vehicle overhangs
into planter areas that are within a vehicular use area but cannot overhang
into the street landscape border.
   B.   When planted within the vehicular use area, trees must be located at
the edge and between vehicle spaces, such as the common corner of four
perpendicular spaces that face each other (see
Figure 5-B, Vehicle Use Area). The minimum required vehicle overhang is three
feet with the following exception. When the tree is located at the common
corner of four perpendicular parking spaces that face each other, the minimum
required overhang is two and one-half feet (2'-6"). The vehicle overhang is
measured from the front of the wheel stop to the centerline of the tree.
   C.   Only trees with single trunks may be planted within these planters
because trees with multiple trunks need wider areas of growth and may interfere
with the parked vehicles.
5-01.4.0   LANDSCAPE BORDERS
4.1   Landscaping on Adjacent Sites
   Existing drought tolerant vegetation on adjacent sites must be considered in
design to prevent abrupt changes in plant types and to maintain a visual
continuity along street frontages.
4.2   Structural Overhangs
   Covered parking canopies or other structural canopies, such as those used in
service stations, may not overhang into street landscape borders in order to
avoid conflicts between the structures and crowns of trees.
4.3   Streetscape Landscape Border - Maximum Width
   In situations where the street landscape border is wider than the minimum
ten foot standard, the landscape border width needs to be determined for the
purposes of calculating the 50% vegetative coverage standard. The width is that
area between the required screen and the property line, unless there is
permitted encroachment into the right-of-way as per this section.
5-01.5.0   PLANT SIZE, LOCATION, AND SPACING
   Required plant characteristics, sizes, and standards for various landscape
applications are as provided below.
5.1   Size of Vegetation
   When vegetation is used to satisfy a screen standard, the size of the plant
material specified must be a minimum of five gallon container size and be of a
type that will maintain an opaque screen year round.
5.2   Screen Planting
   A.   Screen planting may be aligned, clustered, or unevenly spaced to
provide interest, as long as the plants provide a continuous and opaque screen,
at maturity.
   B.   When vegetation is proposed for screening purposes, an appropriate
width of planter area must be provided in addition to the width of the
landscape border. The required width of the screen is based on the growth
pattern of the plant material chosen. For example, if Nerium oleander is
specified, the minimum width that will have to be available is six feet, as
that plant grows as wide as it does high. (See
Figure 5-C, Plant Size, Location, and Spacing)
   C.   Vegetation used to meet the screening standards is not included in the
ground cover calculation as provided in Section
5-01.5.3, Calculation of Plant Growth Coverage.
5.3   Calculation of Plant Growth Coverage
   A.   For the calculation of plant growth coverage, two years’ growth is used
as a base for shrubs and ground covers. Ten years’ growth is used for trees.
   B.   If the standard is for a certain size area of landscaping or for a
purpose such as dust control, the plant materials used must be installed with
the appropriate spacing and cover more than 50% of the area with vegetation.
Applicant must indicate “on center” (o.c.) planting standards for all ground
cover.
5.4   Size of Trees
   Trees that are located in areas of required landscaping must be a minimum of
15-gallon container size. Palms must have a minimum trunk height of five feet
from soil line to the bottom of the crown .
5.5   Protection of Sidewalks
   Trees planted near sidewalks or curbs must be planted at a sufficient
distance from the structural improvement to prevent pavement upheaval or soil
settling. Where the distance is not available or where the design places the
trees closer to the improvement, suitable barriers to the root system to
mitigate pavement upheaval or soil settling must be installed with the
landscaping. If the trees are in the public right-of-way, the root barriers
must be approved by the City Engineer or designee.
5.6   Shrubs Not Used as Screen
   Shrubs in areas of required landscaping other than for opaque screening must
be a minimum of one gallon container size, with 20% of the required number to
be five gallon container size or larger.
5.7   Size of Ground Cover
   Ground cover in areas of required landscaping must be a minimum of one
gallon container size or in flats if the watering techniques allow.
5.8   Refuse Dumpsters and Loading Spaces
   Trees must be planted an appropriate distance from refuse dumpster locations
and loading spaces so that the tree canopy, at maturity, does not obstruct
service.
5.9   High Pollen-Producing Plants
   Use of high pollen-producing plants must be kept to a minimum on the site .
These plant materials, when used, should not be concentrated in any one
location. Pima County health ordinances regulating the use, maintenance, and
sale of specific plant species, such as bermuda grass, mulberry trees, and
olive trees, shall also apply in the City of Tucson.
5.10   Winter Planting Schedule
   Landscape designs for developments that are projected for construction and
occupancy during the winter months shall avoid using frost-sensitive vegetative
ground cover. If it cannot be avoided, planting schedules must be discussed
with the PDSD to establish conditions of occupancy.
5.11   Conflicts with Utilities and Solar Access
   Trees and shrubs must be selected and located so that, at maturity, they do
not interfere with existing on-site or off-site utility service lines or
utility easements or with solar access, as defined in Section
11.4.20 of the Unified Development Code, to an adjacent property (see
Figure 5-D, Conflicts with Utilities and Solar Access).
5-01.6.0   CRIME PREVENTION AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
   Vehicular and pedestrian safety factors from the following list must be
incorporated into all landscape designs:
6.1   The positioning, location, and type of plant material, screening, and
other landscape elements should allow for natural surveillance of the outdoor
spaces from within buildings, from outdoor locations on-site , and from
adjacent buildings, sites , and rights-of-way.
6.2   Landscaping and screening should complement efforts to define public,
semipublic, and private spaces.
6.3   Entrances to and exits from buildings or open spaces around buildings,
including pedestrian walkways, should be open and in view of the surrounding
neighboring or adjacent sites  in order to reduce opportunities for crime.
6.4   Curbs, sidewalks, and landscaped trails should be used to define public,
semipublic, and private areas.
6.5   Property owner/occupant areas of influence should be defined through the
use of design elements, such as walls, fences, changes in level  or grade ,
lights, color, or change in paving texture.
6.6   To allow maximum visibility and surveillance of the development,
screening should be used that is no higher than required by this section unless
high enough to create an effective barrier to entry.
6.7   In areas adjacent to doors and windows, applicants should select plant
material of such height to retain visibility of building openings from the
street or from other development (e.g., less than 30 inches or with a greater
than six foot space between the ground and the canopy).
6.8   Shrubs and ground cover located within four feet of the edge of a walkway
may not exceed 30 inches in height, except where other standards call for a
greater height. An effort should be made to avoid a design requiring a greater
height. Trees located less than 12 feet from the edge of a walkway must be
trimmed to a minimum six foot canopy height. (See
Figure 5-E, Pedestrian Safety Zone.)
6.9   Use of barrier plants (see
Figure 5-F, Security Plant Materials) in areas adjacent to walkways is
recommended with consideration for pedestrian safety in compliance with Section
5-01.8.0, Screening Safety Standards.
6.10   Unless adjacent to a pedestrian path, barrier plants must be planted
below and extending at least 12 inches beyond each side of windows. Plant
materials in this area may be no higher than the sill height of the window.
5-01.7.0   STANDARDS FOR TREES IN SIGHT VISIBILITY TRIANGLES
   Trees may be planted in sight visibility triangles provided that:
7.1   The trunk caliper, at maturity, does not exceed 12 inches in diameter;
7.2   The lowest branch of any tree is at least six feet above the grade of the
street or driveway, whichever is the determining factor in the sight visibility
triangle; and
7.3   Trees are not planted in a line that could result in a solid wall effect
when viewed at an angle.
5-01.8.0   SCREENING SAFETY STANDARDS
8.1   Vegetation, such as those with spines, thorns, or needles, that may
present hazards to pedestrians, bicycles, or vehicles must be planted a safe
distance from the outer branch tips to the edge of a walkway, bike lane  or
path, roadway, or parking area access lane (PAAL). The growing characteristics
of the vegetation must be taken into consideration when determining this
distance (see
Figure 5-I, Safety Standards).
8.2   Shrubs or ground cover planted adjacent to a walkway, driveway, bicycle
path, or street must be placed with the plant center at a distance equal to or
greater than one-half the normal width of the plant, at maturity.
8.3   Shrubs or ground cover that spreads must be kept pruned to prevent
encroachment upon walkways, bicycle paths, driveways, or streets.
8.4   Trees with the potential for overhanging a walkway, driveway, bicycle
path, parking space, or street must be of a type that, at maturity, provides a
canopy with an understory height clearance of eight feet for walkways and
bicycle paths, 12 feet for driveways and streets, and 15 feet for loading
spaces. The height clearance shall be maintained by pruning during the tree’s
active growth period or when necessary.
8.5   In addition to the sight visibility triangle, no planted area may create
a hazard by obstructing a driver’s view of oncoming pedestrians, bicyclists, or
vehicles.
5-01.9.0   MAINTENANCE
9.1   Plant Materials
   A.   Any plant material in areas of required landscaping that does not
survive must be replaced with an equivalent size and species within 30 days.
   B.   Plant material must be pruned as necessary to control size but not to
disrupt the natural growth pattern or characteristic form of the plant except
as necessary to achieve height clearance for visibility and pedestrian passage
or to achieve a continuous opaque hedge if required.
   C.   Clipping and pruning of the plant material are required to allow
maximum shading while preserving surveillance opportunities and preventing
obstructive overhang into walks, curb areas, drives, and line of sight
triangles as required by the Unified Development Code.
   D.   All dead or removed plant material must be replaced with plant material
acceptable under the standards of the xeriscape landscaping standards.
Replacement material must be a minimum 15- gallon size for trees and five
gallon size for shrubs.
   E.   Regular landscape maintenance shall ensure water efficiency and
include, but not be limited to, pruning, mulching, weeding, litter removal,
aerating and dethatching turf areas, and fertilizing nonnative plant materials,
as necessary.
9.2   Inert Materials
   A.   Exterior improvements, such as benches, walls, or ramadas, must be of
durable materials appropriate to the desert climate. Material with integral
coloring or stucco is preferred for seating fixtures and other permanent
improvements.
   B.   Inert materials used in the landscaping areas must be of a nature to
withstand the extremes of the desert climate and minimize heat gain or
reflected heat.
   C.   The inert materials must be replaced as needed due to displacement or
erosion .
9.3   Planting Areas
   A.   Inert materials must be used in inaccessible, narrow, or hard to
maintain sections of the planting areas.
   B.   Landscaped areas must be kept free of trash, weeds, debris, and dead
plant material and must be maintained in a clean and neat fashion.
   C.   Use of river rock is discouraged adjacent to building windows.
9.4   Landscape Removal
   A.   Substantial modifications, as determined by the PDSD Director, and/or
removal of plant materials or other landscape elements shall require review and
approval of a revised landscape plan by PDSD.
   B.   The removal or destruction of landscape material that has been
installed according to an approved landscape plan and not replaced constitutes
a violation of the UDC.
   C.   Minor modifications of the landscaping occurring as a result of routine
maintenance, necessary replacement of elements because of damage or disease, or
other causes is not subject to review by PDSD.
9.5   Screening and Wall Maintenance
   A.   Paint and stucco must be renewed on the surfaces of fences and walls as
needed.
   B.   Wooden slats in chain link fences must be replaced as needed to retain
the opacity of the screen.
   C.   Any screening device that has deteriorated to the point where it does
not serve as a screen must be replaced by the property owner. Vegetation used
to meet the screening standards may not be replaced with new vegetation after
two years past the installation. Replacement must be with another option for
screening, such as a fence or a wall, in order to achieve an immediate screen.
This standard does not apply to the occasional replacement of single plants
within a vegetative screen.
9.6   Irrigation System Maintenance
   A.   Irrigation systems must be maintained and replaced as necessary to
continue to conserve water. Detection and repair of leaky or broken pipes,
valves, and fittings and malfunctioning and/or misaligned heads, emitters, and
bubblers must be part of a regular maintenance program for the site .
   B.   Automatic irrigation controllers are recommended to be reset a minimum
of four times a year (spring, summer, fall, and winter) to adjust for plant
water requirements that vary according to the season.
   C.   Whenever possible, repair of irrigation equipment must be done with the
originally specified materials or their equivalent.
5-01.10.0   FIGURES
   
Figure 5-A:   Vehicle Use Area
   
Figure 5-B:   Vehicle Use Area
   
Figure 5-C:   Plant Size, Location, and Spacing
   
Figure 5-D:   Conflicts with Utilities and Solar Access
   
Figure 5-E:   Pedestrian Safety Zone
   
Figure 5-F:   Security Plant Materials
   
Figure 5-G:   Screening Standards
   
Figure 5-H:   Screening Standards - Variation for Walls
   
Figure 5-I:   Safety Standards
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3104.jpg]
Figure 5-A: Vehicle Use Area
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3106.jpg]
Figure 5-B: Vehicle Use Area
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3108.jpg]
Figure 5-C: Plant Size, Location, and Spacing
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3110.jpg]
Adjust the locations of trees in the border to allow access to existing solar
collectors and prevent conflicts with utility wires or easements.
Figure 5-D: Plant Size, Location, and Spacing
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3112.jpg]
Figure 5-E: Pedestrian Safety Zone
Security Plant Materials
                                                                         Height              Ground
Botanical Common Evergreen Deciduous Barrier Hedge Thorns Stickers Dense at       Tree Shrub Cover  Perennial
Name      Name                                                    Maturity                 
                                                                          
Security Plant Materials
                                                                                          Height              Ground
Botanical Name      Common Name   Evergreen Deciduous Barrier Hedge Thorns Stickers Dense at       Tree Shrub Cover  Perennial
                                                                                   Maturity                 
                                                                                           
Acacia species                             •       •           •    •            Varies   •  •
Agave - many                     •                 •           •                   Varies                     •
species
Aloe barbadensis    Aloe Vera     •                 •                  •            2'                         •
Aloe saponaria      African Aloe  •                 •                  •            12"                        •
Araucaria bidwillii Bunya-Bunya   •                 •                  •            80'      •
                    Tree
Asparagus falcatus  Sickle Thorn  •                               •                   12"                 •    •
                    Asparagus
Atriplex            Saltbush      •                 •                  •      •   8'            •
lentiformis
Bambusa - many      Bamboo        •                         •                   •   10'-15'                    •
species
Bougainvillea                              •       •                                 8'-10'        •
‘Barbara Karst’
Bougainvillea -     Bush                    •               •                         3'-4'         •
Bush Var.           Bougainvillea
Caesalpinia         Red Bird of             •       •           •                   6'       •  •
pulcherrima         Paradise
Carissa grandiflora Natal Plum -  •                 •           •             •   2'-6'         •
                    Many Var.
Celtis pallida      Spiny                   •       •           •             •   8'-10'   •  •
                    Hackberry
Chamaerops humilis  Med. Fan Palm •                 •     •                   •   6'-10'                     •
Cortaderia selloana Pampas Grass  •                 •                           •   10'                        •
Cotoneaster         Silverleaf    •                         •                         6'-10'        •
pannosus            Cotoneaster
Dasylirion wheeleri Sotol         •                 •                  •            5'                         •
Euphorbia mili      Crown of      •                 •           •                   7'-8'                      •
                    Thorns
Feijoa sellowiana   Pineapple     •                         •                   •   6'-15'        •
                    Guava
Ferocactus species  Barrel Cactus •                               •                   2'                         •
Fouquieria          Ocotillo      •                 •           •                   12'                        •
splendens
Ilex cornuta        Burford’s   •                 •     •          •            6'            •
‘Burfordii’     Holly
Jasminum mesnyi     Primrose      •                         •                   •   6'-8'         •
                    Jasmine
Juniperus species   Juniper       •                         •          •      •   Varies        •
Leucophyllum        Texas Ranger  •                         •                   •   6'-8'         •
frutescens
Ligustrum UDCidum   Privet        •                         •                   •   10'-30'  •  •
Mahonia aquifolium  Oregon Grape  •                         •          •      •   6'            •
Nerium oleander     Oleander      •                         •                   •   10'-15'       •
Opuntia species     Prickly Pear; •                 •                  •            Varies                     •
                    Cholla
Photinia fraseri    Photinia      •                         •                         10'           •
Pithecellobium      Texas Ebony             •       •           •                   20'      •  •
flexicaule
Punica granatum     Pomegranate             •               •                         12'-20'  •  •
Pyracantha          Firethorn     •                 •           •                   8'-10'        •
‘Rosedale’
Pyracantha ‘Santa Firethorn     •                 •           •                   2'-3'         •
Cruz’
Rosa                Rose                    •       •           •                   Varies        •          •
Rosa banksiae       Lady Bank’s •                 •           •             •   Varies        •
                    Rose
Tamarix aphylla     Tamarisk      •                         •                   •   10'-30'  •  •
Vauquelinia         Arizona       •                         •                   •   8'            •
californica         Rosewood
Viburnum suspensum  Viburnum      •                         •                         6'-8'         •
Xylosma congestum   Xylosma       •                         •                   •   8'-15'   •  •
Yucca aloifolia     Spanish       •                 •                  •            5'-7'                      •
                    Bayonnet
Yucca brevifolia    Joshua Tree   •                 •                  •            15'                        •
Yucca whipplei      Our Lord’s  •                 •                  •            2'-4'                      •
                    Candle
 
Figure 5-F: Security Plant Materials
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3114.jpg]
Figure 5-G: Screening Standards
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3116.jpg]
Figure 5-H: Screening Standards - Variations for Walls
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3118.jpg]
Figure 5-I: Safety Standards
SECTION 5-02.0.0: LANDSCAPE PLANT MATERIALS
Section
5-02.1.0   Purpose
5-02.2.0   Applicability
5-02.3.0   Types of Plant Material
5-02.4.0   Seeding Programs
5-02.5.0   Plant/Seed Lists
5-02.6.0   Exhibit
5-02.1.0   PURPOSE
   This standard has been prepared for the purpose of establishing plant and
seed lists for use with various City of Tucson regulations that either require
or regulate landscaping.
5-02.2.0   APPLICABILITY
   This standard applies on development projects, including repair and
infrastructure installation, when city regulations mandate the use of drought
tolerant or native plant and seed material.
5-02.3.0   TYPES OF PLANT MATERIAL
   Most projects, with some exceptions, are required to be landscaped with
either native vegetation or drought tolerant vegetation. The following
subsections describe how vegetation is selected to comply with those
requirements. For information on any exceptions, refer to the individual
ordinance requiring or regulating the landscaping.
3.1   Native Vegetation
   There are regulations in the UDC, such as the Scenic Corridor Zone (SCZ) and
the Environmental Resource Zone (ERZ), where native vegetation is required to
be retained or where the property is required to be revegetated with native
plant material. In these two zones or in any other city regulation listing a
requirement for native vegetation or revegetation, the requirement is to be
complied with as discussed below.
   Native vegetation is defined as vegetation indigenous to the site . Native
vegetation, however, varies greatly in different areas of the Tucson basin due
to changes in topographical elevation, soils, and availability of moisture. Due
to this variation of native plant material, a general native plant list
applicable to an individual site within the region cannot be defined.
   Therefore, when native vegetation is required on a project, the landscape
plans submitted for review must include a comprehensive list of native
vegetation that exists on the site and in the immediate areas surrounding the
site . Selection of plant material for use on the project will be from that
comprehensive list.
3.2   Native Seeds
   The type of native vegetation varies greatly within the Tucson basin. To
determine which seeds to use on a project when native seeds are required, a
comprehensive list of native plants must be submitted.
   A base set of native seed species is contained in Exhibit I of this
standard. This base set is not inclusive of all native plant material. Seeds
from that list may be chosen for use on a project requiring native seeds, if
the plant is found on the comprehensive native plant list assembled for the
property.
   If the project does not require native seeds but the landscape design calls
for the use of seeds native to the site or region, a comprehensive list in
accordance with Section
5-02.3.1, may be submitted for determination as to whether or not they are
native. As an alternative (on projects not requiring native seeds), seed
selection may be made from Exhibit I, Native Seeds. If the proposed seed is not
on the comprehensive list, Exhibit I, nor the Arizona Department of Water
Resources (ADWR) Low Water Use/Drought Tolerant Plant List for the Tucson
Active Management Area, it may be used if:
   A.   The seed species is drought tolerant and a seed supplier certification
of drought tolerancy is submitted;
   B.   The city can certify through a third party the seed species’ drought
tolerancy;
   C.   The proposed seed species is not for landscaping public right-of-way,
unless it is to comply with SCZ or ERZ requirements; and,
   D.   The seed species has not been considered by the Arizona Department of
Water Resources (ADWR) and rejected.
3.3   Drought Tolerant Vegetation
   When drought tolerant vegetation is required by a city regulation, such as
Section
7.6, Landscaping and Screening Regulations, of the UDC, plant selection is from
the ADWR Low Water Use/Drought Tolerant Plant List.
3.4   Drought Tolerant Seeds
   Various city landscaping regulations allow the use of seeds within landscape
areas. For example, the landscaping and screening regulations allow the use of
seeds as a ground cover in lieu of decomposed granite (DG) in such areas as
under canopy trees. However, seeds cannot be used to comply with the 50%
vegetative coverage area requirements of the street landscape border.
   In situations where the use of seeds is permitted, selection of seed
material will be from plants on the ADWR Low Water Use/Drought Tolerant Plant
List. Also, if the area that is to be reseeded is not within the public right-
of-way, seed selection may be in accordance with Section
5-02.3.2, Native Seeds.
   All plant material used within the public right-of-way is to be from the
ADWR Low Water Use/Drought Tolerant Plant List regardless of whether it is
plant or seed material. The only exceptions to this are in the application of
native vegetation requirements of the SCZ and the ERZ sections of the UDC.
(Am. Admin. Directive, 11/6/2013)
5-02.4.0   SEEDING PROGRAMS
   In projects where seeding is required or is being utilized to meet a
landscaping requirement, the items to address, in addition to seed selection,
are irrigation requirements, site preparation, and establishment guarantee.
Site -specific situations will be addressed on a case-by-case basis. General
guidelines are provided in this standard; however, alternatives may be proposed
to the staff reviewing the landscape plans.
4.1   Site Preparation
   In order to attain the maximum benefit from the seeded materials, it is
necessary to till the soil prior to seeding. The method and use of fertilizers,
seeding, mulching, tackifiers, etc., will vary per site -specific situations.
The applicant is expected to do whatever is necessary to prepare the site to
guarantee plant establishment to the satisfaction of the city.
4.2   Irrigation
   The sites that will require revegetation will vary considerably. Some sites
with little slope and with soil textures and structures conducive to capturing
rainfall or capable of being modified to capture rainfall can be revegetated on
rainfall alone. Some sites may require short-term irrigation to achieve plant
establishment. The applicant will not be required by the city to irrigate but
will, however, be responsible for successful establishment of vegetation using
the appropriate seeding/irrigation method.
4.3   Plant Establishment Guarantee
   A stand of vegetation shall be considered established when:
   A minimum of one perennial seeded species per square foot has rooted,
developed true leaves, and is in a state of continual positive growth, and the
interspace area between perennial species has a minimum of one annual or
perennial plant in any stage of development or growth other than seed.
5-02.5.0   PLANT/SEED LISTS
5.1   Origin of Plant/Seed Lists
   A.   Exhibit I, Native Seed List, was derived from the Low Water Use/Drought
Tolerant Plant List as known native vegetation. The list is not inclusive of
all native vegetation. For alternative selections, refer to Section
5-02.3.2, Native Seeds.
   The seed list is established as a guide on how to mix the various types of
seeds to provide a varying mix of native plant growth on the site giving it a
more natural appearance. The pounds per acre listing is a guide for use by the
designer to achieve a minimum growth pattern to the seeded area. Specific rates
are based on the seeds that are used in the mix. The seed mix is to be
certified by the seed supplier as to the growth coverage projected.
   B.   The ADWR Low Water Use/Drought Tolerant Plant List is prepared for use
within the Tucson Active Management Area (TAMA) by the ADWR.
5.2   Modification of Plant Selection
   In order to use plants not listed in ADWR Low Water Use/Drought Tolerant
Plant List, the plants are to be approved through the following process.
   A.   Any person seeking to add or delete a plant or plants from the low
water use plant list may submit an application for modification of the list at
any time to the Director of the ADWR. The application is made on a form
prescribed and furnished by the Director of the ADWR.
   B.   The ADWR Director reviews each request for modification of the low
water use plant list. The Director may request additional information from the
applicant and may seek information from other sources as may be necessary to
determine whether the list should be modified.
   C.   If the addition of a plant to the low water use plant list is approved,
the ADWR Director will place the plant on a supplemental list as an addendum to
the low water use plant list. The supplemental list shall be available upon
request from the ADWR.
   D.   If the ADWR Director approves the deletion of a plant from the Low
Water Use/Drought Tolerant Plant List, the deletion from the list will be
issued with the annual modified review plant list.
   E.   The ADWR Director conducts an annual review of the low water use plant
list and issues a modified plant list. As a result of the review, the Director
may add or delete plants from the list.
5.3   Updates of Plant Lists
   The plant and seed lists will be updated as necessary to provide the most
current plant list based on Section
5-02.5.2.E.
5-02.6.0   EXHIBIT
   Exhibit I - Native Seed List
EXHIBIT I: NATIVE SEED LIST
SPECIES
Botanical Name                  Common Name                 PLS* Rate lbs/acre
Aristida purpurea (P, W)        Purple Three-Awn            2.0
Plantago insularis (A, C)       Indian Wheat                3.0
Senna covesii (P, W)            Desert Senna                2.0
Sphaeralcea ambigua (P, C/W)    Desert Globe-Mallow         1.0
Sporobolus cryptandrus (P, W)   Sand Dropseed               1.0
Plus choose a minimum of three (3) species from the following six:
Acacia constricta (P, W)        Whitethorn Acacia, Mescat   2.0
Ambrosia (Franseria) deltoidea  Triangle-Leaf Bursage       4.0
(P, C)
Atriplex canescens (P, C)       Four-Wing Saltbush          3.0
Encelia farinosa (P, C/W)       Brittlebush                 1.5
Haplopappus (Ericameria)        Turpentine Bush             1.0
laricifolius (P, C/W)
Larrea tridentata (divaricata)  Creosote Bush, Greasewood   6.0
(P, W)
Optional recommended species:
Acacia greggii (P, W)           Cat’s Claw Acacia         2.0-3.0
Atriplex lentiformis (P, C)     Quail Bush                  1.0-2.0
Atriplex polycarpa (P, C)       Desert Saltbush             1.0-3.0
Baileya multiradiata (P, C/W)   Desert Marigold             1.0-2.0
Bouteloua curtipendula (P, W)   Sideoats Grama              2.0
Parkinsonia floridum (P, W)     Blue Palo Verde             2.0-3.0
Parkinsonia microphyllum (P, W) Littleleaf or Foothill Palo 2.0-3.0
                                Verde
Eragrostis intermedia (P, W)    Plains Lovegrass            1.0
Eschscholtzia mexicana (A, C)   Mexican Gold Poppy          1.0-3.0
Leptochloa dubia (P, W)         Green Sprangle-Top          1.0
Phacelia campanularia (A, C)    Desert Canterbury Bells     1.0-2.0
Prosopis velutina (P, W)        Velvet Mesquite             1.0-2.0
Psilostrophe cooperi (P, C/W)   Paper Flower                1.0-2.0
Setaria macrostachya (P, W)     Plains Bristle Grass        2.0
*PLS = Pure Live Seed
KEY: A = Annual; P = Perennial; C = Germinates and thrives in the cool season;
W = Germinates and thrives in the warm season; C/W = Germinates and thrives in
cool/warm seasons.
NOTE: The cool season in Tucson runs September through March, and the warm
season is from March through October. There is an overlap of seasons.
 
SECTION 5-03.0.0: PROTECTED NATIVE PLANT LIST
Section
5-03.1.0   Purpose
5-03.2.0   Protected Native Plant List
5-03.1.0   PURPOSE
   This standard has been prepared for the purpose of establishing the
protected native plant list for use with various City of Tucson regulations, in
particular Section
7.7, Native Plant Preservation, of the UDC, that either require or regulate
native plants.
5-03.2.0   PROTECTED NATIVE PLANT LIST
ALL CACTI
Common Name                    Latin Name
Compass Barrel                 Ferocactus acanthodes
Crested or Fan-top Saguaro     Carnegiea gigantea ‘Crested’
Desert Night-blooming Cereus   Peniocereus greggi
Fishhook Barrel                Ferocactus wislezenii
Needle-spined Pineapple Cactus Echinomastus erectrocentrus var. erectrocentrus
*Pima Pineapple Cactus         *Coryphantha scheeri var. robustipina
Saguaro                        Carnegiea gigantea
TREES OF A MINIMUM SIZE OF FOUR-INCH CALIPER
Common Name Latin Name
TREES OF A MINIMUM SIZE OF FOUR-INCH CALIPER
Common Name          Latin Name
Arizona Ash          Fraxinus velutina var. velutina or Fraxinus pennsyvanica
                     spp. velutina
Arizona Black Walnut Juglans major
Arizona Sycamore     Platanus racemosa Nutt. var. wrightii
Blue Palo Verde      Cercidium floridum
Catclaw Acacia       Acacia greggii var. arizonica
Desert Elderberry    Sambucus mexicana
Desert Hackberry     Celtis pallida
Desert Willow        Chilopsis linearis
Foothills Palo Verde Cercidium microphyllum
Fremont Cottonwood   Populus fremontii sp. fremontii
Goodding Willow      Salix gooddingii
Ironwood             Olneya tesota
Net Leaf Hackberry   Celtis reticulata
Screwbean Mesquite   Prosopis pubescens
Western Soapberry    Sapindus saponaria var. drummondii
Whitethorn Acacia    Acacia constricta
Velvet Mesquite      Prosopis velutina
 
* Denotes plants listed as Endangered or Threatened under the Federal
Endangered Species Act (ESA) as of March 24, 1997. Any plants designated by the
ESA, as amended, shall be subject to the Section
7.7.3, Applicability (of the Native Plant Preservation ordinance), of the UDC.
SHRUBS OF A MINIMUM SIZE OF THREE FEET IN HEIGHT
Common Name       Latin Name
Catclaw Acacia    Acacia greggii var. arizonica
Desert Hackberry  Celtis pallida
Desert Willow     Chilopsis linearis
Greythorn         Zizyphus obtusifolia var. canescens
Kearney Condalia  Condalia warnockii var. kearneyana
Whitethorn Acacia Acacia constricta
 
SUCCULENTS OF A MINIMUM SIZE OF TWO FEET IN HEIGHT
Common Name    Latin Name
Ocotillo       Fouquieria splendens
Soaptree Yucca Yucca elata
 
SECTION 6: MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY AND DISPENSARY OFF-SITE CULTIVATION
USES - REQUIRED SETBACK FROM CERTAIN PARKS
SECTION 6-01.0.0: MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY AND DISPENSARY OFF-SITE
CULTIVATION USES - REQUIRED SETBACK FROM CERTAIN PARKS
   In accordance with Sections
4.9.10.E.1.k and
4.9.10.E.2.f of the Unified Development Code, Medical Marijuana Dispensary and
Medical Marijuana Dispensary Off-Site Cultivation Location Uses, are required
to be setback a minimum of 1,000 feet from the following public parks (Note:
the table is organized into the following categories: Parks - General; School
Ground Parks; and, Natural Resources and Other Parks):
Name Address
Parks - General
Name                                   Address
Parks - General
Alvernon Park                          3900 E. 3rd St.
20/30 Park                             5300 E. 7th St.
Abraham Lincoln Park                   8280 E. Escalante Rd.
Balboa Heights Park                    2526 N. Castro Av.
Brandi Fenton Memorial Park            3482 E. River Road
Bravo Park                             4595 S. Mountain Av.
Case Park                              9851 E. Kenyon Dr.
Catalina Park                          900 N. 4th Av.
Cherokee Avenue Park                   900 N. Cherokee Av.
Cherry Avenue Park                     5085 S. Cherry Av.
Children’s Memorial Park             4851 N. 15th Place
Christopher Columbus Park              4600 N. Silverbell Rd.
Conner Park                            2200 E. Glenn St.
Country Club Annex Park                3300 E. Aviation Hy.
David G. Herrera and Ramon Quiroz Park 600 W. St. Mary’s Rd.
De Anza Park                           1000 N. Stone Av.
Desert Aire Park                       600 S. Beverly Bl.
Desert Shadows Park                    Greenway Dr. & Ponderosa Pl.
Eastmoor Park                          2500 E. Aviation Hy.
El Presidio Plaza Park                 160 W. Alameda St.
El Pueblo Park                         101 W. Irvington Rd.
El Tiradito Wishing Shrine             400 S. Main Av.
Escalante Park                         6900 E. Nicaragua Dr.
Estevan Park                           1000 N. Main Av.
Fort Lowell Park                       2900 N. Craycroft Rd.
Francisco Elias Esquer Park            1331 N. 4th Av.
Freedom Park                           5000 E. 29th St.
Garden of Gethsemane                   602 W. Congress St.
Gene C. Reid Park                      900 S. Randolph Wy
Golf Links Sports Complex              2400 S. Craycroft Rd.
Greasewood Park                        1075 N. Greasewood Rd.
Groves Park                            7400 E. Juniper Dr.
Harold Bell Wright Park                Corinth & Shepherd Hills Dr.
Harriet Johnson Park                   6100 E. 25th St.
Himmel Park                            1000 N. Tucson Bl.
Hoffman Park                           4800 E. Cecelia St.
Houghton Park                          5600 S. Houghton Rd.
Iron Horse Park                        75 N. 1st Av.
Jacinto Park                           2600 N. 15th Av.
Jacobs Park                            3300 N. Fairview Av.
James Thomas Park                      3200 S. Forgeus Av.
Jardin de Cesar Chavez Park            E. 18th St. & 6th Av.
Jesse Owens Park                       400 S. Sarnoff Dr.
Joaquin Murrieta Park                  1400 N. Silverbell Rd.
John F. Kennedy Park                   Ajo Way & Mission Rd.
Juhan Park                             1770 W. Copper St.
La Madera Park                         2700 E. La Madera Dr.
Lakeside (Charles Ford) Park           8300 E. Stella Rd.
Limberlost Family Park                 4255 N. 4th Av.
Linden Park                            300 S. Desert Av.
Mansfield Park                         2000 N. 4th Av.
Manuel Herrera Jr. Park                5901 S. Fiesta Av.
Manuel Valenzuela Alvarez Park         1945 N. Calle Central
Mariposa Park                          310 E. Aviation Dr.
McCormick Park                         2950 N. Columbus Bl.
Menlo Park                             300 N. Grande Av.
Mesa Village Park                      5700 E. 18th St.
Michael Perry Park                     8700 E. Arbor St.
Military Plaza Park                    221 S. 6th Av.
Miracle Mile Manor Park                850 W. Grant Rd.
Mirasol Park                           1100 E. Silverlake Rd.
Mission Manor Park                     6100 S. 12th Av.
Mitchell Park                          1100 E. Mitchell St.
Morris K. Udall Park                   7290 E. Tanque Verde Rd.
North Central Park                     3861 N. Cactus Bl.
Oaktree Park                           5433 S. Oaktree Dr.
Ormsby Park                            24th St. & Verdugo Av.
Palo Verde Park                        425 S. Mann Av.
Parkview Park                          3700 E. 24th St.
Pinecrest Park                         4800 E. Fairmount St.
Pueblo Gardens Park                    2500 E. 36th St.
Purple Heart Park                      10050 E. Rita Rd.
Riverview Park                         1600 N. Yavapai St.
Rodeo Grounds                          4825 S. 6th Av.
Rodeo Wash Park                        Michigan & 9th Av.
Rolling Hills Park                     8900 E. 29th St.
Rudy Garcia Park                       5001 S. Nogales Hy
San Augustine Park                     119 W. Broadway Bl
San Juan Park                          1665 S. La Cholla Bl
Santa Cruz River Park                  West of Interstate 10
Santa Rita Park                        401 E. 22nd St.
Santa Rosa Park                        1085 S. 10th Av.
Sears Park                             5900 E. 14th St.
Seminole Park                          600 N. Seminole Av.
Sentinel Peak Park                     1000 S. Sentinel Peak Rd.
Silverlake Park                        1575 E. 36th St.
Stefan Gollob Park                     401 S. Prudence Rd.
Street Scene Park                      39th St. & Euclid Av.
Sunnyside Park                         5811 S. Del Moral Bl.
Sunset Park                            255 W. Alameda St.
Swan Park                              1700 S. Swan Rd.
Swanway Park                           4800 E. 1st St.
Tahoe Park                             2000 E. Edison St.
Tierra del Sol Park                    6700 E. Calle Marta
Toumey Park                            4500 E. Eastland St.
Valle Alegre Park                      13031 E. Redington Rd.
Veinte de Agosto Park                  Broadway Bl. & Church Av.
Verdugo Park                           19th St. & Verdugo Av.
Villa Serena Park                      5900 E. Calle Serena
Vista del Prado Park                   6900 E. Stella Rd.
Vista del Pueblo Park                  1800 W. San Marcos Bl.
Vista del Rio Park                     7575 E. Desert Arbor St.
Wilshire Heights Park                  5500 E. 14th St.
School Ground Parks
Amphi Neighborhood Park                510 E. Navajo Rd.
Amphitheater High School               125 W. Yavapai Rd.
Amphitheater Middle School             315 E. Prince Rd.
Blenman Elementary School              1695 N. Country Club Rd.
Booth-Fickett Middle School            7240 E. Calle Arturo
Catalina High School                   3645 E. Pima St.
Cholla High School                     2001 W. 22nd St.
Desert Vista District Park             6091 W. Calle Santa Cruz
Doolen Middle School                   2400 N. Country Club Rd.
Dunbar School Park                     325 W. 2nd St.
E.C. Nash Elementary School            515 W. Kelso St.
Flowing Wells High School              3725 N. Flowing Wells Rd.
Hudlow Elementary School               502 N. Caribe Av.
Jefferson Park Elementary School       1701 E. Seneca St.
John B. Wright Elementary School       4311 E. Linden St.
Keeling Desert Park                    245 E. Glenn St.
Magee Middle School                    8300 E. Speedway Bl.
Manzo Elementary School                1301 W. Ontario St.
Palo Verde High School                 1302 S. Avenida Vega
Pima Community College (West)          2202 W. Anklam Rd.
Richey Elementary School               2209 N. 15th Av.
Rincon High School                     422 N. Arcadia Av.
Rollin Gridley Middle School           350 S. Harrison Rd.
Sahuaro High School                    545 N. Camino Seco
Santa Rita High School                 3951 S. Pantano Rd.
Sunnyside High School                  1725 E. Bilby Rd.
Townsend Middle School                 2120 N. Beverly Bl.
Utterback Middle School                3233 S. Pinal Vista
Wakefield Middle School                101 W. 44th St.
Natural Resources and Other Parks
Miramonte Natural Resources Park       701 N. Richey Bl.
Rio Vista Natural Resources Park       3974 N. Tucson Bl.
Rodeo Wash Park II                     621 W. Columbia St.
San Gabriel Park                       4056 E. Montecito St.
Sixth Avenue Commemorative Pet Park    2075 N. 6th Av.
 
SECTION 7: PEDESTRIAN ACCESS
SECTION 7-01.0.0: PEDESTRIAN ACCESS
Section
7-01.1.0   Purpose
7-01.2.0   Applicability
7-01.3.0   Pedestrian Circulation Path Required
7-01.4.0   Location and Design Standards
7-01.9.0   Figures
7-01.1.0   PURPOSE
   The purpose of this Section is to require reasonable improvements for
pedestrian facilities to and within places of public accommodation, to
transportation systems, and to housing; increase public safety by lessening the
conflict between vehicular and pedestrian activities; aid in improving air
quality in the City of Tucson by providing for one pedestrian mode of alternate
travel; and provide design standards for pedestrian circulation paths.
7-01.2.0   APPLICABILITY
   The provisions apply to the following:
   A.   All new uses of land or structures;
   B.   All existing uses of land or structures legally existing as of
September 24, 1990, which are expanded in lot coverage, floor area, number of
parking spaces, or seating capacity, as follows:
      1.   If the expansion is less than 25%, these provisions apply only to
the proposed expansion. The remainder of the use or structure is governed by
the provision in force at the time of initial approval for the use or
structure.
      2.   If the expansion is 25% or more, these provisions apply to the
existing use or structure, as well as the expansion.
      3.   All expansions which occur after the adoption of this ordinance are
cumulated in determining the 25% expansion. After the use of the land or
structure is brought into conformance with the provisions of this Section,
additional changes to the existing use of the land or structure will commence
cumulating over time as of the date the existing use of the land or structure
is brought into conformance.
      4.   Nothing contained in this Section affects existing property or the
right to its continued use for the purpose legally used at the time these
regulations become effective, nor do these regulations affect any reasonable
repairs to, or alterations of, buildings or property used for such existing
purposes or require compliance by existing structures or facilities where not
otherwise required by A.R.S. Title 34.
   C.   Other regulations enforceable by the city.
7-01.3.0   PEDESTRIAN CIRCULATION PATH REQUIRED
3.1   Pedestrian circulation paths located within any street, whether public or
private, are regulated by Section
10-01.0.0, Street Technical Standard. (See Figure 7-A for a typical cross-
section.)
3.2   Pedestrian circulation paths designed for barrier-free accessibility for
the physically disabled and located within any development are regulated by the
adopted building codes.
3.3   Within all development, a continuous pedestrian circulation path is
required as follows:
   A.   This path must connect all public access areas of the development and
the pedestrian circulation path located in any adjacent streets.
   B.   The areas within the development which must be connected include, but
are not limited to, all buildings, all bicycle and vehicle parking areas, all
recreation areas, all dumpster areas, and all other common use areas.
   Exceptions:
      1.   Areas within the development which are not required to be connected
to the pedestrian circulation path are those which will be used only for
maintenance or for nonpublic truck use, such as truck loading spaces.
      2.   Portions of certain Land Use Classes which by their nature will not
be used for public pedestrian access, such as industrial uses, commercial
storage uses, wholesale uses, contractor yards, or similar uses, are not
required to have sidewalks constructed in conformance with this standard,
provided adequate pedestrian refuge areas are provided.
   C.   Within this pedestrian circulation path, an accessible route is also
required in compliance with the city’s adopted building codes.
(Am. Admin. Directive, 11/6/2013)
7-01.4.0   LOCATION AND DESIGN STANDARDS
4.1   Location Standards
   Sidewalks must meet the following locational requirements:
   A.   At least one sidewalk is required to a project from each street on
which the project has frontage, unless there is no vehicular access from a
street because of a physical barrier, such as a drainageway or an unbroken
security barrier (e.g., a wall or fence). The sidewalk should be located to
minimize any conflict with vehicular access to the project;
   B.   A sidewalk is required adjacent and parallel to any access lane or PAAL
on the side where buildings are located (See
Figure 1);
   C.   A sidewalk is required adjacent to any parking space accessed by a PAAL
where the space is located on the same side of the PAAL as any building and no
other parking spaces or PAALs intervene (See
Figure 2);
   D.   Sidewalks must connect all areas of the development and must also
connect to the pedestrian circulation path located along any adjacent street;
   E.   Sidewalks shall be flood free for all storm discharges of up to and
including a ten-year frequency flood event. Drainage flowing across all
pedestrian circulation paths shall be conveyed under the path for up and
including the ten-year frequency flood events, except at street intersections,
pedestrian crossings, and PAAL pedestrian crossings;
   F.   Sidewalks or pedestrian refuge areas cannot be located between any
motor vehicle parking space and the PAAL providing access to that space;
   G.   Sidewalks or crosswalks cannot cross any type of stacking areas for
drive-through lanes; and,
   H.   In Land Use Classes where the public does not have access to certain
portions of the site , a four- foot wide pedestrian refuge area must be
maintained between any enclosed structure and a PAAL (See
Figure 6).
4.2   Physical Separation from Travel Lane Standards
   A.   Sidewalks associated with PAALs must be physically separated from any
vehicular travel lane by means of curbing, grade separation (minimum six
inches), barriers, railings, or other means, except at designated crosswalks;
   B.   When bollards or architectural features are used to provide physical
separation, the maximum separation between the barriers is five feet clear (See
Figure 5); and,
   C.   Barriers must be permanently affixed to the sidewalk by pinning, set in
foundations, etc. or when the use of architectural features is proposed such as
planters, the containers must be of sufficient weight and size to prevent the
removal of such features.
4.3   Sidewalk Specifications
   A.   Width
   All sidewalks must be a minimum of four feet wide and installed to avoid any
obstruction which decreases the minimum width to less than four feet (See
Figure 3);
   B.   Vertical Clearance
   All sidewalks must have a minimum unobstructed vertical clearance of 84
inches (See
Figure 4);
   C.   Composition
   Sidewalks must be constructed of:
      1.   Portland cement concrete, four inches thick, with a smooth or broom-
finish;
      2.   Brick Pavers set in a bed of cement;
      3.   Resin Pavement Mixture that complies or is equivalent to ASTM D
4123;
      4.   Any surfaces equivalent in smoothness, hardness, and durability;
      5.   Asphalt or asphaltic concrete may be used only for jogging paths,
nature trails which are part of an accessible route, and pedestrian refuge
areas which are not required to be connected to the pedestrian circulation
path, as listed in Section 7-01.3.3.B; or,
      6.   Compacted decomposed granite or similar material cannot be used for
construction of a required sidewalk system that is part of the required
accessible route or pedestrian circulation path.
   D.   Slope
   Slopes shall comply with the accessibility requirements in accordance with
the city’s adopted Building Code.
   E.   Drainage
   At any point where a ten-year frequency flood discharge is proposed to cross
a sidewalk or pedestrian access, the sidewalk/access shall be designed and
constructed to convey up to and including the ten-year frequency flood flows
under the sidewalk/access.
7-01.9.0   FIGURES
   
Figure 1: Sidewalk Location - One Site of Access Lane or PAAL
   
Figure 2: Sidewalk Location - Adjacent to Parking
   
Figure 3: Sidewalk Obstruction Clearance
   
Figure 4: Sidewalk Height Clearance
   
Figure 5: Physical Separation from a Travel Lane
   
Figure 6: Pedestrian Refuge Area
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3120.jpg]
Figure 1: Sidewalk Location - One Side of Access lane or PAAL
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3122.jpg]
Figure 2: Sidewalk Location Adjacent to Parking
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3124.jpg]
Figure 3: Sidewalk Obstruction Clearance
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3126.jpg]
Figure 4: Sidewalk Height Clearance
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3128.jpg]
Figure 5: Physical Separation from Travel Lane
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3130.jpg]
Figure 6: Pedestrian Refuge Area
SECTION 8: SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLE DISPOSAL, COLLECTION, AND STORAGE
SECTION 8.01.0.0: SOLID WASTE COLLECTION AND RECYCLE DISPOSAL, COLLECTION, AND
STORAGE
Section
8-01.1.0   Purpose
8-01.2.0   Definitions
8-01.3.0   Applicability
8-01.4.0   All Development
8-01.5.0   Multi-family, Commercial, and Industrial Development
8-01.6.0   Single-family Residential Development
8-01.7.0   Special Services
8-01.8.0   Waste Stream Calculation Guidelines
8-01.9.0   Figures
8-01.1.0   PURPOSE
   The following Standards have been established for solid waste and recycle
materials collection, storage, and disposal. The standards shall serve as
guidelines for safe and efficient solid waste and recycling service.
   To enhance the City of Tucson appearance, by implementing standards for the
collection and storage of solid waste and recycle containers.
   Establish dimensional requirements for container enclosures, accessibility
and maneuvering space for collection vehicles.
   To promote the recycling of materials generated by the city residential,
commercial, and industrial communities.
8-01.2.0   DEFINITIONS
   Definitions for words used in this standard are found below, in the Tucson
City Code (TCC) Chapter 15, in the Technical Standards Glossary, or in Article
11 of the Unified Development Code (UDC).
   APC, Automated Plastic Containers
   ASL, Automated Side Loading service vehicle
   PAAL, Parking Area Access Lane
   CC&R, Covenants, Conditions, and Restrictions
   ES, Environmental Services
8-01.3.0   APPLICABILITY
   These Standards apply to all new construction within the city including the
expansion of existing sites as specified by Section
3.4.3.E, Expansions, of the UDC.
8-01.4.0   ALL DEVELOPMENT
   A.   Details from this standard shall be shown on the plan graphically and
by written notes.
   B.   A note specifying the anticipated method of collection and frequency
based on the calculated tonnage from Table 1 for the intended use.
   C.   All solid waste and recycle metal containers storage areas shall be
screened from public view, and from adjacent developments.
   D.   APCs shall be allowed for solid waste and recycle collection for
volumes not greater than 190 gallons per week, 95 gallons for solid waste and
95 gallons for recycle. Metal container service will be required when the waste
stream calculation exceeds 190 gallons per week.
   E.   Solid waste and recycle container enclosures built into property walls
must comply with horizontal and vertical clearances as stated in this technical
standard.
   F.   Properties without sufficient space for on-site collection and storage
of solid waste and recycle containers shall be evaluated for service on a case
by case basis. Examples of enclosures for metal containers are shown in the
Exhibits and Figures of Section
8-01.9.0, List of Exhibits and Figures.
   G.   Use of APCs for multi-family, commercial, or industrial development
requires prior approval from ES.
   H.   Each residential development as defined in Tucson Code Chapter 15,
Environmental Services Department, require on-site  solid waste and recycle
collection services, must contact ES to establish services.
   I.   Off-street parking may be reduced for existing development when solid
waste and recycle enclosures are provided per Section
7.4.5.E.8, Reduction Based on Providing Trash and Recycling Enclosures.
8-01.5.0   MULTI-FAMILY, COMMERCIAL, AND INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT
5.1   General
   A.   New projects and the remodeling of existing sites (including mobile
home parks) consisting of six to 24 units shall provide centralized on-site
solid waste and recycle collection service access within the tract. Utilization
of individual containers (APCs) for six or more new dwelling units requires
approval by ES on a case by case evaluation.
   B.   All containers require enclosures with gates. Containers shall be
stored in their enclosure when not being serviced and containers must be leak
proof.
   C.   The locations of walls, fences, hedges, or landscaped buffer areas that
are designed to reduce noise and enhance the aesthetics at the point of the
solid waste and recycle materials collection shall be shown on the plan.
   D.   Where a development is intending to provide centralized storage and
collection to serve multiple buildings, tenants, or businesses, a general note
must be included within the plan stating “A single property owner, property
management company, or home owners association (HOA), will be responsible for
the management and maintenance of the solid waste collection services and
storage area(s) for all development/business occupants.
5.2   Enclosure Specifications
   A.   Enclosure walls shall be masonry or other materials based upon approval
by the Environmental Services Department and constructed as shown in
Figure 2.
   B.   Vertical steel pipes (bollards) are required within the enclosure as
wall protection. The inside edge of the bollard shall be a minimum of one foot
inside the inside surface of the rear and side walls of the enclosure to
prevent the container from damaging the walls of the enclosure (See
Figure 3A &
3B).
   C.   The enclosure shall have a minimum ten-foot by ten-foot unobstructed
interior space per container within the bollards (See
Figure 3A &
3B).
   D.   Enclosures are to have gates with latches to prevent unauthorized
access and to visually screen the container . Gates are to be mounted to a post
fastened and secured on the front face of the enclosure wall(s).
   E.   Enclosure gates shall be painted to match or compliment the enclosure
walls.
   F.   Enclosure and gates must have a minimum unobstructed opening of 12 feet
(See
Figure 3A &
3B). The gates must be securable in both the closed and open positions.
   G.   A concrete service apron shall be constructed six inches thick with a
minimum of 2% slope away from the enclosure. To prevent storm water from
collecting in front of the enclosure gates (See
Figures 3A &
3B).
   H.   The enclosure shall have a concrete slab six inches thick, and the
concrete shall have a design strength of 3,000 psi with No. 4 rebar
reinforcement at 12-inch on centers both ways.
   I.   Stationary compactor units shall be screened from adjacent properties
and public right-of-way. Enclosure shall allow space to include recycle
containers.
   J.   Stationary roll-off compactor unit shall be placed on a pad of
sufficient width to provide a two- foot clear area on each side of the unit.
The overall length of the pad must be five feet greater than the combined
length of the compactor, receiving container , and recycle container . The
lengths of the receiving containers will vary depending on the container ’s
capacity.
5.3   Access and Maneuvering Standards
   A.   Service access shall be from within the development.
   B.   A minimum safe access and operational area of 14 feet by 40 feet, with
a minimum vertical clearance of 25 feet, shall be provided in front of each
enclosure.
   C.   An adequate and safe ingress/egress is required for the collection
vehicle in each new project. On-site turnarounds for service vehicles are shown
in
Figure 6 and
7.
   D.   Metal container locations shall be placed so that the collection
vehicle does not have to back into the public right-of-way or into moving
traffic.
   E.   Maneuvering requirements - the minimum turning radiuses required for
collection vehicle to service metal containers shall be 36 feet for the inside
rear wheels radius and 50 feet for the outside front bumper as illustrated on
Figure 7. At any structure or vehicle parking space there must be a minimum of
three feet of clearance between the collection vehicle and the maneuvering/
turning radius.
   F.   The maximum back-up distance for the collection vehicle shall be 80
feet measured from the front of the collection vehicle.
   G.   When the width and depth of the property to be developed is
insufficient to provide service access from within the development, the
enclosures may be located such that service access is from the adjacent public
right-of-way with a 45 or 30-degree angle of approach that allows service by
the vehicle without the collection vehicle pulling completely off the public
right-of-way. (Note: Off street service is not permitted from arterial or
collector streets (See
Figure 1 &
4.)
   H.   Service vehicle will approach in-line with the enclosure; ten feet of
space must be provided in front of the enclosure for a vehicle to maneuver in
order to service the containers. (See
Figure 3A &
3B.)
5.4   Location Standards
   A.   Containers shall not be stored on any public right-of-way, bike lane ,
sidewalk or other public access.
   B.   Containers and enclosures shall not obstruct traffic line-of-sight
visibility.
   C.   Containers and enclosures shall not obstruct or block drainage.
5.5   Operational Standards
   The property owner shall be responsible for keeping the collection and
storage areas free from obstructions, vegetation, any liquids spilled within
storage enclosures.
(Am. Admin. Directive, 5/14/2013)
8-01.6.0   SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
6.1   General
   A.   Curbside service in dedicated right-of-way or a PAAL using APCs and the
ASL system is preferred for Single Family and Duplex Developments.
   B.   Three hundred-gallon APC solid waste service is based on three
residences per container . Service availability subject to ES approval .
6.2   Access and Maneuvering Standards
   A.   The collection point shall be unobstructed by any other improvements
such as mailboxes, light poles, fire hydrants, fencing, street signs, or
landscaping.
   B.   Alley access requires approval by ES. Alley shall have a minimum 20-
foot wide cross section, maintained with a 12-foot wide clear travel lane.
   C.   A 25-foot minimum height clearance, free of any overhead obstructions
(wires, branches, etc.), will be provided above the collection area. (The alley
travel lane must have a minimum of 15- foot overhead clearance.)
6.3   Location Standards for APCs, 95 gallons or less
   A.   The standard collection point will be behind the curb in front of the
premises in accordance with the Technical Standards contained herein.
   B.   Where sidewalks exist, APCs are to be placed in the buffer area between
the curb and sidewalk. Placement shall be so as to not obstruct sidewalk
traffic or bike lanes. There should be no obstruction within three feet of an
APC set out for collection. (Common obstructions are cars, mailboxes, and light
poles.)
   C.   For residential collection that cannot be directly placed for
collection in front of the residence, specific instructions on how and where
the solid waste and recycle APCs will be collected will be included in the
subdivision’s plat.
8-01.7.0   SPECIAL SERVICES
   In developments where proposed solid waste and recycle disposal service is
not specified in these Standards (i.e., developments for the elderly or
disabled), prior approval must be obtained from ES.
8-01.8.0   WASTE STREAM CALCULATION GUIDELINES
   A.   Determine the square footage and uses for the proposed development. A
separate calculation for each area that has a different use should be
performed.
   Calculation: Select the use that best describes the proposed usage, from
Table 1 below. Then multiply the Floor Area (sq. ft) by the Annual Tons
Generated for the usage selected.
   Sample Calculation for Food Retail:
[Area in sq. ft. 3,000] x [Annual Waste Generated 0.0057 tons/sq. ft.] =
17 Annual Tons Generated for specified usage.
   Sample Calculation for an Office or Professional Services:
[Area in sq. ft. 2,000] x [Annual Waste Generated 0.0013 tons/sq. ft.] =
2.6 Annual Tons Generated for specified usage
Table 1: Annual Waste Generated Based On Proposed Usage
1. Office, Professional Services or Small Retail Use 0.0013 tons/sq. ft.
2. Industrial Use                                    0.0016 tons/sq. ft.
3. Food Retail, Multi-Family, Large Commercial       0.0057 tons/sq. ft.
4. Public Facility and Large Retail                  0.00105 tons/sq. ft.
5. School and Institution                            0.00105 tons/sq. ft.
6. Warehouses                                        0.00155 tons/sq. ft.
(Table 1, Data is obtained from Fairfax County Virginia Solid Waste Stream
Calculation Reference)
 
   Estimated conversion factors for solid waste 3.0 lbs/gal. and 600 lbs/
cu.yd.
   B.   Determine the size and collection frequency required for the Annual
Tons Generated for specified usage:
   Sample Calculation for Food Retail Above: 17 Annual Tons Generated
      [17 tons/year] / [52 weeks /year] = 0.329 tons /wk.
      [0.329 tons/week] x [2000 lbs/ton] = 658 lbs/wk.
   Size of container , [658 lbs /wk] / [3.0 lbs/gal] = 219 gal/wk, this volume
is greater than an APC of 95 gal/wk. Therefore, a metal container must be
selected.
   Selecting a 2 cubic yard container /wk = [2 cu.yd./wk] x [202 gal/cu.yd] =
404 al/wk.
   Therefore, 404 gal/wk will be adequate service for a Food Retail business of
3000 sq. ft. The 2 cubic yard metal container /wk is adequate.
   Sample Calculation for an Office or Professional Services Above: 2.6 Annual
Tons Generated
      [2.6 tons/years] / [52 weeks / years] = 0.052 tons / week
      [0.052 tons/week] x [2000 lbs/ton] = 100 lbs/wk
   Size of container , [100 lbs /wk] / [3.0 lbs/gal] = 33.33 gal/wk, this
volume is less then an APC of 95 gal/wk.
   Therefore, a 95 gal/wk APC container will be adequate for specified usage.
8-01.9.0   LIST OF EXHIBITS AND FIGURES
   
Figure 1: 45 Degree Enclosure ‘Option’ Off Residential Streets
   
Figure 2: Structural Design for Enclosure Walls
   
Figure 3A: Double Metal Container Enclosure (2 to 8 cubic yards)
   
Figure 3B: Single Metal Container Enclosure (2 to 8 cubic yards)
   
Figure 4: 30 & 45 Degree Enclosures off Alleys
   
Figure 5: 30 & 45 Degree Enclosures off PAAL’s
   
Figure 6: Turnaround for Service Vehicles
   
Figure 7: Turning Radii/Turnaround for Service Vehicles
   
Figure 8: Specifications for 90 Gallon APCs
   
Figure 9: Specifications for 300 Gallon APCs
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3132.jpg]
Figure 1: 45 Degree Enclosure ‘Option’ Off Residential Streets
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3134.jpg]
Figure 2: Structural Design for Enclosure Walls
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3136.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3138.jpg]
Figure 3A: Double Metal Container Enclosure (2 to 8 cubic yards)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3140.jpg]
Figure 3B: Single Metal Container Enclosure (2 to 8 cubic yards)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3142.jpg]
Figure 4: 30 & 45 Degree Enclosures off Alleys
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3144.jpg]
Figure 5: 30 & 45 Degree Enclosures off PAAL’s
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3146.jpg]
Figure 6: Turnaround for Service Vehicles
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3148.jpg]
Figure 7: Turning Radii/Turnaround for Service Vehicles
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3150.jpg]
Figure 8: Specifications for 90 Gallon APCs
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3152.jpg]
Figure 9: Specifications for 300 Gallon APCs
SECTION 9: SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS
SECTION 9-01.0.0: HILLSIDE DEVELOPMENT
Section
9-01.1.0   General
9-01.2.0   Plan Format and Content Requirements
9-01.3.0   Slope Analysis Standard
9-01.1.0   GENERAL
   This standard has been established to provide a listing of criteria for
analysis and development of property affected by Section
5.2, Hillside Development Zone (HDZ), of the Unified Development Code (UDC),
and to inform applicants of the preparation, submittal, and review requirements
for HDZ projects so that proper and adequate information is presented in a
consistent manner, thereby providing the basis for an efficient and timely
review. It is intended that this Technical Manual provide support and
clarification to the HDZ provisions of Section
5.2, Hillside Development Zone, of the UDC. This standard does not waive any
applicable city regulations or codes.
9-01.2.0   PLAN FORMAT AND CONTENT REQUIREMENTS
2.1   Hillside Development Zone Plan Requirement
   The information required as part of the HDZ submittal will be shown
graphically or provided by notes on a plan. The HDZ requirements are in
addition to the plan requirements of the applicable process, such as, but not
limited to, a plat, a development plan, a site plan, or a plot plan. The
information may be provided as part of the drawing required through the
applicable process or as a separate drawing. The plan may comprise several
sheets showing various elements of required data.
2.2   Submittal Requirements
   The plan which includes the HDZ information is to be provided with the
initial submittal under the applicable process, such as, but not limited to, a
plat, development plan, site plan, or plot plan.
   If the HDZ information is provided as a separate drawing, submit three
copies.
2.3   Review
   HDZ compliance applications are reviewed by the Zoning Review Section and
the Engineering Section at the Planning and Planning and Development Services
Department (PDSD).
2.4   Format
   If the HDZ information is provided as a separate drawing, the format, sheet
size, scale, margins, lettering, and similar requirements are the same as those
for the applicable process, i.e., tentative plat, site plan, or plot plan.
2.5   Content
   The following information is to be provided for all projects affected by the
HDZ.
   A.   Grading information, including proposed grading area, amount of grading
by square feet and percentage of lot area, proposed contours, and locations of
all areas of cut and fill .
   B.   Topographic information of the existing terrain, prior to any grading ,
grubbing , clearing, excavation , or modification, with contour intervals.
   C.   The location, size, color, and textural treatment of all retaining
walls, riprapped slopes , or other constructed means of slope stabilization
must be shown on one of the plans submitted.
   D.   The following slope analysis information must be provided on the plan.
For specific information on calculations of slope , refer to Section 9-01.4.0,
Slope Analysis Standard.
      1.   The average natural cross slope (ACS) analysis must be submitted
with the plat or plan, and the ACS must be listed in the general notes on the
plat or plan.
      2.   If the standards of Section
5.2.5, Development Standards, of the UDC require an analysis of sloped areas,
those areas of 15% or greater slope  must be shown on a topographic map.
   E.   A note must be added to the plan or plat listing those lots which are
subject to HDZ grading requirements.
   F.   All protected peaks and ridges must be shown and labeled, and the 300-
foot setback area must be delineated.
9-01.3.0   SLOPE ANALYSIS STANDARD
3.1   Average Natural Cross Slope Analysis
   The Average Natural Cross Slope (ACS) of a site is determined in the
following manner.
   A.   The site is depicted on a topographic map of the existing terrain,
prior to any grading , grubbing , clearing, excavation , or modification,
utilizing a scale no smaller than one inch equals 100 feet, with the following
contour intervals.
      1.   For parcels less than five acres, a contour interval of two feet;
      2.   For parcels five acres and greater, a contour interval of ten feet.
   B.   The length of each contour line contained within the site boundaries on
the map is measured by means of a mechanical device such as a map wheel or
digitizer. This actual length is converted to scale length in feet. For
example, at a scale of one inch equals 40 feet, a contour line with an actual
map length of six and one-half inches represents a line 260 feet long (6.5 x 40
= 260).
   C.   The sum of the lengths (L) of all contour lines is multiplied by the
contour interval (I) in feet.
   D.   The result is multiplied by the factor .0023, which converts the square
footage of the scale map to acres.
   E.   This result is then divided by the area (A) of the site in acres.
   F.   This result is multiplied by a linear adjustment factor which equals
the number of contour lines less one line (N - 1), divided by the number of
contour lines (N).
   G.   This process is mathematically represented by the formula:
   ACS = (I) (L) (.0023) X (N - 1)
      (A)      (N)
   H.   The answer is the percentage of the ACS for the site .
3.2   Sloped Area Analysis
   The slope of any topography is determined by the following method.
   A.   The site or lot is depicted on a map with a scale and contour interval
conforming to Sections 2-03.2.3.F or 2-05.2.3.E.
   B.   A slope gauge is prepared at the same scale as the map to be analyzed,
as follows.
      1.   On a straight edge of a piece of stiff paper, such as an index card
or other straight-edged material, a straight line representing 100 linear feet
is marked parallel to the edge.
      2.   This line is divided into 15 equal divisions, with the 16 marks
between the divisions being numbered. Marks zero and 15 will fall at each end
of the scale 100 foot line. These marks represent the distance between one-foot
contour intervals at a 15% slope for the scale used.
   C.   The contours on the map are compared to the slope gauge by placing the
gauge perpendicular to the contour lines. When the contour lines are equal to
or are closer together than the corresponding interval marks on the gauge, a
slope of 15% or greater is indicated.
   D.   All slopes of 15% or greater are then outlined and so indicated on the
map. Submittal of slope information is required to allow the Engineering Review
Section at the Planning and Planning and Development Services Department (PDSD)
to review, comment upon, and make recommendations concerning the
appropriateness of the location of the grading . Exception. Any sloped area no
greater than 15 feet in any horizontal direction and no greater than seven and
one-half feet vertically may be excluded from compliance with this section.
Adjacent exempted areas are not cumulative.
SECTION 9-02.0.0: HISTORIC PRESERVATION ZONE
Section
9-02.1.0   General
9-02.2.0   Review and Approval Procedures
9-02.3.0   Development Criteria
9-02.4.0   Supplemental Review Criteria
9-02.5.0   Signs
9-02.6.0   Parking
9-02.7.0   Specific Historic Preservation Zone Guidelines
9-02.8.0   Historic Preservation Zones, Sites , and Structures
9-02.1.0   GENERAL
1.1   Purpose
   This standard has been established for the purpose of informing applicants
of preparation, submittal, and review requirements for projects within City
Historic Preservation Zones (HPZs). An owner of property within the HPZ has an
opportunity to work with the HPZ Advisory Board, comprised of district
residents and design professionals, the Tucson-Pima County Historical
Commission, and Planning staff to assure that the proposed development protects
both historic resources and property values.
   The review procedures and development criteria summarized in this standard
should assist the applicant in meeting these twin goals successfully and
expeditiously. The Standard lists general development criteria applicable
within all designated HPZs, along with specific district guidelines that apply
within a particular HPZ. Illustrations are included to clarify particular
design concepts and further aid the applicant in meeting HPZ review
requirements.
   The applicant should refer to the list of Historic Landmarks and
Contributing and Noncontributing Properties within each HPZ published as
Technical Standard 9-02.8.0 (Structures List) and available in the Planning and
Development Services Department (PDSD). This list, and associated maps of the
HPZs, identify and categorize all principal and accessory buildings and
structures within HPZs as combinations of Contributing, Noncontributing,
Historic, and Nonhistoric, or as an Intrusion (Contributing Properties may
contain both historic and nonhistoric buildings and structures; Noncontributing
Properties and Intrusions do not contain any designated historic buildings or
structures).
   The applicant’s first step in the review process is to locate the subject
property on the list and carefully read those sections of this technical
standard that apply to that category of property. In the case of new
construction on vacant land, the applicant should review the Structures List to
identify Contributing Properties within the subject property’s development
zone. Other recommended early steps in the process include a pre-application
meeting with Planning staff and preliminary discussions with the appropriate
advisory board. This standard does not waive any applicable city regulations or
codes. Plans approved through the HPZ review process must also meet applicable
zoning and building code requirements.
1.2   Applicability
   This standard applies to all development and improvements within the
Historic Preservation Zone (HPZ), which is an zoning overlay identified with
the prefix “H” on City of Tucson Zoning Maps, with the exception of the San
Xavier Environs Historic Preservation Zone within which specific development
regulations apply as listed in Section 2.8.8.13 of the Tucson Unified
Development Code (UDC).
1.3   Definitions
   Definitions for words and terms used in this standard are found in Section
12, Definitions, of this Manual and in Article 11 of the UDC. Selected terms
relating to design elements and criteria are further defined and clarified
graphically within this technical standard. National standards and guidelines
for historic preservation distinguish between buildings (constructions created
principally to shelter human activities) and structures (constructions for
purposes other than human shelter). In this Section, these terms are generally
used interchangeably, but are sometimes distinguished when referring to
principal or secondary buildings and accessory structures.
9-02.2.0   REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES
2.1   Development Review Required
   Review and approval of all properties, buildings, signs, and structures
within an HPZ is required for all development and improvements, including new
construction or improvements that do not require building permits in accordance
with the procedures established in Section
5.8.8, Design Review Required, of the UDC.
2.2   Demolition Review Required
   A review in accordance with Section
5.8.10, Demolition Review Required, of the UDC is required when a demolition or
relocation of all or part of a structure, site , sign, or Historic Landmark is
proposed.
9-02.3.0   DEVELOPMENT CRITERIA
3.1   General
   The character of a HPZ depends to a great extent on the integrity of its
buildings and streetscapes. Development patterns, design relationships,
landscape designs, and architectural styles and details together create the
historic fabrics of these districts. Key development criteria relating to
heights, setbacks, proportions, roof types, surface textures, site
utilizations, projections and recessions, details, building forms, and rhythms
have been identified to guide future development within each HPZ. Proposed
improvements will be reviewed for compliance with these criteria to ensure that
projects in historic districts preserve the historical and architectural
character of the neighborhood. Although new construction does not require a
specific architectural style, it must be compatible with the overall design
context of the neighborhood and streetscapes.
   All treatments of historic buildings and structures must apply the Secretary
of Interior’s Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties (1995, and as
amended). There are different local standards for different types of historic
resources. Generally, alterations to a Historic Landmark must conform to the
intrinsic and unique character of the building or structure. Changes to a
historic building or structure must reflect the architectural style and
character of the existing building/structure. Alterations to a nonhistoric
building or structure and new construction must be compatible with historic
buildings and structures on Contributing Properties located within the
development zone of the subject property.
   The design context within the development zone is particularly important as
a guide for streetscape improvements, siting and setbacks, and building
massing. Changes to architectural detailing are evaluated based on comparisons
within the development zone of similar buildings. Principal buildings are
compared with other principal buildings that reflect a similar historical
period and style. Alterations to a historic building or structure located on a
Contributing Property must be true to the style of the original construction
or, in the case of new construction, to a characteristic historical style and
period within the development zone.
3.2   Height
   Height is measured as the vertical distance between the highest part of a
building/structure and the finished grade at the midpoint of the front facade
of the principal building, excluding chimneys, mechanical equipment, church
spires, belfries, towers, and other miscellaneous additions and exceptions as
provided in the Code.
   As shown in
Figure 5: Height Compatibility, compatibility of building heights is addressed
by comparing principal building proposed heights, in both new construction and
alterations, with existing principal building heights within the development
zone. Proposed accessory structure heights are compared with existing accessory
structure heights.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3154.jpg]
Figure 5: Height Compatibility
   Building height compatibility can be accomplished by comparing similar types
and styles of buildings. For example, a new Territorial style house should not
be built to the height of its Victorian neighbor. The mass, volume, and scale
of the Territorial building is quite different from that created by a hipped
roof bungalow or more steeply pitched Victorian. A Territorial house built up
to the allowable height of a pitched roof Victorian would look massive and out
of scale.
3.3   Setbacks
   The prevailing setback is the most frequently occurring distance between
buildings and the street and interior property boundaries in the development
zone of the subject property. Maintaining the prevailing setback protects the
historic and visual character of the street. The figures which follow give
several examples of prevailing setbacks in the Tucson metropolitan area.
   As shown in
Figure 6, row houses on this block of El Presidio HPZ are built in the Spanish-
Mexican vernacular tradition with no side or front setbacks. Their front
elevations (facades) are all located on their front property lines. The effect
of this zero lot line could be achieved without actually locating the building
on the property line.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3156.jpg]
Figure 6: Sonoran Row Houses
   In cases where a front building setback is provided, a high wall or fence
may be located on the property line to allow the building itself to be set
farther back. This design solution would reinforce the continuous and cohesive
sense of enclosure along the street while providing for the unique needs of the
property owner. Zero lot line design does not eliminate other Code
requirements, such as fire walls and on-site drainage.
   
Figure 7: Comparison of Prevailing Setbacks shows the contrast in front and
side setbacks between blocks.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3158.jpg]
Figure 7: Comparison of Prevailing Setbacks
   In the area represented in
Figure 8, the setbacks from interior property lines do not follow a regular
pattern. In this example low density development has been incremental and
informal and has resulted in the preservation of valuable native vegetation. In
this case, determining the prevailing setbacks entails an evaluation of both
the character of site design in the entire development zone and close scrutiny
of setbacks of adjacent properties.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3160.jpg]
Figure 8: Irregular Setbacks, Fort Lowell Historic Preservation Zone (HPZ)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3162.jpg]
Figure 9: Anglo-American Site Design illustrates front setbacks and a typical
streetscape. A uniform setback from the street reflects site planning practices
common in subdivisions built after the arrival of the Southern Pacific Railroad
in Tucson. The uniform front setback is a primary factor in giving the street
its character. The goal in both new construction and renovation is to maintain
the prevailing front yard setbacks.
Figure 9: Anglo-American Site Design
   The effect of disrupting the prevailing front setback is shown in the
schematic in
Figure 10. In this example, the effect of discontinuity of the streetscape
would be the same whether the offending structure is a room addition, a
carport, or a screen or security wall built on the front property line. In each
of these instances, the prevailing setback would be compromised.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3164.jpg]
Figure 10: Incompatible Front Setback
3.4   Proportion
   Proportion, as used in the HPZs, means the relationship between the width
and height of a building’s front facade, windows, and doors. Maintaining
similar building proportions preserves the sense of visual continuity of the
street and neighborhood. The buildings shown in
Figure 11 illustrate horizontal massing. They are about twice as wide as they
are high--a proportion of two to one. This proportion holds true for many of
the buildings in the El Presidio and Barrio Historico HPZs built in the Sonoran
vernacular tradition. These buildings generally have horizontal massing with
width predominating over height. When most of the buildings in a development
zone have similar proportions, whatever they may be, construction of a new
building with very different proportions would be destructive of the character
of the zone.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3166.jpg]
Figure 11: Horizontal Massing
   
Figure 12 shows a series of buildings that generally have the same proportions,
with a two to one width-to-height ratio. The second building from the right,
with a three to four width-to-height ratio, represents a new structure which
does not relate well to the others because of its markedly different
proportions.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3168.jpg]
Figure 12: Proportion in Series
3.5   Roof Types and Rooftop Equipment
   The relationship of a new or altered building to the historic buildings and
structures in the development zone will be strengthened by repeating a roof
type that is prevalent within the zone. If the predominant roof type is hipped
or gabled, typical of California bungalow or Victorian styles, a new home
constructed with a flat roof characteristic of the Sonoran Territorial style
would be a visual disruption of the rooflines and may result in conflicts in
height, mass, and materials between established residences and the new
construction.
Figure 13 provides examples of common roof types in different HPZs in Tucson.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3170.jpg]
Figure 13: Common Roof Types in Tucson’s Historic Districts
   Solar panels, other energy-conserving or -generating devices, and water
harvesting systems should be architecturally integrated into the design when
installed on an existing historic building or structure, and should be
installed in a way that minimizes visibility, does not damage the building/
structure or remove historic roof features, and can be easily removed.
   Newly installed equipment on principal buildings and on secondary buildings
and structures should be placed in locations that minimize visual impacts.
Rooftop panels and other types of units should not be mounted on street-facing
roof elevations. For sloped roofs, panels should be installed flat against the
roof to maintain the existing roof profile, and any visible mounting hardware
should be painted to match the roofing materials as closely as possible. Panels
and other types of units appropriate for flat roofs should be installed so they
are hidden by parapet walls. If none of the secondary roof elevations are an
appropriate orientation for efficient operation, then solar panels and other
types of units should be ground mounted or placed on a nonhistoric accessory
structure in a way that minimizes visual impacts.
   Other architectural features and mechanical equipment atypical of the
historical period or style, such as skylights, coolers, heating units, and
satellite dishes, should be located on the building, structure, or property on
non-street-facing elevations and in locations that minimize visual impacts. The
following guidelines are recommended for the type, placement, and screening of
these features.
   A.   Skylights should be flat, non-bubble type installations located on the
rear of the structure or behind gables or dormers so that they are not visible
from the front public right-of-way.
   B.   Mechanical devices such as coolers and heating units should be hidden
whenever possible, e.g., ground placement on the interior portion of the
property, or placement on a roof slope facing the interior of the property. If
they cannot be hidden, then they should be placed in locations that minimize
visual impacts.
   C.   Satellite dishes should be placed on non-street-facing elevations and
in locations that minimize visual impacts.
   D.   Wind turbines should be of a height and scale compatible with the
historic building, and installed in an appropriate location on the site or on a
non-historic structure or addition so as to minimize the visual impact on the
historic character of the building, the site , and the development zone.
   E.   Gutters, downspouts, and other roof drainage features being added to a
structure should blend into the architecture and avoid interrupting the lines
and details of architectural features, and should provide proper drainage to
avoid water damage to the building. Cisterns used to collect rainfall from a
roof should be located at non-street facing elevations, and should not block
views of architectural features. The placement of cisterns within properties is
additionally regulated by Sections
6.4.5, Perimeter Yards, and 6.6, Accessory Uses and Structures, of the UDC
detailing the requirements for accessory structures. Historic gutters,
scuppers, drainpipes (canals), and downspouts should be repaired when possible,
and not covered; when historic roof drainage features cannot be repaired, they
should be replaced using like materials, shapes, and placements.
3.6   Surface Texture
   Building materials and surface treatments found in Tucson’s HPZs can vary
from district to district. An application for renovation or new construction
must be compatible with the architectural context found in the particular
development zone to ensure that materials and textures of new development are
appropriate to neighborhood character. Surface treatments commonly used in the
particular development zone should guide future improvements. Adobe and stucco
may characterize an entire historic district, such as Fort Lowell, while the
types of materials and surface treatments in other districts may vary
considerably. Brick, stone masonry, lava rock, and wood are common materials in
districts with eclectic architectural styles.
   When stucco (plaster) is being replaced on the entire exterior of a
Contributing historic building or structure, a lime or mud stucco should be
used; cement based stucco should not be used. When stucco is being repaired,
the same material should be used. On Contributing historic buildings and
structures, stucco applications with expansion joints and modern textures are
not allowed. Buildings and structures that were stuccoed historically should
not have their stucco sheathings entirely or partially removed without being
replaced with new stucco. Certain materials, such as exposed concrete block,
and certain surface treatments, such as painting over rock or painting over
unpainted brick or masonry, are not allowed.
3.7   Site Utilization
   Site utilization is defined as the distance between the sides of buildings.
However, the concept of site utilization also relates to front and rear
setbacks. The space between buildings is an important factor that contributes
to the character of an entire group of buildings.
Figure 14 shows a block in the University area. The generous side yards
visually separate each house from the next.
Figure 15 depicts a block in an older part of the city where the spacing
between buildings is either very narrow or nonexistent. Any new construction
should observe the same or compatible spacing within the development zone.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3172.jpg]
Figure 14: University Area
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3174.jpg]
Figure 15: Barrio Historico
   Principal buildings in most HPZs are street-oriented with entrances from at
least one street. Any new construction or renovation should maintain the
relationship to the street that is appropriate to the architectural and site
design context of the development zone. Any changes to the front of the
building should maintain the street facade of existing buildings and the
prevalent street orientation of front entrances in the development zone.
3.8   Projections and Recessions
   Projections and recessions, such as porches, steps, awnings, overhangs,
entrances, windows, and doors, provide the continuity, rhythm, and spatial
quality of the streetscape. They also help define the architectural and
historic character of the buildings as seen from the street. Sonoran-style
buildings usually had no projections beyond the facade. Transformed Sonoran
buildings, such as the Verdugo House shown in
Figure 16, added front steps, an understated front projection.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3176.jpg]
Figure 16: Verdugo House
   As the influence of the Anglo immigrants to Tucson increased, front porches
began to appear on residential buildings. In some cases, the grafting of one
architectural tradition onto another resulted in an eclectic mixture of styles
and treatments, as is shown in
Figure 17.
   Front porches help to link the structure with the street. In addition to
supporting street character, porches protect windows and doors from solar
damage and consequently affect maintenance and long-term property values.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3178.jpg]
Figure 17: New Porch Addition
   The design of any new construction or repair in a HPZ must take into account
the presence or absence of such projections and recessions, in order to assure
that the development reflects-but does not directly mimic-the design of
surrounding buildings in the development zone and is compatible with other
buildings in the particular HPZ.
3.9   Details
   Repetition of architectural details is another way of achieving a harmonious
relationship between new and old buildings and structures. Architectural
details frequently define the historical period(s) and style. Examples of
character-defining details include wall design, parapet treatment, roof trim,
eaves and verge treatment, and door and window openings. These details must be
compatible with the existing historical periods and styles. However,
compatibility does not mean exact duplication of architectural details. When
replacing a feature that was previously replaced with inappropriate material
after the historical period(s) of the building or structure, the replacement
should be of the same material and type as the original, or an alternative
material accepted by the Historic Preservation Zone Advisory Board.
   Of the details listed above, windows are particularly important in defining
historical and architectural character. With this in mind, repair or
alterations to windows must be accomplished with a degree of sensitivity to the
types of existing windows on the building. Window location, size, shape,
function, and materials should be retained and in the case of new construction,
the window type and historical style most common within the development zone
will determine the type of window used in the new structure. Historic windows
should be repaired, rather than replaced, whenever possible. When replacing
historic windows, the replacements should be of the same types and designs
(e.g., number and dimensions of lights, and widths and profiles of mullions and
muntins) as the original windows. The material of a replacement window should
be the same as the original window, or an alternative material accepted by the
Historic Preservation Zone Advisory Board. Aluminum, vinyl, and fiberglass
materials are not allowed. Sliding, flush-mounted, and simulated divided lights
are not allowed. Lintels, molding, and sills should be added to replacements
and new windows as appropriate.
   
Figure 18 identifies traditional window components.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3180.jpg]
Figure 18: Window Components
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3182.jpg]
Figure 19: Anatomy of a Double-Hung Window
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3184.jpg]
Figure 20: Details Found in Tucson’s Historic Preservation Zones
3.10   Building Form
   Maintaining the character of a neighborhood through size, mass, and scale of
the buildings and structures reinforces the sense of conformity and
compatibility essential to development in HPZs. Conversely, new construction or
alterations that do not conform to the overall character of the neighborhood
can erode the historical and architectural character. The schematic in
Figure 21 shows buildings with similar heights, proportions, and massings.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3186.jpg]
Figure 21: Continuity in Size, Mass, and Scale
3.11   Rhythm
   Rhythm means an ordered, alternating, recurring pattern of solids to voids
in building facades along the street. The recurrent alternation of walls to
windows and doors (solids to voids) along the front facade of a building
establishes a pattern which can be perceived when observing the building from a
distance.
Figure 22 shows wall to window and door patterns common in Sonoran row houses.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3188.jpg]
Figure 22: Rhythm of Solids to Voids in Sonoran Row Houses
   When constructing a new building or addition, a similar rhythmic pattern
should be incorporated to achieve a relationship between the existing historic
building and the new construction. The rhythm of recurrent building masses
helps define the quality of the streetscape. Street rhythm can be accomplished
by the central siting of a structure and the regular width of side yards. With
row houses, having no side yards, the rhythm is established through the
alternation of walls to windows and doors.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3190.jpg]
Figure 23: Street Rhythm
3.12   Accessibility Features
   Features added to increase accessibility for persons with lessened mobility,
such as ramps and lifts, should be designed and installed in ways that do not
damage the building or remove historic features, do not negatively impact the
historic character of the building, and can be removed. Handrails should be of
simple design and compatible with the building character. The Building Code
includes regulations on accessibility features for compliance with the
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, as amended.
(Am. Admin. Directive, 3/22/2017)
9-02.4.0   SUPPLEMENTAL REVIEW CRITERIA
   In addition to the key design criteria listed above, the following factors
affecting the appearance, harmony, and unique characteristics of a HPZ have
been identified in the UDC and may be considered in the review process.
4.1   Color
   Although a property owner does not need approval to paint a house in a HPZ,
color may be reviewed as part of a required HPZ review. In this case, the color
of walls, trim, roof, and other details of a building or structure, including
fences and privacy walls, will be evaluated according to how well the choice of
colors reflects the architectural style of the subject structure and the
historical period of properties within the development zone.
4.2   Landscaping
   Landscaping and hardscape elements, such as walkways, driveways, and site
furnishings, may be reviewed as part of a required HPZ review. The general
guide for the selection and placement of plants is the existing character of
landscaping within the HPZ. Individual district guidelines may include specific
recommendations on plant materials. The PDSD Director has the authority to
waive or amend landscaping and screening requirements in order to assure that
the type and placement of plant materials is compatible with the character of
the subject property and the development zone.
4.3   Enclosures
   Fences, privacy walls, or other physical features used to enclose open space
or provide privacy must be compatible with the architectural style of the
subject structure and the historic character of the development zone. The
height of a new privacy wall or fence cannot obstruct the public view of
buildings and structures from the street, except where it is used to simulate
zero-lot-line construction to meet compatibility criteria; new solid walls or
fences at the front of a property should not be taller than four feet as
measured from the street-side grade, but may be up to six feet tall on the
sides and rear of a property. Privacy wall and fence materials must be
appropriate to the historic context of the structure and the neighborhood.
Although recommended materials for enclosures vary from district to district,
adobe, stone, stuccoed masonry, wood picket, and wrought iron are acceptable.
Chain link, unpainted redwood, and unstuccoed concrete block are not acceptable
materials.
4.4   Utilities
   Whenever possible, utilities should be located underground or where they are
not visible from public rights-of-way.
9-02.5.0   SIGNS
5.1   General
   The appearance, color, size, location, method of attachment, materials, and
design of signs within a HPZ must be compatible with the historic
characteristics of the structures located within the appropriate development
zone. Signs allowed in the underlying zoning are regulated by Chapter 3 of the
Tucson Code and may be further limited by the HPZ ordinance.
5.2   Heritage Landmark Signs (HLS)
   Article III and Article XIII include the regulations for the preservation
and designation of historic iconic signs in the City of Tucson. Permitting
requirements, fees, inspections and the initial designation of a sign as a
Heritage Landmark Sign are provided in Section 3-25 of the Sign Code. Section
3-149 of the Sign Code provides information for the designation of signs within
a voluntary registry of HLS maintained by the City of Tucson Sign Section at
PDSD. Section 3-149 also provides the regulations for restoration and
relocation of registered HLS signs.
(Am. Ord. 11803, 12/8/2020)
9-02.6.0   PARKING
6.1   Parking is required in accordance with Section
7.4 of the UDC. All Code required improvements, including surfacing, wheel
stops, curbing, striping and screening are applicable within HPZs.
6.2   Parking requirements applicable in the El Presidio Historic Preservation
Zone are provided in Section 2.8.8.6.N of the HPZ ordinance.
6.3   The location and number of on-site  parking spaces can have negative
effects on the unique architectural design and historic features of a site  and
can affect the character of the streetscape in an HPZ. Generally, on-site
parking should be located at the rear of all development and in a location that
cannot be seen from public rights-of-way.
6.4   Screening of parking areas with non-traditional materials may be required
to be compatible with and protect the character of the HPZ.
9-02.7.0   SPECIFIC HISTORIC PRESERVATION ZONE GUIDELINES
7.1   General
   In addition to facilitating compliance with development criteria required by
the Historic Preservation Zone and described in Section
9-02.3.0 of this standard, related guidelines are used by individual HPZ
Advisory Boards to evaluate proposed projects within those HPZs. Because each
of the HPZs is unique, individual district guidelines have been created by each
HPZ Advisory Board and are used as tools for making recommendations to the
Historical Commission Plans Review Subcommittee.
   Buildings and structures designated as Contributing in an HPZ and listed in
Technical Standard 9-02.8.0 (Structures List) should have minimal changes made,
with alterations compatible with the existing architectural style and
character. For buildings and structures designated as a Noncontributing,
renovation may offer an opportunity to restore the historic character with
alterations that are compatible with Contributing buildings and structures
within the development zone. Applicants considering new construction on a
vacant parcel in a HPZ, should be familiar with the overall character of the
HPZ, particularly with site  design and architectural features within the
development zone. This will ensure that new construction projects are
compatible with, and contribute to, the character of the HPZ. The following
list is a guide when considering exterior renovation or construction:
   A.   Exterior alterations and changes are minimal;
   B.   Alterations are compatible with the structure’s original design;
   C.   New construction is compatible with surrounding properties, in terms of
materials and architectural style and character;
   D.   Alterations or renovations visible from the street are minimal;
   E.   Alterations or changes to original roof form, building materials, and
details are minimal;
   F.   All construction materials are appropriate to the building and to the
neighborhood;
   G.   The size, shape, and materials of window and door openings are
maintained; and,
   H.   Any historical and distinctive architectural details are to remain.
   Information provided in this section will aid the applicant in successfully
and expeditiously meeting Code requirements, as interpreted and applied at the
Historic Preservation Zone level .
7.2   Armory Park
   A.   Background. Armory Park became the city’s first Historic Preservation
Zone in 1974 encompassing approximately a 30-block area bounded by Stone Avenue
on the west, Third and Jacobus Avenues on the east, Twelfth Street on the
north, and Nineteenth Street on the south. District boundaries are shown on the
map below. The 1995 survey of the District lists approximately 450 buildings or
structures as Contributing Historic Properties. (See Technical Standard 9-
02.8.0.) In addition to City Historic Preservation Zone status, the
neighborhood is a National Register Historic District that was designated in
1976.
   The present Armory Park Historic Preservation Zone was surveyed as part of
the original 1872 town plan. The arrival of the railroad in 1880 had the
greatest impact on the development of the area until approximately 1920. Armory
Park grew from the original Military Plaza to a progressive neighborhood of
prominent railroad men, affluent businessmen, and working class residents. The
majority of structures in Armory Park were residences for Southern Pacific
Railroad workers and their families. In addition to the residential core of the
neighborhood, the Armory Park Historic Preservation Zone includes a mix of
public uses, including the former Carnegie Library, Safford Junior High School,
the Temple of Music and Art, and Armory Park with the adjacent Senior Center.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3192.jpg]
   B.   Architectural Character - Armory Park developed into a stable, cohesive
neighborhood of multiple and single family detached houses encompassing a
mixture of architectural styles. The vast majority of structures in the
district were built speculatively in tract fashion, having similar
architectural character and detail. The railroad afforded wealthy Tucsonans the
ability to add Victorian detailing and soon a variety of each architectural
style and tradition began to appear in the neighborhood. Several of these
architectural styles were intermixed and the result is often referred to as
“American Victorian”. Houses reflecting this eclectic style are constructed of
brick and have complex roofs and intricate wood detailing. In addition to
design influences introduced from the East and Midwest, the 1915 Panama-
California Exposition at San Diego provided architectural models that were
copied within the Armory Park area, including the Mission Style, California
Bungalow, and Spanish Colonial Revival. Safford School is the best example of
the latter style. The school displays plastered walls, an ornamented and
elaborate entry, flanked columns, and portales. Bungalow-style homes were built
from mass produced model plans to provide simple, single-story bungalows with
gable roofs, articulated wood rafters, and heavy masonry porch piers. Houses
that typify earlier Spanish-Mexican traditions can be found throughout Armory
Park as well.
   C.   Streetscape - The character of the streetscape of Armory Park reflects
the influence of the post-railroad era and Anglo site  planning concepts.
Rather than contiguous structures built on street property lines, typical of
the Sonoran or Spanish-Mexican vernacular tradition, site  utilization in the
Anglo manner located the structure in the center of the lot, with spacious
front, side, and rear landscaped yards. The neighborhood’s character is further
defined by ornamental lamp standards, street trees, and lushly landscaped
yards.
   D.   Specific District Guidelines. In addition to the development criteria
described above, the following review criteria provide additional guidance to
applicants considering renovations or additions within the district boundaries.
      1.   Additions. Additions to buildings, including rooms, porches, stairs
and access ramp s, should be constructed at the rear of the property.
      2.   Windows and Doors. Any replacement doors and windows shall be of the
same materials, types, and designs. Flush doors, sliding glass doors, aluminum
windows, doors, or screen frames are inappropriate materials for renovation or
new construction. Security bars are discouraged, however if used, should be of
a simple design, follow the lines of the window and should be mounted inside
the window opening, rather than on the surface of the building.
      3.   Masonry. Exposed concrete block is not an acceptable substitute for
brick or adobe. If concrete block is used for the construction of an addition,
it must be stuccoed. Color may be added to the stucco or it may be painted an
appropriate color.
      4.   Chimneys. Original chimneys must be left in place and maintained,
even if unused. If repairs are necessary, the original material, color, shape,
and brick pattern must be matched as closely as possible.
      5.   Roofing. Rolled roofing, white or light roofing shingles are
discouraged on roof surfaces visible from the street.
      6.   Porches. Original porches should be maintained and as much of the
original material and ornamentation as possible should be retained if repair is
necessary. Front porches should not be enclosed as rooms. If a porch has been
enclosed, the enclosure should be removed and the porch restored. Wrought iron
columns or steel pipe columns are not acceptable building materials for new or
restored porches.
      7.   Architectural Details. Historical architectural details should be
retained; even the simplest details contribute to the overall character of the
building. If replacement of architectural details is necessary, original
detailing on the structure should be researched and architectural details
visible on other houses in the development zone can be duplicated using size,
placement, and quantity as a guide.
      8.   Mechanical Equipment. Mechanical equipment, including but not
limited to swamp coolers, air conditioners, water heaters, wind turbines, roof
vents, furnaces, electrical equipment, solar panels, catwalks, emergency or
utility access, maintenance safety equipment, satellite dishes, disks and
antennas, and skylights should be placed in locations that minimize visual
impacts. Cisterns should be placed at non-street-facing elevations and should
not block views of architectural features.
      9.   Fences and Privacy Walls. Fences and privacy walls should be
compatible with the style, material, and age of the existing structure. The
height of a front fence or privacy wall should be four feet or lower to allow
an unobstructed view of the buildings and structures from the public right-of-
way. Inappropriate fence and privacy wall materials include: ocotillo ribs,
stockade fencing, post and rail, tubular steel or wrought iron without spear
tips, unstuccoed concrete block, unpainted wood, rough cedar, and corrugated
metal. Extra attention should be paid to the fence or privacy wall along the
street side of the property and the side yards extending from the front facade
of the building.
      10.   Landscaping. Landscaping should be in keeping with the historic
period of the neighborhood. Plantings should reflect the architectural style of
the structure, and all vegetation should provide an unobstructed view of the
building.
7.3   Barrio Historico
   A.   Background.
   The Barrio Historico Historic Preservation Zone is an approximately 20-block
area located between Cushing Street on the north, Eighteenth Street on the
south, the Southern Pacific Railroad on the west, and Stone Avenue on the east.
District boundaries are shown on the map below. The area was designated as a
Historic Preservation Zone by the City of Tucson in 1975. A 1995 survey of the
District lists El Tiradito Wishing Shrine as a city historic landmark and
approximately 225 buildings or structures as contributing historic properties.
(See Technical Standard 9-02.8.0.) In addition to City Historic Preservation
Zone status, the neighborhood is included in two National Register Districts:
Barrio Libre, created in 1978, and Barrio El Hoyo, created in 2008, and
comprises portions of four distinct neighborhoods (barrios): El Hoyo, El
Membrillo, Santa Rosa, and Barrio Viejo.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3194.jpg]
   The National Register District barrios were first settled in the mid to late
1800s by residents who began building homes and businesses beyond the original
Presidio walls, and around the Plaza de la Mesilla. The real growth occurred
during the Territorial Period, and development accelerated with the arrival of
the Southern Pacific Railroad in 1880. While the barrios were primarily
working-class Mexican neighborhoods, the residents enjoyed a surprising
diversity of ethnic backgrounds, including Chinese, African-American, Anglo,
and Native American.
   As the Arizona Territory grew with the influx of Anglo soldiers, ranchers,
businessmen, and craftsmen, the barrios grew as well but managed to remain
relatively unchanged in their cultural and architectural heritage. In the late
1960s, urban renewal programs led to the demolition of nearly half of the
barrios. Arising in their place were the Tucson Convention Center associated
parking lots, the La Placita commercial area, and the city, county, and Federal
buildings. Tucson’s preservation movement was in large part a response to the
unfortunate impacts of urban renewal programs and threats to these historic
neighborhoods from proposed major transportation plans.
   B.   Architectural Character and Streetscape.
   The Barrio Historico Historic Preservation Zone retains the distinctive
architectural and cultural traditions of the past due to the majority of the
development being comprised of small one-story adobe and brick residences and
commercial buildings. Sonoran and Transformed Sonoran are the most
characteristic architectural styles, although the Spanish Colonial Revival,
Victorian, and Craftsman Bungalow styles are represented as well. The Sonoran
style, part of the Spanish-Mexican vernacular tradition, is characterized by
thick-walled adobe buildings set on the street property line; flat roofs with
high parapet walls, stuccoed or left exposed; round wood beams (vigas);
saguaro-rib roof decks; and projecting drainpipes (canales), which penetrate
the parapet wall at roof level . The buildings generally have horizontal
massing, with width predominating over height. Exterior doors are usually
placed flush with the inside wall creating a deeply recessed entry when viewed
from the street. Windows are installed flush with the outside wall, creating a
shelf or window seat for interior rooms. Floor plans vary, having either a
central hall (zaguan) or a series of rooms parallel or perpendicular to the
street. Transformed Sonoran buildings are similar to this earlier vernacular
style, with the addition of a sloping gable or pyramidal roof.
   The streetscape of Barrio Historico reflects Spanish and Mexican site
planning concepts and earlier Islamic planning principles. Residential open
spaces consisted of interior courtyards designed both to accommodate social
customs and environmental factors with narrow streets shadowed by thick-walled
buildings set close to the street. A typical street in Barrio Historico, lined
with Sonoran row houses that hug the street, reflects these design influences.
This street character contrasts sharply with the look and feel of neighborhoods
developed after the arrival of the railroad and Anglo design influences from
the East and Midwest. These later styles located the structure in the center of
the lot, with front, side, and rear landscaped yards.
   C.   Specific Historic Preservation Zone Guidelines for Barrio Historico.
   In addition to the development criteria listed above, the following HPZ
criteria provide additional guidance to applicants contemplating renovation or
new construction.
      1.   Alterations of Existing Buildings. Windows, doors, and porches,
should remain open with original sizes and shapes maintained.
      2.   Roof Forms and Elements. Roof forms and elements vary within the
HPZ. New construction should be constructed to reflect the roof form
immediately adjacent to the new building or the prominent roof forms within the
development zone.
      3.   Porches. Existing porches should retain all original detail and
ornamentation. Existing porches should not be enclosed. Porches that have been
enclosed and made into a room as part of a previous remodel should be taken
back to their original condition as an open porch.
      4.   Exterior Wall Materials. When repairing or replacing adobe block,
brick, stucco or stone, the same or similar materials should be used and should
match as closely as possible the color, texture, and composition of the
original walls. Unacceptable materials include exposed or painted concrete
block or slump block as a substitute for brick or adobe. When stucco (plaster)
is being replaced on the entire exterior of a Contributing historic building or
structure, a lime or mud stucco should be used; cement based stucco should not
be used. When stucco is being repaired, the same material should be used. On
Contributing historic buildings and structures, stucco applications with
expansion joints and modern textures are not allowed. Buildings and structures
that were stuccoed historically should not have their stucco sheathings
entirely or partially removed without being replaced with new stucco.
      5.   Doors and Windows. New and/or replacement doors and windows should
conform to the original size, style, and materials of the structure (e.g.,
single glazed, double-hung wood windows and solid wood panel doors). Flush
mounted doors and sliding glass doors are not appropriate, nor are aluminum
windows, doors, or screen frames.
      6.   Site Elements. New privacy walls and fences should be compatible
with the architectural style and age of the house. Appropriate materials
include: stuccoed masonry, adobe, stone, cast iron, and wood picket.
Unacceptable materials include: chain link, unpainted redwood, rough cedar,
post and rail. Unstuccoed concrete block as privacy wall or fence facing the
street side(s) of a property are not permitted. If a new carport will be
constructed on the site , the carport and driveway should be located at the
side or rear of the property whenever possible. Mailboxes should be compatible
with the style of the building and surrounding neighborhood.
      7.   Landscaping. Landscaping should respect the historic period of the
neighborhood, as well as the architectural style of the structure, and should
not obstruct the public view of the building.
7.4   El Presidio Historic Preservation Zone (HPZ)
   A.   Background.
   The El Presidio HPZ, an approximately 12-block area located immediately
north of the downtown governmental center, is linked both physically and
historically to the center of life in Tucson. The area was designated a HPZ by
the City of Tucson in 1975 and a National Register District in 1976. District
boundaries are shown on the map below.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3196.jpg]
   B.   Architectural Character and Streetscape
   Although a relatively small and homogeneous neighborhood in many respects,
the El Presidio HPZ reflects a diversity of architectural styles. Sonoran,
Transformed Sonoran, Spanish Colonial Revival, Victorian, Prairie, and Bungalow
styles are all represented. The Sonoran style, part of the Spanish-Mexican
vernacular tradition, is characterized by thick-walled adobe buildings set on
the street property line; flat roofs with high parapet walls, stuccoed or left
exposed; round wood beams (vigas); saguaro-rib roof decks; and projecting
drainpipes (canales), which penetrate the parapet wall at roof level . The
buildings generally have horizontal massing, with width predominating over
height. Exterior doors are usually placed flush with the inside wall creating a
deeply recessed entry when viewed from the street. Windows are installed flush
with the outside wall, creating a shelf or window seat for interior spaces.
Floor plans vary using a central hall (zaguan) or have a series of rooms
parallel or perpendicular to the street. Transformed Sonoran buildings are
similar to this earlier vernacular style, with the addition of a sloping gable
or pyramidal roof.
   Other architectural and site design features in the District arrived after
the Southern Pacific Railroad in 1880. Some architectural styles, such as the
Queen Anne, Victorian, Tudor Revival, and Prairie styles, were introduced from
the East and Midwest. Many of these styles were intermixed, and the result is
often referred to as Anglo-American Victorian. Victorian houses reflecting this
eclectic style are generally constructed of brick and have complex roofs and
intricate wood detailing. The El Presidio HPZ also has several examples of
Spanish Colonial and Mission Revival structures. The streetscape of El Presidio
reflects both Spanish-Mexican site planning concepts and later Anglo design
influences. Streets such as Meyer and Court illustrate the Sonoran tradition
with row houses built to the front property line. Open spaces were generally
interior courtyard spaces. In contrast to this tradition, many of the houses
along Main Avenue show Anglo site planning concepts. Houses such as the
Hereford House and the Franklin House were built in architectural styles
popular in the East and Midwest. These Prairie and Victorian adaptations were
set back from the street and surrounded by trees and lush vegetation in front,
side, and rear yards.
   C.   Specific Historic Preservation Zone Guidelines for El Presidio
   In addition to the development criteria listed above, the following HPZ
criteria provide additional guidance to applicants contemplating renovation or
new construction.
      1.   Development Zone. In the El Presidio HPZ, there are many instances
where different building styles are located side by side or across from each
other within the same development zone. Because of the heterogeneous nature of
this HPZ, the design context within the development zone will be evaluated as
part of HPZ review, particularly for proposed renovations. Plans submitted with
proposed alterations that are not compatible with the character, period(s), or
style of the subject property, even though examples of similar alterations are
found within the development zone will not be approved by the Advisory Board.
Renovations must be consistent with the style and period(s) of the subject
building, despite the existence of other styles within the development zone.
The applicant should avoid grafting on stylistic details from neighboring
buildings of a different timeframe or architectural style.
      2.   District Review Categories.
   Level One: Basic zoning regulations and design criteria in the UDC
   Level One design criteria focus on site planning and overall site design
issues addressed in the UDC and discussed in detail in this technical standard.
(See Sections
9-02.3 through Section
9-02.6.) The submittal will be evaluated using these design elements. Any
submittal that conflicts with UDC provisions applicable to these overall site
design issues will not be recommended for approval . (References in parentheses
are to subsections of this technical standard.)
      1.   Building spacing (see Site Utilization, Section
9-02.3.7);
      2.   Lot coverage (see Site Utilization, Section
9-02.3.7);
      3.   Yard limits (see Site Utilization, Section
9-02.3.7);
      4.   Setbacks (see Setbacks, Section
9-02.3.3);
      5.   Density of use (see Setbacks, Section
9-02.3.3);
      6.   Bulk (see Building Form, Section
9-02.3.10);
      7.   Height (see Height, Section
9-02.3.2); and,
      8.   Signage (see Signs, Section
9-02.5.0).
   Level Two: Specific Elements in the HPZ’s Design Vocabulary
   Level Two design criteria focus on elements of building style and detailing
to determine whether the proposed design is appropriate with respect to the
following:
      1.   Simplicity (see Details, Section
9-02.3.9);
      2.   Elements of composition (see Projections and Recessions, Section
9-02.3.8);
      3.   Symmetrical or asymmetrical appearance (see Building Form, Section
9-02.3.10, and Rhythm, Section
9-02.3.11);
      4.   Basic shape or form (see Building Form, Section
9-02.3.10);
      5.   Roof form (including skylights) and pitch (see Roof Types, Section
9-02.3.5);
      6.   Door and window patterns (see Rhythm, Section
9-02.3.11, and Details, Section
9-02.3.9);
      7.   Characteristic local forms (stoops, porches, etc.) (see Projections
and Recessions, Section
9-02.3.8);
      8.   Expression of detailing (see Details, Section
9-02.3.9). Details must reflect the style and period of the structure despite
the existence of non-approved details in the development zone;
      9.   Materials (see Surface Texture, Section
9-02.3.6);
      10.   Surface texture (see Surface Texture, Section
9-02.3.6). Textures must reflect the style and period of the structure despite
the existence of non-approved textures in the development zone;
      11.   Colors (see Color, Section
9-02.4.1). Colors must reflect the style and period of the structure despite
the existence of non-approved colors in the development zone;
      12.   Gutters and down spouts (see Details, Section
9-02.3.9);
      13.   Peripheral walls and/or fencing (see Enclosures, Section
9-02.4.3);
      14.   Lighting fixtures (see Details, Section
9-02.3.9);
      15.   Landscape and hardscape (see Landscaping, Section
9-02.4.2). Landscaping will be reviewed for appropriateness of massing and
plant materials on a case-by-case basis; and,
      16.   Mechanical Equipment (HVAC, satellite dishes, solar panels) (see
Utilities, Section
9-02.4.4).
   Level Three: Environmental Relationships
   Level Three design criteria focus on the overall relationship of the
proposed design to site surroundings and character. The proposed design will be
evaluated to determine whether it is appropriate with respect to the following:
      1.   Scale (see Building Form, Section
9-02.3.10);
      2.   Rhythm of the block space (see Rhythm, Section
9-02.3.11);
      3.   Orientation (see Site Utilization, Section
9-02.3.7);
      4.   Proportion (see Proportion, Section
9-02.3.4);
      5.   Ground cover and plantings (see Landscaping, Section
9-02.4.2);
      6.   Parking Requirements (see Parking, Section
9-02.6.0); and,
      7.   General character of the neighborhood (see General, Section
9-02.3.1).
7.5   Fort Lowell Historic Preservation Zone (HPZ)
   A.   Background. The Fort Lowell Historic Preservation Zone, an area of
approximately 150 acres, is located southwest of the confluence of the Tanque
Verde, Pantano, and Rillito Washes. The map below shows HPZ boundaries.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3198.jpg]
   A 1995 survey of the HPZ lists approximately 30 Contributing Historic
Properties. In addition, nearly 70 recently constructed residences in the La
Sonrisa, San Miguel, and Bosque Ranch developments are designated as
Contributing Non-historic Properties. (See Technical Standard 9-02.8.0.) The
area north of Fort Lowell Road was designated by the Pima County Board of
Supervisors as a County Historic District in 1976. In 1978, in order to
preserve the historical Fort remains, Hohokam sites , and several biological
communities, the area including and surrounding Fort Lowell Park was designated
the “Fort Lowell Multiple Resource Area” and listed on the National Register of
Historic Places. In 1981, the Mayor and Council designated the area south of
Fort Lowell Road as the City Fort Lowell Historic Preservation Zone. Eleven
years later, the city annexed the area between Fort Lowell Road and the Rillito
and Pantano washes; the County and City Historic Preservation Zones were
combined into one City Fort Lowell Historic Preservation Zone. San Pedro
Chapel, located west of the HPZ boundary, was built by the people of the
Village of El Fuerte in Mission Revival style and dedicated in 1932. It was
designated as the first City Historic Landmark in 1982. In 1993, it was placed
on the State and National Registers of Historic Places. The Fort Lowell
neighborhood is a unique area in metropolitan Tucson, reflecting a wide range
of historic, scenic, rural, and natural resources.
   The first documented remains of settlement show a large community of Hohokam
people, who lived and farmed in the area from about 300 to 1250 A.D. In 1873,
the military began to build Fort Lowell. During the Fort days, a number of
adobe homes were built to the east of Swan Road--on the road from the Fort to
Tucson and are still in use. Just west of the Fort, the sutler’s store, or the
post trader’s store, was built by John B. “Pie” Allen, an important historical
figure in Tucson and the Arizona Territory. This structure was restored and is
in use as a home today. Fort Lowell was the base of operations during the U.S.
Army campaigns against the Apaches. The Fort was abandoned in 1891 and shortly
thereafter, Sonoran and Chihuahuan farming and ranching families came north
from Mexico to the rich bottomlands of the Rillito and Pantano washes. They
adapted the deserted Fort buildings to their own use and as time passed, they
acquired land and built homes. Moving west of the Fort, the Village of El
Fuerte was established. At about the same time, Mormons established dairy farms
and maintained the several irrigation ditches which had probably been built
before the Fort by nearby farmers and ranchers. Originally from Utah and
Colorado, as well as from the colonies in Chihuahua, these Mormons established
the community of Binghampton, near Fort Lowell Road and Dodge Boulevard.
   Because later growth was incremental and low density, the cultural landscape
generally developed in harmony with the opportunities and limits of the area’s
natural resources. Increased development in recent years and a rapidly dropping
water table have placed the remaining groves of mesquites at risk. Development
criteria included within the HPZ ordinance, review guidelines developed by the
Historic Zone Advisory Board, and policies established for the greater Fort
Lowell area (in the Old Fort Lowell Neighborhood Plan) together help to
maintain the historic, cultural, and natural resources of the area.
   B.   Architectural Character and Streetscape.
   Houses in the Fort Lowell Historic Preservation Zone reflect a simple
vernacular style with design roots in the Sonoran tradition. Distinct styles
include Sonoran Military, Sonoran Ranch, Santa Fe-Sonoran Ranch, and Bungalow
Vernacular. Structures are single story, of adobe or other masonry
construction, with parapet flat roofs, although gabled roofs also occur in
bungalow adaptations. Buildings have horizontal massing, with width
predominating over height. Solid walls predominate over voids, such as windows
and door openings. Exterior doors are usually placed flush with the inside wall
creating a deeply recessed entry when viewed from the exterior or the street.
Windows are installed flush with the outside wall, creating a shelf or window
seat for the interior rooms. The area’s rural and historic low density
residential land uses resulted in random site utilization, irregular street
setbacks, and organic rather than planned growth. This informal and incremental
growth pattern is complemented by informality in landscaping design and plant
materials. Generally, native plants are favored since they help maintain
habitat values and complement vernacular house styles. Together architectural
styles, site design, and landscaping reinforce the interdependent relationship
that exists between the natural and cultural environments in the HPZ.
   C.   Specific Historic Preservation Zone Guidelines for the Fort Lowell
Historic Preservation Zone.
   In addition to the development criteria listed above, the following HPZ
criteria provide additional guidance to applicants contemplating renovations or
new construction. For a more detailed explanation, see the District’s
Guidelines available from the Fort Lowell Historic Advisory Board.
      1.   Setbacks. Historically, there has been great variety in front
setbacks, rather than strict adherence to a prevailing setback. Projects will
be evaluated for conformance to the general character or pattern of front and
interior setbacks within the development zone.
      2.   Site Utilization. The informal, semi-rural, low-density quality of
site  design should be continued throughout the HPZ for new construction.
      3.   Proportion. Buildings are greater in length than in height and roof
lines are irregular.
      4.   Pattern/Rhythm. Solid walls predominate over voids. Openings should
be a minimum of two feet from building corners. Symmetry is not architecturally
characteristic in the Fort Lowell HPZ.
      5.   Roof Types. Flat roofs with parapets are characteristic. Sloping
porch roofs may be shingled or metal sheeting. Mission tile is not a compatible
material.
      6.   Texture. Building walls can be lime or mud stucco (plaster) with
smooth or sand finish or exposed sun-dried adobe. When stucco is being replaced
on the entire exterior of a Contributing historic building or structure, a lime
or mud stucco should be used; cement based stucco should not be used. When
stucco is being repaired, the same material should be used. On Contributing
historic buildings and structures, stucco application with expansion joints and
modern textures are not allowed. Buildings and structures that were stuccoed
historically should not have their stucco sheathings entirely or partially
removed without being replaced with new stucco.
      7.   Color. Soft earth tones of light to middle value predominate in the
area. However, dark colors and stark primaries should be avoided. Blue window
trim is common.
   Property owners do not need approval for painting or repainting a structure.
However, since color is important to the character of the Fort Lowell HPZ, the
Advisory Board recommends that all repainting projects, regardless of size and
scope, adhere to the color guidelines as stated above.
      8.   Landscaping. Landscaping should be informal native desert plant
materials. As much of the original vegetation as possible should be retained.
Stormwater runoff is best retained and detained on site  for passive irrigation
use.
      9.   Architectural Detail. Frame-and-panel or plank wooden doors are most
common in the area and French doors are acceptable even though not historic.
French doors may be installed if they are not visible from streets or adjacent
properties. Double-hung or casement wood frame windows are most historically
correct. Painted steel casement windows with divided lights are acceptable with
the vertical dimension greater than the horizontal. Arched openings over the
main entrance may be appropriate, although rows of arches characteristic of
Spanish Colonial or Mediterranean architecture are not. Exposed wooden lintels
over window and door openings are encouraged.
7.6   San Xavier Environs
   A.   Background.
   The San Xavier Environs Historic Preservation Zone applies to an area
extending one and one-half miles from San Xavier Mission (see map below).
   This HPZ was established in 1972 by Pima County in order to conserve
heritage values by designating an “area of influence” from the Mission, the
county’s most recognized historic landmark. When areas included in the county-
designated San Xavier Environs Historic Zone were annexed by the City of Tucson
in 1994, Pima County Code provisions were adopted by the Mayor and Council to
provide comparable protection within the San Xavier “area of influence” for
properties between Valencia Road and Los Reales Road.
   B.   Specific Development Regulations.
   Specific regulations of the City San Xavier Environs Historic Preservation
Zone apply to those areas within the city limits that lie within a one and one-
half mile radius from the Mission. Other provisions of the Historic
Preservation Zone ordinance do not apply within the San Xavier Environs
Historic Preservation Zone. The San Xavier Environs HPZ is divided into three
sub-areas as shown on the map. Each of these areas has maximum residential
densities (two residences per 36,000 square feet in Area A; four residences per
36,000 square feet in Area B; and six residences per 36,000 square feet in Area
C with development standards that address lighting, screening, and height
restrictions. An applicant with property within the San Xavier Environs HPZ
should refer to the UDC (Section 2.8.8.13) for more detailed information.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3200.jpg]
7.7   West University Historic Preservation Zone (HPZ)
   A.   Background.
   The West University HPZ is an approximately 60-block area located between
the University of Arizona and downtown. District boundaries are shown on the
map below.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3202.jpg]
   The area was designated a HPZ by the City of Tucson in 1984. Prior to local
designation, the District was listed on the National Register of Historic
Places. The 1995 survey of the District lists more than 600 buildings or
structures as Contributing Historic Properties. (See Technical Standard 9-
02.8.0.)
   B.   Architectural Character and Streetscape.
   The West University Historic Preservation Zone retains the residential scale
pedestrian environment of an early 1900s community in the heart of metropolitan
Tucson. While predominantly residentially developed, two commercial areas, on
Fourth Avenue and University Boulevard, are located within the West University
Historic Preservation Zone boundaries.
   Although there are some Sonoran Transitional buildings in the West
University neighborhood, reflecting Tucson’s Spanish colonial and Mexican
heritage, the majority of architectural and site design features in the HPZ
arrived after the Southern Pacific Railroad in 1880. Some architectural styles,
such as the Queen Anne, Victorian, and Neo-Classical Revival styles, were
introduced from the Midwest and East Coast. Instead of being introduced to
Tucson with their characteristics intact, several of these imported styles were
intermixed, and the result is often referred to as Anglo-American Victorian.
Victorian houses reflecting this eclectic style are generally constructed of
brick and have complex roofs and intricate wood detailing. Other styles, such
as Mission Revival, Spanish Colonial Revival, Western Stick Style, and the
California Bungalow, arrived from the West Coast. The latter is the most
characteristic style in the HPZ, and even this style was transformed over time
to include variety in materials and detailing.
   The West University HPZ includes bungalows that are quite small, two rooms
wide and two or three rooms deep, and have a broad gable roof. Stuccoed brick
is the most common material with wood structural members along the roof eaves
and an exposed porch with tapered columns of stucco or stone. In spite of this
rich diversity of design influences and styles, the buildings in the HPZ share
homogeneity of scale and density - a collective character that contributes to
the neighborhood’s unique sense of place.
   The relationship of houses to streets and alleys was also defined by
imported design influences. In contrast to Sonoran row houses which lack front
setbacks, houses in the West University neighborhood have uniform, albeit
modest, setbacks copied from early 20th century City Beautiful style suburbs
popular in the Midwest and East. In addition, nearly all the houses in the
neighborhood, regardless of architectural style, include a clearly indicated
front entry and front porch. Symmetrically placed front walks, sidewalks, a
clearly defined planting strip between the sidewalk and street, and many mature
trees collectively contribute to the area’s pedestrian-friendly street
character.
   C.   Specific District Guidelines.
   In addition to development criteria described in this technical standard,
the West University Historic Zone Advisory Board has prepared design guidelines
applicable within the HPZ. The applicant should contact the Chair of the
Advisory Board for a current copy of these specific HPZ guidelines.
9-02.8.0   HISTORIC PRESERVATION ZONES, SITES, AND STRUCTURES
8.1   General
   A.   Purpose. To establish a centralized list of neighborhoods, districts,
sites , and structures that have been designated as HISTORIC LANDMARK,
CONTRIBUTING-HISTORIC, CONTRIBUTING-NONHISTORIC, NONCONTRIBUTING, and
INTRUSION. The list also includes structures in the Downtown Heritage Incentive
District which are either designated on the National Register of Historic
Places or have the potential for designation. These lists are for the purpose
of convenient accessibility, public awareness, and effective enforcement of
city regulations on historic preservation.
   B.   Applicability. Listed within this standard are the districts, sites ,
and structures designated as HISTORIC LANDMARK, CONTRIBUTING-HISTORIC,
CONTRIBUTING NON-HISTORIC, NONCONTRIBUTING, and INTRUSION under the
applicability of Chapter 23 of the Tucson Code or any city regulation that was
in effect prior to the adoption of Section 2.8.8 of the UDC.
8.2   Historic Preservation Zones
   Listed below are all the districts within the Historic Preservation Zone
that have been designated by the Mayor and Council. As part of the list, all
pertinent information relative to the District, such as historic structures,
sites , adoption information, boundaries, and permitted uses, will be included
for proper implementation and enforcement.
8.3   Armory Park Historic District
   A.   Established: December 23, 1974, by Ordinance No. 4300.
   Amended: November 14, 1983, by Ordinance No. 5902.
   Amended: June 12, 1995, by Ordinance No. 8520.
   Amended: July 10, 1995, by Ordinance No. 8544.
   B.   Boundaries and Location: The boundaries and location of the Armory Park
Historic District are as designated on Map 2-1.
   C.   List of HISTORIC LANDMARK, CONTRIBUTING-HISTORIC (CH), CONTRIBUTING-
NONHISTORIC (CN), NONCONTRIBUTING (NHNC), and INTRUSION (I).
TAX PARCEL NUMBER ADDRESS STRUCTURE OR SITE STATUS
TAX PARCEL NUMBER ADDRESS                         STRUCTURE OR SITE STATUS
BLOCK 99, CITY OF TUCSON
117-06-222 0      346 E. 12th St.                 CH
117-06-223 0      340 E. 12th St.                 CH
117-06-224 0      334-336 E. 12th St.             CH
117-06-225 0      328 E. 12th St.                 CH
117-06-226 0                                     Vacant
117-06-227 0      316 E. 12th St.                 CH
117-06-228 0      203 S. 4th Ave.                 CH
117-06-229 0      211 S. 4th Ave.                 CH
117-06-230 0                                     Vacant
117-06-231 0      218-226 S. 3rd Ave.             CH
117-06-232 0      219 S. 4th Ave.                 CH
117-06-233 0      227 S. 4th Ave.                 CH
117-06-234 0      244 & 266 S. Railroad Ave.      CH
117-06-235 0      228 S. 3rd Ave.                 CH
117-06-236 0      230 S. 3rd Ave.                 CH
117-06-237 0      236 S. 3rd Ave.                 CH
                  270 S. Railroad Ave.            CH
117-06-238 0      345 E. 13th St.                 CH
117-06-239 0                                     Vacant
117-06-240 0      237 S. 4th Ave.                 CH
117-06-241 0      245 S. 4th Ave.                 CH
BLOCK 100, CITY OF TUCSON
117-06-242 0      238-248 E. 12th St.             CH
117-06-243 0      214-216 E. 12th St.             CH
117-06-244 0                                     Vacant
117-06-248 0      211-219 S. 5th Ave.             CH
117-06-249 0                                     Parking Lot
117-06-250 0      225 S. Herbert Ave.             CH
117-06-251 0      218 S. 4th Ave.                 CH
117-06-252 0      220 S. 4th Ave.                 CH
117-06-253 0      227 S. Herbert Ave.             CH
117-06-254 0      229 S. Herbert Ave.             CH
117-06-256 0      225-227 S. 5th Ave.             CH
117-06-257 0      230 S. Herbert Ave.             CH
117-06-258 0      231-237 S. 5th Ave.             CH
117-06-259 0      231 S. Herbert Ave.             CH
117-06-260 0      228 S. 4th Ave.                 CH
117-06-261 0      238 S. 4th Ave.                 CH
117-06-262 0      246 S. 4th Ave.                 CH
117-06-263 0      221-223 E. 13th St.             CH
117-06-264 0      219 E. 13th St.                 CH
117-06-265 0      245 S. 5th Ave.                 CH
BLOCK 101, CITY OF TUCSON
117-06-267 0      300 S. 5th Ave./200 E. 13th St. CH/NHNC
BLOCK 102, CITY OF TUCSON
117-06-268 0      306 S. 3rd Ave.                 CH
117-06-269 0      340 E. 13th St.                 CH
117-06-270 A      330 E. 13th St.                 CH
117-06-271 0      318 E. 13th St.                 CH
117-06-273 A      312 S. 3rd Ave.                 CH
117-06-274 A      331-337 S. Railroad Ave.        CN
117-06-274 B      322-328 S. 3rd Ave.             NHNC
117-06-275 0      319 S. 4th Ave.                 CH
                  319 S. Railroad Ave.            CH
117-06-276 0      329 S. 4th Ave.                 CH
117-06-277 0      330 S. 3rd Ave.                 CH
117-06-278 0      340 S. 3rd Ave.                 CH
117-06-279 0      337 S. 4th Ave.                 CH
117-06-280 0      345 S. 4th Ave.                 NHNC
117-06-281 0      344 S. 3rd Ave.                 CH
BLOCK 107, CITY OF TUCSON
117-07-001 0      348 E. 14th St.                 CH
117-07-002 0      340 E. 14th St.                 CH
117-07-003 0      332 E. 14th St.                 CH
117-07-004 0      330 E. 14th St.                 CH
117-07-005 0      405 S. 4th Ave.                 CH
                  405-1/2 S. 4th Ave.             CH
117-07-006 0      417 S. 4th Ave.                 CH
117-07-007 0      414 S. 3rd Ave.                 CH
117-07-008 0      416-418 & 420-422 S. 3rd Ave.   CH
                  417 S. Railroad Ave.            CH
117-07-009 0                                     Vacant
117-07-010 0      427 S. 4th Ave.                 CH
                  429-431 S. Railroad Ave.        CH
117-07-011 0      428 S. 3rd Ave.                 CH
117-07-012 0      438 S. 3rd Ave.                 CH
117-07-013 0      333 E. 15th St.                 CN
                  443 S. Railroad Ave.            CH
117-07-014 0      445 S. 4th Ave.                 CH
117-07-015 0      446 S. 3rd Ave.                 CH
BLOCK 108, CITY OF TUCSON
117-07-017 0      406 S. 4th Ave.                 CH
117-07-018 0      222 E. 14th St.                 CH
117-07-019 0      220 E. 14th St.                 CH
117-07-020 0      417 S. 5th Ave.                 CH
117-07-021 0      414 S. 4th Ave.                 CH
117-07-022 0      420 S. 4th Ave.                 CH
117-07-023 0      419-421 S. 5th Ave.             CH
117-07-024 0      423 S. 5th Ave                  CH
                  423 S. Herbert Ave.             CH
117-07-024 0      423 S. 5th Ave.                 CH
                  423 S. Herbert Ave.             CH
117-07-025 0      429 S. 5th Ave.                 CH
                  429-1/2 S. 5th Ave.             CH
117-07-026 0                                     Vacant
117-07-027 0                                     Vacant
117-07-028 0      441 S. 4th Ave.                 CH
                  225 E. 15th St.                 CH
117-07-029 0      437-441 S. 5th Ave.             CH
117-07-030 0      219 E. 15th St.                 CH
117-07-031 0      445 S. 5th Ave.                 CH
BLOCK 109, CITY OF TUCSON
117-07-032 0      404-408 S. 5th Ave.             CH
117-07-033 0      138-140 E. 14th St.             CH
117-07-034 0      136 E. 14th St.                 CH
117-07-035 0      126 E. 14th St.                 CH
117-07-036 0      415-435 S. 6th Ave.             CH/CN
117-07-038 0      422 S. 5th Ave.                 CH
117-07-041 0      422 S. Arizona Ave.             CH
117-07-042 0      424 S. Arizona Ave.             CH
117-07-043 0      424-426 S. 5th Ave.             CH
                  425 S. Arizona Ave.             CH
117-07-044 A      438 S. Arizona Ave.             CH
117-07-044 B      436 S. 5th Ave.                 CH
117-07-047 0      115 E. 15th St.                 CH
117-07-048 0      125-129 E. 15th St.             CH
117-07-049 0      460 S. 5th Ave.                 CN
BLOCK 110, CITY OF TUCSON
117-07-050 0      502-506 S. 5th Ave.             CH
117-07-051 A      120 E. 15th St.                 CH
117-07-052 A      505 S. 6th Ave.                 CH
117-07-053 A      509 S. 6th Ave.                 CH
117-07-054 0      508-512 S. 5th Ave.             CH
117-07-055 0      516 S. 5th Ave.                 CH
117-07-056 0      522 S. 5th Ave.                 CH
117-07-057 0      515 S. 6th Ave.                 CH
117-07-058 0      521 S. 6th Ave.                 CH
117-07-059 0      525 S. 6th Ave.                 CH
117-07-060 0      530 S. 5th Ave.                 CH
                  530 S. Arizona Ave.             CH
117-07-061 0      534 S. 5th Ave.                 CH
117-07-062 0      527-533 S. 6th Ave.             CH/NHNC
117-07-063 0      541 S. 6th Ave.                 CH
117-07-064 0      115 E. 16th St.                 CH
117-07-065 0      117-119 E. 16th St.             CH
117-07-066 0      543 S. 6th Ave.                 CH
117-07-067 0      125 E. 16th St.                 CH
117-07-068 0      544 S. 5th Ave.                 CH
BLOCK 111, CITY OF TUCSON
117-07-069 0      502 S. 4th Ave.                 CH
117-07-070 0      226 E. 15th St.                 CH
117-07-071 A      220-222 E. 15th St.             CH
117-07-071 B      501 S. 5th Ave.                 CN
117-07-072 0      515-517 S. 5th Ave.             CH
117-07-073 0      518-520 S. Herbert Ave.         CH
117-07-074 0      522 S. Herbert Ave.             CH
117-07-075 0      524 S. Herbert Ave.             CH
117-07-076 A      512 S. 4th Ave.                 CH
117-07-076 B      509 S. Herbert Ave.             CH
117-07-077 0      516 S. 4th Ave.                 CH
                  525-527 S. Herbert Ave.         CH
117-07-078 0      520 S. 4th Ave.                 CH
                  529 S. Herbert Ave.             CH
117-07-079 0      526 S. Herbert Ave.             CH
117-07-080 0      530 S. Herbert Ave.             CH
117-07-081 0      521 S. 5th Ave.                 CH
117-07-083 0      529 S. 5th Ave.                 CH
117-07-084 0      530-532 S. 4th Ave.             CH
117-07-085 0      542-544 S. 4th Ave.             CH
117-07-086 0      535 S. 5th Ave.                 CH
117-07-087 0      537 S. 5th Ave.                 CH
117-07-088 0      545 S. 5th Ave.                 CN
                  209 E. 16th St.                 CH
117-07-089 0      546 S. 4th Ave.                 CH
BLOCK 112, CITY OF TUCSON
117-07-090 0      350 E. 15th St.                 CN
117-07-091 0      330 E. 15th St.                 CN
                  505 S. 4th Ave.                 CH
117-07-092 0      509-513 S. 4th Ave.             CH
117-07-093 A      512 S. 3rd Ave.                 CN
117-07-095 A      521 S. 4th Ave.                 CH
117-07-095 B                                     Vacant
117-07-096 0      523-527 S. 4th Ave.             CH
                  526 S. Railroad Ave.            CH
117-07-097 A      528 S. 3rd Ave.                 CH
117-07-097 B      529 S. Railroad Ave.            CH
117-07-098 0      536 S. 3rd Ave.                 CH
117-07-099 0      546 S. 3rd Ave.                 CH
                  333-335 & 337-339 E. 16th St.   CH
117-07-100 0      537 S. 4th Ave.                 CH
117-07-101 0      545 S. 4th Ave.                 CH
BLOCK 116, CITY OF TUCSON
117-07-103 0                                     Vacant
117-07-104 0                                     Vacant
117-07-105 0      424 E. 16th St.                 CH
117-07-107 0      416 E. 16th St.                 CH
                  620 S. Bean Ave.                CH
117-07-108 0      412 E. 16th St.                 CH
117-07-109 0      408 E. 16th St.                 CH
117-07-110 0      617 S. 3rd Ave.                 CH
117-07-111 0      619 S. 3rd Ave.                 CH
117-07-112 0      621 S. 3rd Ave.                 CH
117-07-113 0      622 S. Bean Ave.                CH
117-07-114 0      628 S. 2nd Ave.                 CH
117-07-115 0      627 S. 3rd Ave.                 CH
117-07-116 0      632 S. 2nd Ave.                 CH
117-07-117 0      640 S. 2nd Ave.                 CH
117-07-118 0      417-419 E. 17th St.             CH
117-07-119 0      415 E. 17th St.                 CH
117-07-120 0      641 S. 3rd Ave.                 CH
117-07-121 0      645 S. 3rd Ave.                 CH
117-07-122 0      425 E. 17th St.                 CH/NHNC
117-07-123 0      648 S. 2nd Ave.                 CH
BLOCK 117, CITY OF TUCSON
117-07-124 B      604 S. 3rd Ave.                 CH
117-07-125 B      336 E. 16th St.                 CH
117-07-126 0      334 E. 16th St.                 CH
117-07-127 0      330 E. 16th St.                 CH/NHNC
117-07-128 0      601-603 S. 4th Ave.             CH
117-07-129 0      605-607 S. 4th Ave.             CH
117-07-130 0      619 S. 4th Ave.                 CH
117-07-131 A      606 S. Railroad Ave.            CH
117-07-132 0      614 S. 3rd Ave.                 CH
117-07-133 0      620 S. 3rd Ave.                 CH
117-07-134 0      622 S. Railroad Ave.            CH
117-07-135 A      621-623 S. 4th Ave.             CH
117-07-136 0      627-629 S. 4th Ave.             CH
                  630 S. Railroad Ave.            CH
117-07-137 0      630 S. 3rd Ave.                 CH
117-07-138 0      636-638 S. 3rd Ave.             CH
117-07-139 0      639 & 641-643 S. Railroad Ave.  CH
117-07-140 0      637 S. 4th Ave.                 CH
                  636 S. Railroad Ave.            CH
117-07-141 0      647 S. 4th Ave.                 CH
117-07-142 0      646 S. 3rd Ave.                 CH
BLOCK 118, CITY OF TUCSON
117-07-143 0      600 S. 4th Ave.                 CH
117-07-144 0      230 E. 16th St.                 CH
                  601 & 607 S. 5th Ave.           CH
117-07-145 0      607-1/2 S. 5th Ave.             CH
                  606 S. Herbert Ave.             CH
117-07-146 0      611 S. 5th Ave.                 CH/CN
117-07-147 0      610 S. 4th Ave.                 NHNC
117-07-148 0      620 S. 4th Ave.                 CH/CN
117-07-149 0      619 S. 5th Ave.                 CH
117-07-150 0      625 S. 5th Ave.                 CH
117-07-151 0      629 S. 5th Ave.                 CH
                  627 S. Herbert Ave.             CH
117-07-152 0      630 S. 4th Ave.                 CH
117-07-153 0      640 S. 4th Ave.                 CH
117-07-154 0      233 E. 17th St.                 CH
117-07-155 0      227 E. 17th St.                 CH
117-07-156 0      631 S. 5th Ave.                 CH
                  636 S. Herbert Ave.             CH
117-07-157 A      643 S. 5th Ave.                 CH
117-07-157 B      647 S. 5th Ave.                 CH
117-07-158 0      215 E. 17th St.                 CH
117-07-159 0      217 E. 17th St.                 CH
117-07-160 0      650 S. 4th Ave.                 CH
BLOCK 119, CITY OF TUCSON
117-07-161 0      600 S. 5th Ave.                 CH
117-07-162 0      120 E. 16th St.                 CH
117-07-163 0      112-114 E. 16th St.             CH
117-07-164 0      603-605 S. 6th Ave.             CH
117-07-165 0      611 S. 6th Ave.                 CH
117-07-166 0      612 S. 5th Ave.                 CH
117-07-167 0      618 S. 5th Ave.                 CH
117-07-168 0      620 S. 5th Ave.                 CH
                  619 S. 6th Ave.                 CN
117-07-169 0      621 S. 6th Ave.                 CH
                  627 S. 6th Ave.                 NHCH
117-07-170 0      617 S. 6th Ave.                 NHNC
117-07-171 0      629 S. 6th Ave.                 CH
117-07-172 0      632 S. 5th Ave.                 CH/NHNC
117-07-173 0      634 S. 5th Ave.                 CH
117-07-174 0      631-639 S. 6th Ave.             CH
                  631 S. Arizona Ave.             CH
117-07-175 0      647 S. 6th Ave.                 CH
117-07-176 0      106 E. 17th St.                 CH
117-07-177 0      644 S. 5th Ave.                 CH
BLOCK 122, CITY OF TUCSON
117-07-210 A      148 E. 17th St.                 CH
117-07-211 C      140 E. 17th St.                 CH
117-07-212 0      132 E. 17th St.                 CN
117-07-213 0      105 E. 17th St.                 CH
117-07-214 0      705 S. 6th Ave.                 CH
                  102 E. 17th St.                 CH
117-07-215 0      707-709 S. 6th Ave.             CH
117-07-216 A      711 S. 6th Ave.                 CN
117-07-218 0      720 S. 5th Ave.                 I
117-07-222 0      725 S. 6th Ave.                 NHNC
117-07-224 0      738 S. 5th Ave.                 CH
117-07-225 0      735 S. 6th Ave.                 CH
117-07-226 0      747 S. 6th Ave.                 CH
117-07-227 0      742-744 S. 5th Ave.             CH
BLOCK 123, STARR’S RESUB, CITY OF TUCSON
117-07-285 0                                     Vacant
117-07-286 0                                     Vacant
117-07-287 0                                     Vacant
117-07-288 0      218 E. 17th St.                 CH
117-07-289 0      216 E. 17th St.                 CH
117-07-290 0      212 E. 17th St.                 CH
117-07-291 0      701-703 S. 5th Ave.             CH
117-07-292 0      715-717 S. 5th Ave.             CH
117-07-293 0      723 S. 5th Ave.                 CH
117-07-294 0      724-728 S. Herbert Ave.         CH
117-07-295 0      730-734 S. Herbert Ave.         CH
117-07-296 0      725-729 S. 5th Ave.             CH
117-07-297 A                                     Vacant
117-07-297 B      748 S. 4th Ave.                 CN
117-07-298 A      731 S. 5th Ave.                 CN
117-07-298 B      736 S. Herbert Ave.             CN
117-07-299 0      733 S. 5th Ave.                 CH
                  740-742 S. Herbert Ave.         CH
117-07-300 0                                     Vacant
117-07-301 0      749 S. 5th Ave.                 CH
117-07-302 0      215 E. 18th St.                 CH
117-07-303 0      731-735 S. Herbert Ave.         NHNC
117-07-304 0      722 S. 4th Ave.                 CH
117-07-305 0                                     Vacant
BLOCK 124, CITY OF TUCSON
117-07-228 0      702 S. 3rd Ave.                 CH
117-07-229 0      326 E. 17th St.                 CH
117-07-230 0      320 E. 17th St.                 CH/CN
117-07-231 0      300-310-316 E. 17th St.         CH
117-07-232 0                                     Easement
117-07-233 0      714 S. 3rd Ave.                 CH
117-07-234 0      720 S. 3rd Ave.                 CH
117-07-235 0                                     Easement
117-07-236 0      719 S. 4th Ave.                 CH
117-07-237 0      727-729 S. 4th Ave.             CH
117-07-238 0      731 S. 4th Ave.                 CH
117-07-239 0      731-733 S. Railroad Ave.        CH
117-07-240 0      728 S. 3rd Ave.                 CH
117-07-241 0      732 S. 3rd Ave.                 CH
117-07-242 0      736 S. 3rd Ave.                 CH
117-07-243 0      742 S. 3rd Ave.                 CH
117-07-244 0      741 S. 4th Ave.                 CH
117-07-245 0      749 S. 4th Ave.                 CH
117-07-246 0      321 E. 18th St.                 CH
117-07-247 0      331 E. 18th St.                 CH
117-07-248 0      337 E. 18th St.                 CH
                  744 S. 3rd Ave.                 CH
BLOCK 125, CITY OF TUCSON
117-07-249 0      704 S. 2nd Ave.                 CH
117-07-250 0      428 E. 17th St.                 CH
117-07-251 0      426 E. 17th St.                 CH
117-07-252 A      701 S. 3rd Ave.                 CH
                  404 E. 17th St.                 CH
117-07-252 B      420-422 E. 17th St.             CH
117-07-253 A      707-709 S. 3rd Ave.             CH
117-07-254 0                                     Vacant
117-07-255 0      706 S. 2nd Ave.                 CH
117-07-256 0      710 S. 2nd Ave.                 CH
117-07-257 0      707-709 S. Bean Ave.            CH
117-07-258 A      715 S. 3rd Ave.                 CH
117-07-258 B                                     Vacant
117-07-259 0      720 S. 2nd Ave.                 CH
117-07-260 0      730-732 S. 2nd Ave.             CN
                  728 S. Bean Ave.                CN
117-07-261 0      727-729 S. 3rd Ave.             CH
117-07-262 0      733 S. 3rd Ave.                 CH
                  741 S. 3rd Ave.                 CH
117-07-263 0      419 E. 18th St.                 CH
                  419-1/2 E. 18th St.             CH
117-07-264 0      435 E. 18th St.                 I
117-07-267 0                                     Vacant
117-07-268 0      415 E. 18th St.                 CH
BLOCK 126, CITY OF TUCSON
117-07-271 0                                     Vacant
117-07-272 0      516 E. 17th St.                 CH
117-07-274 A      502 E. 17th St.                 CH
117-07-275 0      707 S. 2nd Ave.                 CH
117-07-276 0      717 S. 2nd Ave.                 CH
117-07-277 0      721 S. 2nd Ave.                 CH
117-07-279 0      731 S. Jacobus Ave.             CH
117-07-281 0      729 S. 2nd Ave.                 CH
117-07-282 0      739 S. 2nd Ave.                 CH
117-07-283 0      739 (Rear) S. 2nd Ave.          CH
117-07-284 0      749 S. 2nd Ave.                 CH
BLOCK 127, CITY OF TUCSON
117-08-002 0      520 E. 18th St.                 CH
117-08-003 0      516 E. 18th St.                 CH
117-08-004 0      510 E. 18th St.                 CH
117-08-005 0      502 E. 18th St.                 CH
117-08-006 0      821 S. 2nd Ave.                 CH
117-08-007 0      823 S. 2nd Ave.                 CH
117-08-009 0      826 S. Jacobus Ave.             CH
117-08-010 0      825 S. 2nd Ave.                 CH
117-08-011 0      831 S. 2nd Ave.                 CH
                  831 S. Jacobus Ave.             CH
117-08-012 0      519 E. 19th St.                 CH
117-08-014 0      849 S. 2nd Ave.                 CH
BLOCK 128, CITY OF TUCSON
117-08-016 0      802 S. 2nd Ave.                 CH
117-08-017 A      430 E. 18th St.                 CH
                  430-1/2 E. 18th St.             CH
117-08-017 B      426-428 E. 18th St.             CH
117-08-018 0      420 E. 18th St.                 CH
117-08-020 A      801 S. 3rd Ave.                 CH
117-08-021 A      806 S. Bean Ave.                CH
117-08-021 C      807 S. 3rd Ave.                 CH
117-08-022 0      815 S. Bean Ave.                CH
117-08-023 0      814 S. 2nd Ave.                 CH
117-08-024 0      820 S. 2nd Ave.                 CH
117-08-025 0      811 S. 3rd Ave.                 CH
117-08-026 0      815 S. 3rd Ave.                 CH
117-08-027 0      817 S. 3rd Ave.                 CH/CN
117-08-028 0      826 S. 2nd Ave.                 CH
117-08-029 0      838 S. 2nd Ave.                 CH
117-08-030 0      821-825 S. 3rd Ave.             CH
117-08-031 0      837 S. 3rd Ave.                 CH
117-08-032 0      419 E. 19th St.                 CH
117-08-033 0      427 E. 19th St.                 CH
117-08-034 0      846-848 S. 2nd Ave.             CH
BLOCK 129, CITY OF TUCSON
117-08-035 0      346 E. 18th St.                 CH
117-08-036 0      342 E. 18th St.                 CH
117-08-037 0      330 E. 18th St.                 NHNC
117-08-038 0      320-322 E. 18th St.             CH
117-08-039 0      803-807 S. 4th Ave.             CH
117-08-040 0      811 S. 4th Ave.                 CH
117-08-041 A      814 S. 3rd Ave.                 CH
117-08-041 B      814 S. Railroad Ave.            CH
117-08-042 0      820 S. 3rd Ave.                 CH
117-08-043 0      820 S. Railroad Ave.            CH
117-08-044 0      821 S. 4th Ave.                 CH
117-08-045 0      825 S. 4th Ave.                 CH
117-08-046 0      822 S. 3rd Ave.                 CH
117-08-047 0      826 S. 3rd Ave.                 CH
117-08-048 0      825 S. Railroad Ave.            CH
117-08-049 A      837 S. Railroad Ave.            CH
117-08-051 0      847-849 S. 4th Ave.             CN
117-08-052 0      365 E. 19th St.                 CH
117-08-053 0      830 S. 3rd Ave.                 CH
BLOCK 130, CITY OF TUCSON
117-08-054 0      802 S. 4th Ave.                 CH
117-08-055 0      808 S. 4th Ave.                 CH
117-08-056 0      222 E. 18th St.                 CH
117-08-057 0      803 S. 5th Ave.                 CH
117-08-058 0      813 S. 5th Ave.                 CH
117-08-059 0      806 S. Herbert Ave.             CH
117-08-060 0      810 S. Herbert Ave.             CH
117-08-061 0      810 S. 4th Ave.                 CH
117-08-062 0      812-814 S. 4th Ave.             CH
117-08-063 D      822 S. 4th Ave.                 CH
117-08-064 0      812 S. Herbert Ave.             CH
117-08-065 0      819 S. 5th Ave.                 CH
117-08-066 0      819-1/2 S. 5th Ave.             CH
117-08-067 A      818 S. Herbert Ave.             CH
117-08-068 0      827 S. Herbert Ave.             CH
117-08-069 0      824 S. 4th Ave.                 CH
117-08-070 A      840 S. 4th Ave.                 CH
117-08-071 0      840 S. Herbert Ave.             CH
117-08-072 A      821 S. 5th Ave.                 CH
117-08-073 0      847 S. 5th Ave.                 CH
117-08-074 0      215 E. 19th St.                 CH
117-08-075 A      848 S. 4th Ave.                 CH
117-08-075 B      848 S. 4th Ave.                 CN
BLOCK 131, CITY OF TUCSON
117-08-076 0                                     Vacant
117-08-081 0      812 S. 5th Ave.                 CH
117-08-082 0      822 S. 5th Ave.                 CH
117-08-083 0      818-820 S. Arizona Ave.         CH
117-08-087 0      827 S. Arizona Ave.             CH
117-08-088 0      828 S. 5th Ave.                 CH
117-08-089 0      844 S. 5th Ave.                 CH
117-08-092 0      850 S. 5th Ave.                 CN
BLOCK 226, CITY OF TUCSON
117-13-174 0      204-214 S. Scott Ave.           CH
BLOCK 231, CITY OF TUCSON
117-14-072 A      260 S. Scott Ave.               NHNC
117-14-073 B      31-33 & 35 E. McCormick St.     CH
117-14-078 A      330 S. Scott Ave.               CH
117-14-080 A      336-340 S. Scott Ave.           CH
117-14-083 0      344 S. Scott Ave.               CH
117-14-084 0      346 S. Scott Ave.               CH
BLOCK 232, CITY OF TUCSON
117-14-085 0      408 S. 6th Ave.                 CH
117-14-086 0      40 E. 14th St.                  CH
117-14-090 0      410 S. 6th Ave.                 CH
117-14-091 0      35 E. 15th St.                  CH
117-14-092 0      35 E. 15th St.                  CH
117-14-094 0      385 S. Stone Ave.               CH
117-14-095 0      35 E. 15th St.                  CH
117-14-096 0      35 E. 15th St.                  CH
117-14-097 0      25 E. 15th St.                  CH
117-14-098 0      23 E. 15th St.                  CH
117-14-100 0      19 E. 15th St.                  CH
117-14-101 0      417-419 S. Stone Ave.           CH
BLOCK 238, CITY OF TUCSON
117-14-200 0      502 S. 6th Ave.                 CH
117-14-201 0      28 E. 15th St.                  CH
117-14-202 0      24 E. 15th St.                  CH
117-14-203 0      16 E. 15th St.                  CH
117-14-204 0      443 S. Stone Ave.               CH
117-14-205 B      447 S. Stone Ave.               CH
117-14-207 0      512 S. Russell Ave.             CH
117-14-208 A      516 S. Russell Ave.             CH
117-14-209 0      512-514 S. 6th Ave.             CH
                  511 S. Russell Ave.             CN
117-14-210 0      522 S. 6th Ave.                 CH
117-14-211 0      521-523 S. Russell Ave.         CH
117-14-213 0      475 S. Stone Ave.               CH
                  522 S. Russell Ave.             CH
117-14-215 0      526-528 S. 6th Ave.             CH
117-14-216 A      538 S. 6th Ave.                 CN
                  535 S. Russell Ave.             CN
117-14-220 0      545 S. Russell Ave.             CH
117-14-221 0      544 S. 6th Ave.                 CH
BLOCK 258, CITY OF TUCSON
117-17-032 0      71 E. 13th St.                  CH
117-17-033 0      36-39 E. 13th St.               CH
117-17-034 0      273 S. Scott Ave.               CH
117-17-035 0      277 S. Scott Ave.               CH
117-17-036 0      314 S. 6th Ave.                 NHNC
                  316 S. 6th Ave.                 CH
117-17-037 0      324 S. 6th Ave.                 CH
117-17-038 0      281-283 S. Scott Ave.           CH
117-17-039 0      285 S. Scott Ave.               CH
117-17-040 0      287 S. Scott Ave.               CH
                  287-1/2 S. Scott Ave.           CH
117-17-041 0      334 S. 6th Ave.                 CH
117-17-042 0      344 S. 6th Ave.                 CH
117-17-043 0      346-348 S. 6th Ave.             CH
                  81-83 E. 14th St.               CH
117-17-044 0      343 S. Scott Ave.               CH
BLOCK 259, CITY OF TUCSON
117-17-045 0      200 E. 13th St.                 NHNC
117-17-046 0                                     I
117-17-047 0                                     I
117-17-048 0      307 S. 6th Ave.                 CH
117-17-049 0      315 S. 6th Ave.                 CN
117-17-050 0      321 S. 6th Ave.                 CH
                  320 S. Arizona Ave.             CH
117-17-052 0      333 S. 6th Ave.                 I
117-17-054 0      337 S. 6th Ave.                 CH
117-17-055 0      345-347 S. 6th Ave.             CH
117-17-056 0      115 E. 14th St.                 CH
117-17-057 0      117 E. 14th St.                 CH
BLOCK 260, CITY OF TUCSON
117-17-058 0      220 S. 6th Ave.                 CH/NHNC
                  220 S. 6th Ave.                 CH
BLOCK 261, CITY OF TUCSON
117-07-059 0      200 (Block) S. 5th Ave.         CH
117-07-060 0      220 S. 5th Ave.                 CN
 
8.4   Barrio Historico Historic District
   A.   Established: April 28, 1975, by Ordinance No. 4307.
   Amended: August 7, 1995, by Ordinance No. 8555.
   Amended: November 27, 1995, by Ordinance No. 8611.
   B.   Boundaries and Location: The boundaries and location of the Barrio
Historico Historic District are as designated on Map 2-2.
   C.   List of HISTORIC LANDMARK, CONTRIBUTING-HISTORIC (CH), CONTRIBUTING-
NONHISTORIC (CN), NONCONTRIBUTING (NHNC), and INTRUSION (I).
TAX PARCEL NUMBER ADDRESS STRUCTURE OR SITE STATUS
TAX PARCEL NUMBER ADDRESS                          STRUCTURE OR SITE STATUS
BLOCK 120, CITY OF TUCSON
117-07-181 0      127 W. 17th St.                  CH
117-07-182 0      129 W. 17th St.                  CH
117-07-183 0      135 W. 17th St.                  CH
117-07-184 0      141 W. 17th St.                  CH
117-07-185 0                                      Vacant
117-07-186 0      567 S. 8th Ave.                  CH
117-07-187 0                                      Vacant
117-07-188 0      708 S. Rubio Ave.                CH
BLOCK 221, CITY OF TUCSON
117-13-072 0      357 W. Simpson St.               CH
117-13-095 B      354-356 S. Main Ave.             CH
117-13-097 0                                      Parking Lot
117-13-098 0      418 S. Main Ave. (El Tiradito    LANDMARK
                  Wishing Shrine)
117-13-099 0      420 S. Main Ave.                 CH
117-13-100 0      424 S. Main Ave.                 CN
BLOCK 228, CITY OF TUCSON
117-14-014 A      201-203 W. Cushing St.           NHNC
                  310 S. Meyer Ave.                CN
117-14-015 0      384-388 S. Meyer Ave.            CH
117-14-017 0                                      Vacant
117-14-019 0      207-211 W. Simpson St.           CH
117-14-020 0      319 W. Simpson St.               CH
117-14-022 0      373-381 S. Main Ave.             CH
117-14-023 0      361 S. Main Ave.                 CH
117-14-024 0      351 S. Main Ave.                 CH
BLOCK 233, CITY OF TUCSON
117-14-102 0                                      Parking Lot
117-14-103 0      340 S. Stone Ave.                NHNC
117-14-104 0      376 S. Stone Ave.                CH/CN
117-14-105 0      38-40 W. Cushing St.             CH
117-14-106 0                                      Parking Lot
117-14-107 0      58 W. Cushing St.                CH
117-14-108 C      62-70 W. Cushing St.             CH
117-14-109 0      78 W. Cushing St.                CH
117-14-110 0      287-297 S. Convent Ave.          CH
117-14-111 0      305-307 S. Convent Ave.          CH
117-14-112 0      317 S. Convent Ave.              CH
117-14-113 0                                      Parking Lot
117-14-114 0      69-91 W. Simpson St.             CH
117-14-116 0      63-65 W. Simpson St.             CH
117-14-117 0      53 W. Simpson St.                CH
117-14-118 0      43 W. Simpson St.                CH/CN
117-14-119 0      25 W. Simpson St.                CH
117-14-120 0      388 S. Stone Ave.                CH
117-14-121 0      396 S. Stone Ave.                CH
BLOCK 234, CITY OF TUCSON
117-14-122 0      292-296 S. Convent Ave.          CH
117-14-125 0      310-314 S. Convent Ave.          CH
117-14-126 0      102 W. Cushing St.               CH
117-14-127 0                                      Parking Lot
117-14-128 0      316-318 S. Convent Ave.          CH/CN
                  130 W. Cushing St.               CN
117-14-129 0                                      Parking Lot
117-14-130 0                                      Parking Lot
117-14-131 0      198 W. Cushing St.               CH
117-14-132 0      363 S. Meyer Ave.                CH
117-14-134 0      371-379 S. Meyer Ave.            CH/CN
117-14-135 0                                      Vacant
117-14-136 0      135-139 & 141-147 W. Simpson St. CH
117-14-137 0      330-332 S. Convent Ave.          CH/CN
117-14-138 A      334-340 S. Convent Ave.          CN
117-14-141 0      101 W. Simpson St.               CH
BLOCK 235, CITY OF TUCSON
117-14-142 0                                      Vacant
117-14-143 0                                      Vacant
117-14-144 0                                      Vacant
117-14-145 0                                      Vacant
117-14-146 0      196 W. Simpson St.               CH
117-14-147 0                                      Parking Lot
117-14-148 0                                      Parking Lot
117-14-149 0                                      Parking Lot
117-14-150 0      453 S. Main Ave.                 CH
117-14-151 0      485 S. Main Ave.                 CH
117-14-152 0      235 W. Kennedy St.               CH
117-14-153 0      221 W. Kennedy St.               CH
117-14-154 0                                      Vacant
117-14-155 0                                      Vacant
BLOCK 236, CITY OF TUCSON
117-14-156 0      116 W. Simpson St.               CH
                  364-370 S. Convent Ave.          CH
117-14-157 0      382 S. Convent Ave.              CH
117-14-158 0      136 W. Simpson St.               CH
117-14-159 0      150 W. Simpson St.               CH
117-14-160 0      415 S. Meyer Ave.                CH
117-14-161 0      417 S. Meyer Ave.                CN
117-14-162 A                                      Vacant
117-14-163 A      447-449 S. Meyer Ave.            CH
117-14-164 0                                      Vacant
117-14-165 0      155-157 W. Kennedy St.           CH
117-14-166 0      149 W. Kennedy St.               CH
117-14-167 A      396 S. Convent Ave.              CH/CN
117-14-167 C      394 S. Convent Ave.              CN
117-14-167 D      392 S. Convent Ave.              CN
117-14-169 0      145 W. Kennedy St.               CH
117-14-172 C      408 S. Convent Ave.              CH/CN
117-14-172 D      136 W. Kennedy St.               CN
117-14-174 0      418 S. Convent Ave.              CH
BLOCK 237, CITY OF TUCSON
117-14-176 0      350 S. Stone Ave.                CH
117-14-177 0      454 S. Stone Ave.                NHNC
117-14-178 0      24-28 W. Simpson St.             CH
117-14-179 0      38 W. Simpson St.                CH
117-14-180 0      46 W. Simpson St.                CH
117-14-181 0      54-64 W. Simpson St.             CH
117-14-183 0      92 W. Simpson St.                CH
117-14-184 0      355 S. Convent Ave.              CH
117-14-185 0      371 S. Convent Ave.              CN
117-14-186 0      387-391 S. Convent Ave.          CH
117-14-187 A      391-395 S. Convent Ave.          CH
117-14-189 A      413 S. Convent Ave.              CN
117-14-191 A      89 W. Kennedy St.                NHNC
117-14-192 0                                      Vacant
117-14-193 0      61 W. Kennedy St.                CH
117-14-194 0                                      Vacant
117-14-195 0      59 W. Kennedy St.                CH
117-14-196 0      53 W. Kennedy St.                CH
117-14-197 0      49 W. Kennedy St.                CH
117-14-198 A      21-31 W. Kennedy St.             CH
117-14-199 A      482 S. Stone Ave.                CH
BLOCK 240, CITY OF TUCSON
117-14-237 0      504 S. Stone Ave.                CH
117-14-239 0      34-38 W. Kennedy St.             CH
117-14-240 0      42 W. Kennedy St.                CH
117-14-241 0      46-48 W. Kennedy St.             CH
117-14-242 0                                      Vacant
117-14-243 0      56 W. Kennedy St.                CH
117-14-245 0      60 W. Kennedy St.                CH
117-14-246 0      74 W. Kennedy St.                CH
117-14-247 0      78 W. Kennedy St.                CH/CN
117-14-248 A      86-92 W. Kennedy St.             CH
117-14-249 0      441-447 S. Convent Ave.          CN
117-14-250 A      501 S. Convent Ave.              CN
117-14-251 0      459 S. Convent Ave.              CH
117-14-252 A      463 S. Convent Ave.              CH
117-14-252 B      467 S. Convent Ave.              CH
117-14-253 0      469-471 S. Convent Ave.          CH
117-14-254 0      473-481 S. Convent Ave.          CH
117-14-255 0                                      Vacant
117-14-256 0                                      Vacant
117-14-264 0      499 S. Convent Ave.              CH
117-14-265 0      483 S. Convent Ave.              CH/CN
117-14-266 0      517 S. Convent Ave.              CH
117-14-267 0                                      Vacant
117-14-268 0                                      Vacant
117-14-269 0      519 S. Convent Ave.              CH
117-14-271 0      531 S. Convent Ave.              CH
117-14-273 0      116 W. 17th St.                  CH
117-14-274 0      128 & 136 W. 17th St.            CH
117-14-275 0      503 S. Convent Ave.              CH
117-14-276 0      507 S. Convent Ave.              CH
117-14-277 0      44 W. 17th St.                   CH/NHNC
BLOCK 241, CITY OF TUCSON
117-14-283 0      436 S. Convent Ave.              CH
117-14-285 0      140 W. Kennedy St.               CH
117-14-286 0      150 W. Kennedy St.               CH
117-14-287 0      168 W. Kennedy St.               CH
                  487 S. Meyer Ave.                CH
117-14-288 0      499 S. Meyer Ave.                CH
117-14-289 0      505 S. Meyer Ave.                CH
117-14-290 0                                      Vacant
117-14-291 0      509-511 S. Meyer Ave.            CH
117-14-292 0      525 S. Meyer Ave.                CH
117-14-294 0      529 S. Meyer Ave.                CH
117-14-295 B      482-484 S. Convent Ave.          CH
117-14-296 0      492-494 S. Convent Ave.          CH
117-14-297 0      496 S. Convent Ave.              CH
117-14-298 B      500-502 S. Convent Ave.          CH
117-14-299 A      504-506 S. Convent Ave.          CH
117-14-300 0      551-557 S. Meyer Ave.            CH
117-14-301 0      555 S. Meyer Ave.                CH
117-14-303 0      541-545 S. Meyer Ave.            CH
117-14-307 B      180 W. 17th St.                  CN
117-14-308 A      510 S. Convent Ave.              CH
117-14-309 0                                      Vacant
BLOCK 242, CITY OF TUCSON
117-14-312 0      486-498 S. Meyer Ave.            CH
117-14-313 0                                      Vacant
117-14-314 0      517 & 529 S. Main Ave.           CH
117-14-315 0      531 S. Main Ave.                 CH
117-14-318 0      537 S. Main Ave.                 CH
117-14-319 0      541 S. Main Ave.                 CH
117-14-320 0      579 S. Main Ave.                 CH
117-14-321 0                                      Vacant
117-14-322 0                                      Vacant
117-14-325 0      589 S. Main Ave.                 CN
                  580 S. Ninth Ave.                CN
117-14-326 0                                      Vacant
117-14-327 C      623 S. Main Ave.                 CH
117-14-329 0      600 S. Meyer Ave.                CH
117-14-331 0      526 S. Ninth Ave.                CH
117-14-333 0      530 S. Ninth Ave.                CH
117-14-334 0                                      Vacant
117-14-336 0                                      Vacant
117-14-337 0      661 S. Main Ave.                 CH
117-14-338 0      534 S. Ninth Ave.                CH
117-14-339 0                                      Vacant
117-14-340 0                                      Vacant
117-14-341 0                                      Vacant
117-14-342 0      554 S. Meyer Ave.                CH
117-14-343 0                                      Vacant
117-14-344 0      524 S. Meyer Ave.                CH
117-14-346 0      508-522 S. Meyer Ave.            CH
117-14-347 0                                      Vacant
117-14-349 0                                      Vacant
117-14-425 0                                      Vacant
117-14-426 0      671 S. Ninth Ave.                CN
117-14-427 0      651 S. Ninth Ave.                CN
117-14-428 0      631 S. Ninth Ave.                CN
117-14-429 0      601 S. Ninth Ave.                CN
117-14-430 0      590 S. Ninth Ave.                CN
117-14-431 0                                      Vacant
117-14-432 0      570 S. Ninth Ave.                CH
117-14-433 0      560 S. Ninth Ave.                CN
117-14-434 0                                      Common Area
BLOCK 243, CITY OF TUCSON
117-14-350 0      440 S. Main Ave.                 CH
117-14-351 0      448 S. Main Ave.                 CH
117-14-352 0      530 S. Main Ave.                 CN
117-14-353 0      562-564 S. Main Ave.             CH
117-14-354 B      570 S. Main Ave.                 CH
117-14-384 0                                      Vacant
117-14-385 0                                      Vacant
117-14-386 0      582 S. Main Ave.                 CH
                  582 1&2 S. Main Ave.             CH
117-14-389 0      580 S. Main Ave.                 CH
117-14-390 0                                      Vacant
117-14-391 0      420 1&2 W. 17th St.              CN
117-14-395 0      460 W. 17th St.                  CH
BLOCK 245, CITY OF TUCSON
117-14-358 0      630 S. Main Ave.                 CH
117-14-359 0      664 S. Main Ave.                 CH
117-14-360 0      668 S. Main Ave.                 CH
117-14-361 0                                      Vacant
117-14-362 0      372 W. 18th St.                  CH
117-14-363 0      419 W. 18th St.                  CH
117-14-364 0      416 W. 18th St.                  CH
117-14-365 E      418 W. 18th St.                  CH
117-14-367 0      438 W. 18th St.                  CH
117-14-369 A      733 S. Osborne Ave.              CH
117-14-370 0                                      Vacant
117-14-371 0                                      Vacant
117-14-372 0                                      Vacant
117-14-373 0      704 S. Osborne Ave.              CH/CN
117-14-374 0      449 W. 17th St.                  CH
117-14-375 0      505 W. 17th St.                  CH
117-14-376 0      706 S. Osborne Ave.              CN
117-14-377 0      708 S. Osborne Ave.              CH
117-14-378 0      715 S. 11th Ave.                 CH
117-14-379 0      719 S. 11th Ave.                 CH
117-14-380 0      730 S. Osborne Ave.              CH
117-14-381 0      732 S. Osborne Ave.              CH
117-14-382 0      734 S. Osborne Ave.              CH
117-14-383 A      508 W. 18th St.                  CH
BLOCK 246, CITY OF TUCSON
117-14-396 0      614 S. Meyer Ave.                CH
117-14-397 0                                      Vacant
117-14-398 0                                      Vacant
117-14-399 0      684 S. Meyer Ave.                CH
BLOCK 247, CITY OF TUCSON
117-14-400 0      677-685 S. Meyer Ave.            CH
117-14-401 0      669 S. Meyer Ave.                CH
117-14-402 0                                      Vacant
117-14-403 0                                      Vacant
117-14-404 0      641 S. Meyer Ave.                CH
117-14-405 0      633 S. Meyer Ave.                CH
117-14-406 0      601-611 S. Meyer Ave.            CH
117-14-407 0      209-217 S. 8th Ave.              CH
                  562 S. 8th Ave.                  CH
117-14-410 0                                      Vacant
117-14-413 0      600-610 S. 8th Ave.              CH
117-14-414 0                                      Vacant
BLOCK 7, SOUTHWESTERN ADDITION
117-18-054 0                                      Vacant
117-18-055 0                                      Vacant
117-18-056 0      403 S. El Paso Ave               CH
117-18-057 0      437 S. El Paso Ave.              CH
117-18-058 0                                      Vacant
117-18-060 A      340 W. Simpson St.               CH
117-18-061 0                                      Vacant
117-18-062 0      421 S. El Paso Ave.              CN
117-18-063 0      350 W. Simpson St.               CH/NHNC
BLOCK 8, SOUTHWESTERN ADDITION
117-18-064 0      546 W. Simpson St.               CH
117-18-065 0      440 W. Simpson St.               CH
117-18-066 0      438 W. Simpson St.               CH
117-18-067 0      426 W. Simpson St.               CH
117-18-068 0      430 W. Simpson St.               CH
117-18-069 0      416 W. Simpson St.               CH/CN
117-18-070 0      410 W. Simpson St.               CH
117-18-071 0      402 W. Simpson St.               CH
BLOCK 1, BALL PARK SUBDIVISION
117-18-079 0      448 W. Rosales St.               CH
117-18-080 0                                      Vacant
117-18-081 0                                      Vacant
117-18-082 0      428 W. Rosales St.               CH
117-18-083 0                                      Vacant
117-18-084 0      412 W. Rosales St.               CH
117-18-085 0      410 W. Rosales St.               CH
117-18-086 0      400 W. Rosales St.               CH
BLOCK 2, BALL PARK SUBDIVISION
117-18-087 0      442 S. El Paso Ave.              CH
117-18-088 0      409 W. Rosales St.               CH
117-18-089 0      411 W. Rosales St.               CH
117-18-090 0      427 W. Rosales St.               CH
117-18-091 0      429 W. Rosales St.               CH
117-18-092 0      431 W. Rosales St.               NHNC
117-18-093 0      433 W. Rosales St.               CH
117-18-094 0                                      Vacant
117-18-095 0                                      Vacant
BLOCK 1, ELYSIAN GROVE
117-19-001 0      400 W. Simpson St.               CH
117-19-003 0      408 W. Simpson St.               CH
117-19-005 0      420 S. Samaniego Ave.            CH
117-19-006 0      428 S. Samaniego Ave.            CH
117-19-007 0                                      Vacant
117-19-008 0      521 S. Elias Ave.                CN
117-19-009 0                                      Vacant
117-19-010 0                                      Vacant
117-19-011 0      423 S. Elias Ave.                NHNC
117-19-012 0      427 S. Elias Ave.                CN
117-19-013 0      550 S. Samaniego Ave.            CH
117-19-014 0      552 S. Samaniego Ave.            CN
117-19-015 0      431 S. Elias Ave.                CN
117-19-017 0                                      Vacant
117-19-020 A      441 S. Elias Ave.                CN
117-19-021 0      445 S. Elias Ave.                CH
117-19-022 0      560 S. Samaniego Ave.            CN
117-19-023 0      570 S. Samaniego Ave.            CN
117-19-025 0      449 S. Elias Ave.                CH
BLOCK 2, ELYSIAN GROVE
117-19-026 0      445 W. Simpson St.               CH/I
117-19-027 0      455 W. Simpson St.               CH
117-19-028 0      505 S. Otero Ave.                CN
117-19-029 0      412 S. Elias Ave.                CN
117-19-030 0      416 S. Elias Ave.                CH
117-19-031 0      511 S. Otero Ave.                CN
117-19-032 0                                      Vacant
117-19-033 0      436 S. Elias Ave.                CH
117-19-034 0                                      Vacant
117-19-035 0      431 S. Otero Ave.                CN
117-19-036 0      455 S. Otero Ave.                CN
117-19-037 0      432 S. Elias Ave.                CH
117-19-038 0      434 S. Elias Ave.                CH
117-19-039 0      435 S. Otero Ave.                CN
117-19-040 0      439 S. Otero Ave.                CN
117-19-042 0      438 S. Elias Ave.                CH
117-19-043 0      445 S. Otero Ave.                CN
117-19-046 0      446 S. Elias Ave.                CH
117-19-047 0      529 S. Otero Ave.                CH
BLOCK 3, ELYSIAN GROVE
117-19-048 0                                      Vacant
117-19-049 0                                      Vacant
117-19-050 0                                      Vacant
117-19-051 0                                      Vacant
117-19-052 0      426 S. Otero Ave.                CH/CN
117-19-054 0      438 S. Otero Ave.                CH
117-19-056 0      452 S. Otero Ave.                CH
117-19-057 0      456 S. Otero Ave.                CH
117-19-058 0      460 S. Otero Ave.                CN
BLOCK 4, ELYSIAN GROVE
117-19-061 0                                      Vacant
117-19-062 0      502 W. 17th St.                  CH
117-19-063 0      506 W. 17th St.                  CH
117-19-064 0      407 W. Carrillo St.              CH
117-19-065 0      415 W. Carrillo St.              CN
117-19-066 0      514A W. 17th St.                 CH
117-19-067 0      514B W. 17th St.                 CH
117-19-068 0      503 W. Carrillo St.              CH
117-19-069 0      525 W. Carrillo St.              CH
117-19-070 0      516 W. 17th St.                  CH
117-19-071 0      516 W. 17th St.                  CH
117-19-072 0                                      Vacant
117-19-073 0      521 W. Carrillo St.              CH/CN
117-19-074 0      518 W. 17th St.                  CH
117-19-075 0      520 W. 17th St.                  CH
117-19-076 0      531 W. Carrillo St.              CN
117-19-077 0      535 W. Carrillo St.              CH
117-19-078 0      534 W. 17th St.                  CH
117-19-079 0      524 W. 17th St.                  CH
117-19-080 0      537 W. Carrillo St.              CH
117-19-081 0      545 W. Carrillo St.              CN
117-19-082 0      538 W. 17th St.                  CH
 
8.5   El Presidio Historic District
   A.   Established: February 24, 1975, by Ordinance No. 4328.
   Amended: October 3, 1983, by Ordinance No. 5880.
   Amended: June 12, 1995, by Ordinance No. 8520.
   Amended: July 10, 1995, by Ordinance No. 8544.
   Amended: August 7, 1995, by Ordinance No. 8555.
   B.   Boundaries and Location: The boundaries and location of the El Presidio
Historic District are as designated on Map 2-3.
   C.   List of HISTORIC LANDMARK, CONTRIBUTING-HISTORIC (CH), CONTRIBUTING-
NONHISTORIC (CN), NONCONTRIBUTING (NHNC), and INTRUSION (I).
TAX PARCEL NUMBER ADDRESS STRUCTURE OR SITE STATUS
TAX PARCEL NUMBER ADDRESS                      STRUCTURE OR SITE STATUS
116-19-044 A      402 N. Main Ave.             CH
BLOCK 6, GOLDSCHMIDT’S ADDITION
116-19-050 0      378 N. Main Ave.             CH
116-19-051 0      340 N. Main Ave.             CH
116-19-052 0      325 W. Franklin St.          CH
116-19-053 A      329 W. Franklin St.          CH
116-19-053 B      329 N. Granada Ave.          CN
BLOCK 11, GOLDSCHMIDT’S ADDITION
116-19-067 C      300 N. Main Ave.             CH
116-19-067 B      330 W. Franklin St.          I
116-19-068 0      343 W. Franklin St.          CH
116-19-070 0      262 N. Main Ave.             CH/NHNC
116-19-072 0      252 N. Main Ave.             CH
116-19-074 0      233 N. Main Ave.             CH
BLOCK 172, CITY OF TUCSON
117-10-003 0      433 N. Main Ave.             CH
117-10-004 0      427 N. Main Ave.             CH
117-10-005 0      309 W. Sixth St.             CH
117-10-006 0      307 W. Sixth St.             CH
117-10-007 0                                  Vacant
117-10-008 A      423-425 N. Main Ave.         CH
117-10-009 A      417-419 N. Main Ave.         CH
117-10-010 A      385 N. Main Ave.             CH
117-10-013 0      347 N. Main Ave.             CH
117-10-014 0      333-335 N. Main Ave.         CH
117-10-015 0      317-319 N. Main Ave.         CH
117-10-016 0      239-241 W. Franklin St.      CH
117-10-017 0      345-347 N. Meyer Ave.        CH
117-10-018 0      211-219 W. Franklin St.      CH
117-10-019 0      349-361 N. Meyer Ave.        CH
117-10-020 D                                  Easement
117-10-020 E      365 N. Meyer Ave.            CH
117-10-020 F      369 N. Meyer Ave.            CH
117-10-022 A      373 N. Meyer Ave.            CH
117-10-023 A      385-387 N. Meyer Ave.        CH
117-10-024 B                                  Easement
117-10-025 0                                  Vacant
117-10-026 0      405 N. Court Ave.            CN
117-10-027 0      403 N. Court Ave.            CH
117-10-028 0      402 N. Meyer Ave.            CH
117-10-029 0      382-384 N. Meyer Ave.        CH
117-10-030 0      381 N. Court Ave.            NHNC
117-10-031 0      378-380 N. Meyer Ave.        CH
117-10-033 A      351-359 N. Court Ave.        CH
117-10-034 0      222-224 W. Franklin St.      CN
                  326-340 N. Meyer Ave.        CH
117-10-035 0      337 N. Court Ave.            CH
117-10-036 0      333 N. Court Ave.            CH
117-10-138 0      405-411 N. Meyer Ave.        CH/CN
117-10-150 0                                  Vacant
117-10-151 0      360 N. Main Ave.             CN
117-10-152 0      350 N. Main Ave.             CN
BLOCK 176, CITY OF TUCSON
117-10-092 0      317 N. Court Ave.            CH
117-10-093 A      186-192 W. Franklin St.      CH
117-10-094 A      196-198 W. Franklin St.      CH
117-10-095 0                                  Vacant
117-10-096 0      311 N. Court Ave.            CH
117-10-097 0      299 N. Court Ave.            CH
117-10-098 0      297 N. Court Ave.            CH
117-10-099 0      290 N. Meyer Ave.            CH
117-10-100 0                                  Vacant
117-10-101 0      250 N. Meyer Ave.            NHNC
117-10-102 0      141 W. Council/261 N. Court  CH
BLOCK 177, CITY OF TUCSON
117-10-103 0      212 W. Franklin St.          CH
117-10-104 0      216 W. Franklin St.          CH
117-10-105 0      220 W. Franklin St.          CH
117-10-106 0      285-295 N. Meyer Ave.        CH
117-10-107 0      259 N. Meyer Ave.            CN
117-10-108 A      259 N. Meyer Ave.            CN
117-10-108 C      259 N. Meyer Ave.            CN
117-10-109 0      259 N. Meyer Ave.            CN
117-10-110 0      239 N. Meyer Ave.            CH
117-10-111 0      107 W. Washington St.        NHNC
117-10-112 0      115-117 W. Washington St.    CH
117-10-113 0      221-223 N. Main Ave.         CH
                  135-137 W. Washington St.    CH
117-10-114 0      235-237 N. Main Ave.         CH
117-10-115 0      245 N. Main Ave.             CH
117-10-116 0      253-255 N. Main Ave.         CH
117-10-118 B      273 N. Main Ave.             CH
117-10-119 A      297 N. Main Ave.             CH/CN
BLOCK 178, CITY OF TUCSON
117-10-121 0      233-239 N. Court Ave.        CH
117-10-123 0      230-234 N. Meyer Ave.        CH
117-10-124 0      220 N. Meyer Ave.            CH
                  77 W. Washington St.         CH
117-10-125 0      215 N. Court Ave.            NHNC
BLOCK 179, CITY OF TUCSON
117-10-130 0                                  Vacant
117-10-131 0      15 W. Washington St.         CH
117-10-133 A      135 W. Council St.           CN
117-10-135 0      222 N. Court Ave.            CH
117-10-136 0      240 N. Court /134 W. Council CH
BLOCK 181, CITY OF TUCSON
117-11-014 0                                  Vacant
117-11-015 0                                  Vacant
117-11-016 0                                  Vacant
117-11-018 0      182 N. Court Ave.            CH
117-11-019 0      192-196 N. Court Ave.        CH
117-11-020 0      198-200 N. Court Ave.        CH
                  38 W. Washington St.         CH
BLOCK 182, CITY OF TUCSON
117-11-021 0      201 N. Court Ave.            CN
                  186 N. Meyer Ave.            CH
BLOCK 183, CITY OF TUCSON
117-11-024 0      195-199 N. Meyer             CH
117-11-025 0      100-108 W. Washington        CH
117-11-026 0                                  Vacant
117-11-027 0      150 N. Main Ave.             CH
117-11-034 0      171-177 N. Court Ave.        CH
117-11-039 0                                  Vacant
117-11-040 0                                  Vacant
117-20-003 0      120 N. Main Ave.             CH
117-20-001 0      166 W. Alameda               NHNC
                  166 W. Alameda               CH
BLOCK 185, CITY OF TUCSON
116-19-042 0      216 N. Main Ave.             CH
 
8.6   Fort Lowell Historic District
   A.   Established: May 11, 1981, by Ordinance No. 5364.
   Amended: January 11, 1982, by Ordinance No. 5495.
   Amended: September 8, 1992, (as the result of annexation) by Ordinance No.
7902.
   Amended: June 12, 1995, by Ordinance No. 8520.
   B.   Boundaries and Location: The boundaries and location of the Fort Lowell
Historic Preservation Zone are as designated on Map 2-4.
   C.   List of HISTORIC LANDMARK, CONTRIBUTING-HISTORIC (CH), CONTRIBUTING-
NONHISTORIC (CN), NONCONTRIBUTING (NHNC), and INTRUSION (I).
TAX PARCEL NUMBER ADDRESS STRUCTURE OR SITE STATUS
TAX PARCEL NUMBER ADDRESS                     STRUCTURE OR SITE STATUS
FORT LOWELL RD./BEVERLY AVE.
109-26-011 A                                 Vacant
110-09-001 0      5302 E. Fort Lowell Rd.     CH/CN/I
110-09-003 D                                 Easement
110-09-003 F                                 Mesquite Bosque/The Swale
110-09-006 G                                 Vacant
110-09-006 L      5479 E. Ft. Lowell Rd.      CH
110-09-006 K      5495 E. Ft. Lowell Rd.      CN
110-09-006 R                                 Undeveloped
110-09-006 Q      3111 N. Craycroft Rd.       NHNC
110-09-006 D                                 Vacant
110-09-008 0      5309 E. Ft. Lowell Rd.      CH
110-09-009 E      5333 E. Ft. Lowell Rd.      CH
110-09-009 F      El Callejon                  
110-09-010 A      5329 E. Ft. Lowell Rd.      CH/CN
110-09-011 0      5343 E. Ft. Lowell Rd.      CH
110-09-012 B      5335 E. Ft. Lowell Rd.      NHNC
110-09-013 0      5345 E. Ft. Lowell Rd.      CN
110-09-014 0      5341 E. Ft. Lowell Rd.      CH
110-09-015 0      5347 E. Ft. Lowell Rd.      CH
110-09-016 0      5351 E. Ft. Lowell Rd.      CH
110-09-017 B      5339 E. Ft. Lowell Rd.      CN
110-09-017 D                                 Vacant
110-09-018 A      5349 E. Ft. Lowell Rd.      CH
110-09-018 B      5353 E. Ft. Lowell Rd.      CN
110-09-019 K      5433 E. Ft. Lowell Rd.      CN
110-09-019 D      5425 E. Ft. Lowell Rd.      CH
110-09-019 J                                 Vacant
110-09-019 N                                 Vacant
110-09-019 M      5329 E. Ft. Lowell Rd.      NHNC
110-09-020 0      3031 N. Craycroft Rd.       CH
110-09-021 0      5230 E. Ft. Lowell Rd.      CH
110-09-037 0                                 Vacant
110-09-039 0      5354 E. Ft. Lowell Rd.      CH
110-09-040 0      5352 E. Ft. Lowell Rd.      CH
110-09-042 0      5344 E. Ft. Lowell Rd.      CH/CN
110-09-043 0      5349 E. Ft. Lowell Rd.      CH
110-09-044 0      5346 E. Ft. Lowell Rd.      CN
110-09-047 0      5328 E. Ft. Lowell Rd.      CN
110-09-048 0      5320 E. Ft. Lowell Rd.      CH/CN
110-09-049 B      2928 N. Beverly Ave.        CH
110-09-049 C      2930 N. Beverly Ave.        CH
110-09-049 D      2932 N. Beverly Ave.        CH
110-09-049 E      2932 N. Beverly Ave.        I
110-09-049 F                                 Vacant
110-09-050 0      2920 N. Beverly Ave.        CH
110-09-055 0                                 Vacant
110-09-057 A      5303 E. San Francisco Blvd. CN
110-09-056 A      5313 E. San Francisco Blvd. CN
110-09-058 0      2902 N. Beverly Ave.        CH/CN
LA SONRISA TOWNHOMES
110-09-390 0                                 Common Area
110-09-362 0      5428 E. Francisco Loop      CN
110-09-363 0      5424 E. Francisco Loop      CN
110-09-364 A      5420 E. Francisco Loop      CN
110-09-365 0      5416 E. Francisco Loop      CN
110-09-366 0      5412 E. Francisco Loop      CN
110-09-367 0      5408 E. Francisco Loop      CN
110-09-368 0      5346 E. Francisco Loop      CN
110-09-369 0      5344 E. Francisco Loop      CN
110-09-370 0      5342 E. Francisco Loop      CN
110-09-371 0      5340 E. Francisco Loop      CN
110-09-372 0      5351 E. Francisco Loop      CN
110-09-373 0                                 Vacant
110-09-374 A                                 Vacant
110-09-375 A      5363 E. Francisco Loop      CN
110-09-376 0      5371 E. Francisco Loop      CN
110-09-377 0      5375 E. Francisco Loop      CN
110-09-378 0      5383 E. Francisco Loop      CN
110-09-379 0      5387 E. Francisco Loop      CN
110-09-380 0      5395 E. Francisco Loop      CN
110-09-381 0      5399 E. Francisco Loop      CN
110-09-382 0      5403 E. Francisco Loop      CN
110-09-383 0      5407 E. Francisco Loop      CN
110-09-384 0      5411 E. Francisco Loop      CN
110-09-385 0      5415 E. Francisco Loop      CN
110-09-386 0      5419 E. Francisco Loop      CN
110-09-387 0      5427 E. Francisco Loop      CN
110-09-388 0      5431 E. Francisco Loop      CN
110-09-389 0      5435 E. Francisco Loop      CN
BOSQUE RANCH
110-09-344 0                                 Common Area
110-09-345 0                                 Common Area
110-09-327 0      5301 E. Presidio Dr.        CN
110-09-328 0      5315 E. Presidio Dr.        CN
110-09-329 0      5329 E. Presidio Dr.        CN
110-09-330 0      5343 E. Presidio Dr.        CN
110-09-332 A      5375 E. Presidio Dr.        CN
110-09-331 0      Schantz Pool & Spa           
110-09-334 0                                 Vacant
110-09-335 0      5415 E. Presidio Dr.        CN
110-09-336 0      5433 E. Presidio Dr.        CN
110-09-337 0      5441 E. Presidio Dr.        CN
110-09-339 C      5440 E. Presidio Dr.        CN
110-09-339 B      5432 E. Presidio Dr.        CN
110-09-340 0      5424 E. Presidio Dr.        CN
110-09-341 0      5416 E. Presidio Dr.        CN
110-09-342 A      5408 E. Presidio Dr.        CN
FORT LOWELL PARK
110-14-009 C                                 Vacant
110-14-010 0      5669 E. Ft. Lowell Rd.      NHNC
110-14-011 G      5621 E. Ft. Lowell Rd.      CN
110-14-011 H      5611 E. Ft. Lowell Rd.      CN
110-14-011 J      5651 E. Ft. Lowell Rd.      CN
110-14-011 K                                 Vacant
110-14-011 L      5601 E. Ft. Lowell Rd.      CN
110-14-011 M                                 Vacant
110-14-012 C                                 Vacant
110-14-013 B      5531 E. Ft. Lowell Rd.      CH
110-14-014 0                                 Vacant
110-14-015 A      Fort Lowell Park            CH
110-14-016 B      Fort Lowell Park            CH
SAN MIGUEL TOWNHOMES
110-14-242 0      5565 E. Binghampton Dr.     CH
110-14-222 0      5521 E. Miles Circle        CN
110-14-223 0      5520 E. Miles Circle        CN
110-14-224 0      5530 E. Miles Circle        CN
110-14-225 0      5540 E. Miles Circle        CN
110-14-226 0      5550 E. Miles Circle        CN
110-14-227 0      5560 E. Miles Circle        CN
110-14-228 0      5570 E. Miles Circle        CN
110-14-229 0      5580 E. Miles Circle        CN
110-14-230 0      5590 E. Binghampton Dr.     CN
110-14-231 0      5600 E. Binghampton Dr.     CN
110-14-232 0      5610 E. Binghampton Dr.     CN
110-14-233 A      5620 E. Binghampton Dr.     CN
110-14-234 A      5630 E. Binghampton Dr.     CN
110-14-235 0      3070 N. Binghampton Pl.     CN
110-14-236 0      3080 N. Binghampton Pl.     CN
110-14-237 0      3090 N. Binghampton Pl.     CN
 
8.7   West University Historic District
   A.   Established: January 3, 1984, by Ordinance No. 5920.
   Amended: July 10, 1995, by Ordinance No. 8544.
   Amended: August 7, 1995, by Ordinance No. 8555.
   Amended: November 27, 1995, by Ordinance No. 8611.
   Amended: November 18, 1996, by Ordinance No. 8775.
   B.   Boundaries and Location: The boundaries and location of the West
University Historic Preservation Zone are as designated on Map 2-5.
   C.   List of HISTORIC LANDMARK, CONTRIBUTING-HISTORIC (CH), CONTRIBUTING-
NONHISTORIC (CN), NONCONTRIBUTING (NHNC), and INTRUSION (I).
TAX PARCEL NUMBER ADDRESS STRUCTURE OR SITE STATUS
TAX PARCEL NUMBER        ADDRESS                       STRUCTURE OR SITE STATUS
BLOCK 1, CITY OF TUCSON
117-02-001 0             648 E. Speedway Blvd.         CH
117-02-002 0             642 E. Speedway Blvd.         CH
117-02-003 0             644 E. Speedway Blvd.         CH
117-02-004 0             632 E. Speedway Blvd.         CH
117-02-005 0             630 E. Speedway Blvd.         CH
117-02-006 0             616 E. Speedway Blvd.         CH
117-02-007 0             612 E. Speedway Blvd.         CH
117-02-009 0             1048 N. 2nd Ave.              CH
                         1049 N. Jacobus Ave           CH
117-02-010 0             1043 N. 1st Ave.              CH
                         1043-1/2 N. 1st Ave.          CH
117-02-012 0             1023 N. 1st Ave.              CH
117-02-013 0             1046 N. 2nd Ave.              CH
117-02-014 0             1044 N. 2nd Ave.              CH
117-02-015 0             1027 N. 1st Ave.              CH
117-02-016 A             1017 N. 1st Ave.              CH
117-02-016 B             1018 N. Jacobus Ave.          CH
117-02-017 0             1019 N. Jacobus Ave.          CH
117-02-018 0             1038 N. 2nd Ave.              CH
117-02-019 0             1040 N. 2nd Ave.              CH
117-02-020 0             601 E. 1st St.                CH
117-02-021 0             615 E. 1st St.                CH
117-02-022 0             627 E. 1st St.                CH
117-02-023 0             629 E. 1st St.                CH
                         1014-1016 N. Jacobus Ave.     CH
117-02-024 0             645 E. 1st St.                CH
BLOCK 2, CITY OF TUCSON
117-02-027 0             1049 N. 2nd Ave.              CH
117-02-028 0             540-544 E. Speedway Blvd.     CH
117-02-029 0             530 E. Speedway Blvd.         CH
117-02-030 0             522 E. Speedway Blvd.         CH
117-02-031 0             518 E. Speedway Blvd.         CH
117-02-032 0             512-514 E. Speedway Blvd.     CH
117-02-033 0             504 E. Speedway Blvd.         CH
117-02-034 0             1044 N. 3rd Ave.              CH
117-02-035 0             1043 N. Bean Ave.             CH
117-02-036 0             1043-1045 N. 2nd Ave.         NHNC
                         1048 N. Bean Ave.             CH
117-02-037 0             1033 N. 2nd Ave.              CH
117-02-038 0             1042 N. 3rd Ave.              CH
117-02-039 0             1024-1028 N. 3rd Ave.         CH
117-02-040 0             1025 N. 2nd Ave.              CH
117-02-041 B             1021 N. 2nd Ave.              NHNC
                         1023 N. 2nd Ave.              CH
117-02-042 0             1019 N. Bean Ave.             NHNC
117-02-043 0             1022 N. 3rd Ave.              CH
117-02-044 0             501 E. 1st St.                NHNC
117-02-045 0             515 E. 1st St.                CH
117-02-046 0             519 E. 1st St.                CH
117-02-047 0             529 E. 1st St.                CH
117-02-048 0             537-539 E. 1st St.            CH
117-02-049 0             547-549 E. 1st St.            CH
BLOCK 3, CITY OF TUCSON
117-02-050 0                                          Vacant
117-02-051 0             436 E. Speedway Blvd.         CH
117-02-052 0             432 E. Speedway Blvd.         CH
117-02-053 0             420 E. Speedway Blvd.         CH
117-02-054 0             410 E. Speedway Blvd.         CH
117-02-055 0                                          Vacant
117-02-056 0                                          Vacant
117-02-057 0             1044 N. 4th Ave.              CH
117-02-058 0             1038 N. 4th Ave.              CH
117-02-059 0             1045 N. 3rd Ave.              CH/NHNC
117-02-060 0             1042 N. Hoff Ave.             CH
117-02-061 0             1037 N. 3rd Ave.              CH
117-02-062 0             1032 N. 4th Ave.              CH
117-02-063 0             1030 N. 4th Ave.              CH
117-02-064 0             1031-1035 N. 3rd Ave.         CH
117-02-065 0             1021 N. 3rd Ave.              CH
117-02-067 0             1002-1004 N. 4th Ave.         NHNC
117-02-068 0             425 E. 1st St.                CH
117-02-069 0             437 E. 1st St.                CH
117-02-070 0             439 E. 1st St.                CH
BLOCK 4, CITY OF TUCSON
117-02-073 0             346 E. Speedway Blvd.         CH
                         346-1/2 E. Speedway Blvd.     CH
117-02-074 0             338 E. Speedway Blvd.         CH
117-02-076 0             320 E. Speedway Blvd.         CH
117-02-077 0             318 E. Speedway Blvd.         CH
117-02-078 0             316 E. Speedway Blvd.         CH
117-02-075 0                                          Vacant
117-02-079 0             1042 N. 5th Ave.              CH
117-02-080 0             1045 N. 4th Ave.              CH
117-02-081 0             1041 N. 4th Ave.              CH
117-02-082 0             1033 N. 4th Ave.              CH
117-02-083 01            1026 N. 5th Ave.              CH
                         1025 N. Herbert Ave.          CH
117-02-084 0             1010 N. 5th Ave.              NHNC
17-02-085 A              1025 N. 4th Ave.              CH
117-02-086 A             1011-1019 N. 4th Ave.         NHNC
117-02-088 0             309 E. 1st St.                CH
117-02-090 0             315 E. 1st St.                CH
117-02-091 0             317 E. 1st St.                CH
117-02-092 0             341 E. 1st St.                CH
BLOCK 5, CITY OF TUCSON
117-02-094 C             220 E. Speedway Blvd.         CH
117-02-097 A                                          Vacant
117-02-099 B             202 E. Speedway Blvd.         NHNC
117-02-100 A                                          Parking Lot
117-02-101 0             1045 N. 5th Ave.              CH
117-02-102 0             1035 N. 5th Ave.              CH
117-02-103 0                                          Parking Lot
117-02-104 B             1010-1030 N. 6th Ave.         NHNC
117-02-105 0             1029 N. 5th Ave.              CH
117-02-106 0             1015 N. 5th Ave.              CH
117-02-108 0             1006 N. 6th Ave.              CH
117-02-109 0             1007 N. 5th Ave.              CH
117-02-110 0             1003 N. 5th Ave.              CH/CN
117-02-111 0             225-227 E. 1st St.            CH
117-02-112 0             1004 N. 6th Ave.              CH
BLOCK 6, CITY OF TUCSON
117-02-116 0             118-120 E. Speedway Blvd.     NHNC
117-02-117 0             110 E. Speedway Blvd.         CH
117-02-118 0             102 E. Speedway Blvd.         NHNC
117-02-119 0             1040-1044 N. 7th Ave.         NHNC
117-02-120 A             1039 N. 6th Ave.              CH
117-02-121 0             1034 N. 7th Ave.              CH
117-02-122 0             1018 N. 7th Ave.              CH
117-02-124 0             1007 N. 6th Ave.              CH
117-02-125 0             1014 N. 7th Ave.              CH
117-02-126 0             1010 N. 7th Ave.              CH
117-02-127 0             105 E. 1st St.                CH
117-02-128 0             115 E. 1st St.                CH
117-02-129 0             119 E. 1st St.                CH
117-02-130 0             127-129 E. 1st St.            CH
117-02-131 0             1005 N. 6th Ave.              CH
117-02-132 0             1001 N. 6th Ave.              CH
117-02-412 0             1011-1017 N. 6th Ave.         CH/NHNC
BLOCK 7, CITY OF TUCSON
117-02-133 A             De Anza Park                  CH
BLOCK 16, CITY OF TUCSON
117-02-195 0             48 E. 1st St.                 CH
117-02-196 0             30-32 E. 1st St.              CH
117-02-197 0             939 N. 7th Ave.               CH
117-02-200 0             935 N. 7th Ave.               CH
117-02-201 0             925-933 N. 7th Ave.           I
117-02-204 0             921 N. 7th Ave.               CH
117-02-205 0             917 N. 7th Ave.               CH
117-02-206 0             911 N. 7th Ave.               CH
117-02-207 B             909 N. 7th Ave.               CH
117-02-208 0             29 E. 2nd St.                 CH
117-02-211 A             901 N. 7th Ave.               CH
BLOCK 17, CITY OF TUCSON
117-02-212 0             947-949 N. 6th Ave.           CH
117-02-213 0             941 N. 6th Ave.               CH
117-02-214 0             118 E. 1st St.                CH
117-02-215 0             112 E. 1st St.                CH
117-02-216 0             102 E. 1st St.                CH
117-02-217 0             936 N. 7th Ave.               CH
117-02-218 0             930 N. 7th Ave.               NHNC
117-02-219 0             937-939 N. 6th Ave.           CH
117-02-220 0             935 N. 6th Ave.               CH
117-02-221 0             933 N. 6th Ave.               CH/CN
117-02-223 0             103 E. 2nd St.                CH
117-02-224 0             105-113 E. 2nd St.            I
117-02-225 0             121 E. 2nd St.                CH
117-02-226 0             127 E. 2nd St.                CH
117-02-227 0             911 N. 6th Ave.               CH
117-02-228 0             901 N. 6th Ave.               CH
BLOCK 18, CITY OF TUCSON
117-02-229 B             945 N. 5th Ave.               CH
117-02-230 0             950 N. 6th Ave.               CH/CN
117-02-231 0             932-944 N. 6th Ave.           NHNC
117-02-232 0             937 N. 5th Ave.               CH
117-02-233 0             931 N. 5th Ave.               CH
117-02-234 0             924 N. 6th Ave.               CH
117-02-235 0             920 N. 6th Ave.               CH
117-02-236 0             919 N. 5th Ave.               CH
117-02-237 0             907 N. 5th Ave.               CH
117-02-238 0             219 E. 2nd St.                CH
117-02-239 0             211 E. 2nd St.                CH
117-02-240 0             203 E. 2nd St.                CH
117-02-241 0             903 N. 5th Ave.               CH
BLOCK 19, CITY OF TUCSON
117-02-242 0             Catalina/Northside Park       CH
BLOCK 20, CITY OF TUCSON
117-02-243 0             446 E. 1st St.                CH
117-02-244 0             438-444 E. 1st St.            NHNC
117-02-245 0             434 E. 1st St.                CH
117-02-246 0             424 E. 1st St.                CH
117-02-247 0             944 N. 4th Ave.               CH
117-02-248 0             940 N. 4th Ave.               CH
117-02-252 0             929 N. 3rd Ave.               CH
117-02-253 0             929 N. Hoff Ave.              CH
117-02-254 0             925 N. 3rd Ave.               CH
117-02-255 0             915-917 N. Hoff Ave.          CH
117-02-258 0             922 N. Hoff Ave.              CH
117-02-259 0             917 N. 3rd Ave.               CH
117-02-260 0             907 N. 3rd Ave.               CH
117-02-261 0             425 E. 2nd St.                CH
117-02-262 0             415 E. 2nd St.                CH
117-02-263 0             407 E. 2nd St.                CH
117-02-265 0             910 N. 4th Ave.               CH
117-02-266 0             904 N. 4th Ave.               CH
117-02-268 0             901 N. 3rd Ave.               CH
BLOCK 21, CITY OF TUCSON
117-02-269 0             939 N. 2nd Ave.               CH
117-02-271 0             532 E. 1st St.                CH
117-02-272 0             530 E. 1st St.                CH
117-02-273 0             518 E. 1st St.                CH
117-02-274 A             512-514 E. 1st St.            CH
117-02-275 A             502 E. 1st St.                CH
117-02-276 0             924-926 N. 3rd Ave            CH
117-02-277 0             927 N. 2nd Ave.               CH
                         927-1/2 N. 2nd Ave.           CH
117-02-278 0             921-923 N. 2nd Ave.           CH
117-02-279 0             920 N. 3rd Ave.               CH
117-02-280 0             503 E. 2nd St.                CH
117-02-281 0             509 E. 2nd St.                CH
117-02-282 0             515 E. 2nd St.                CH
117-02-283 0             521 E. 2nd St.                CH
117-02-284 0             525-529 E. 2nd St.            CH
117-02-285 0             543-545 E. 2nd St.            CH
117-02-286 0             911 N. 2nd Ave.               CH
117-02-287 0             909 N. 2nd Ave.               CH
                         547-549 E. 2nd St.            CH
BLOCK 22, CITY OF TUCSON
117-02-288 0             642 E. 1st St.                CH
117-02-289 0             638 E. 1st St.                CH
117-02-290 0             630 E. 1st St.                CH
117-02-291 0             620 E. 1st St.                CH
117-02-292 0             612 E. 1st St.                CH
117-02-293 0             604 E. 1st St.                CH/CN
117-02-295 0             927 N. 1st Ave.               CH
117-02-296 0             921 N. 1st. Ave.              CH
117-02-297 0             928 N. 2nd Ave.               CH
117-02-298 0             914-918 N. 2nd Ave.           CH
                         601-605 E. 2nd St.            CH
117-02-299 0             615 E. 2nd St.                CH
117-02-300 0             623 E. 2nd St.                CH
117-02-301 0             901 N. 1st St.                I
BLOCK 23, CITY OF TUCSON
117-03-001 0             646 E. 2nd St.                CH
                         845 N. 1st Ave.               CH
117-03-002 0             837 N. 1st Ave.               CH
117-03-003 0             642 E. 2nd St.                CH
117-03-004 0             636-638 E. 2nd St.            CH
117-03-005 0             630 E. 2nd St.                CH
117-03-010 0             819 N. 1st Ave.               I
117-03-015 0                                          Vacant
117-03-016 0                                          Vacant
117-03-017 0             645 E. University Blvd.       CH
BLOCK 24, CITY OF TUCSON
117-03-018 0             550 E. 2nd St.                CH
                         847-849 N. 2nd Ave.           CH
117-03-019 0             534-538 E. 2nd St.            CH
117-03-020 0             528 E. 2nd St.                CH
117-03-021 0             522 E. 2nd St.                CH
117-03-022 0             512 E. 2nd St.                CH
117-03-023 0             502 E. 2nd St.                CH
117-03-024 0             832 N. 3rd Ave.               CH
117-03-025 0             827 N. Bean Ave.              CH
117-03-026 0             833 N. 2nd Ave.               CH
                         830 N. Bean Ave.              CH
117-03-027 0             825 N. 2nd Ave.               CH
                         822 N. Bean Ave.              CH
117-03-028 0             820 N. 3rd Ave.               CH
117-03-029 0             503 E. University Blvd.       CH
117-03-030 0             509 E. University Blvd.       CH
117-03-031 0             521 E. University Blvd.       CH
117-03-032 0             535 E. University Blvd.       CH
117-03-033 0             541 E. University Blvd.       CH
117-03-034 0             545 E. University Blvd.       CH
BLOCK 25, CITY OF TUCSON
117-03-035 0             448 E. 2nd St.                CH
117-03-036 0             438 E. 2nd St.                CH
117-03-037 0             434 E. 2nd St.                CH
117-03-038 A             415 E. University Blvd.       I
117-03-042 0             827-829 N. 3rd Ave.           CH
117-03-048 0             435-437 E. University Blvd.   CH
117-03-049 0             439-441 E. University Blvd.   CH
117-03-050 0             445 E. University Blvd.       CH
117-03-374 0             800 N. 4th Ave.               NHNC
BLOCK 26, CITY OF TUCSON
117-03-051 0             845 N. 4th Ave.               CH
117-03-052 0             314 E. 2nd St.                CH
117-03-053 0             312 E. 2nd St.                CH
117-03-055 0             826 N. 5th Ave.               CH
117-03-057 0             827 N. 4th Ave.               CH
117-03-058 0             305 E. University Blvd.       CH
117-03-059 0             307 E. University Blvd.       CH
117-03-060 0             819 N. 4th Ave.               CH
117-03-061 0             329 E. University Blvd.       CH
117-03-062 0             339 E. University Blvd.       CH
117-03-063 0             345 E. University Blvd.       CH
                         345-1/2 E. University Blvd.   NHNC
BLOCK 27, CITY OF TUCSON
117-03-064 0             248 E. 2nd St.                CH
117-03-065 0             236 E. 2nd St.                CH
117-03-066 0             224 E. 2nd St.                CH
117-03-067 0             200-210 E. 2nd St.            CH
117-03-068 0             836 N. 6th Ave.               CH
117-03-069 B             829 N. 5th Ave.               CH
117-03-070 0             825-827 N. 5th Ave.           CH
117-03-071 0             828 N. 6th Ave.               CH
117-03-072 0             820 N. 6th Ave.               CH
117-03-073 0             811-819 N. 5th Ave.           CH
                         245 E. University Blvd.       CH
117-03-074 0             239-243 E. University Blvd.   CH
117-03-075 0             237 E. University Blvd.       CH
117-03-076 0             215 E. University Blvd.       CH
117-03-077 0             207 E. University Blvd.       CH
117-03-078 0             205 E. University Blvd.       CH
BLOCK 28, CITY OF TUCSON
117-03-079 0             835 N. 6th Ave.               I
117-03-080 0             122 E. 2nd St.                CH
                         122-1/2 E. 2nd St.            CH
117-03-081 0             116 E. 2nd St.                CH
                         116-1/2 E. 2nd St.            CH
117-03-082 0             110 E. 2nd St.                CH
117-03-083 0             104 E. 2nd St.                CH
117-03-084 C             830 N. 7th Ave.               CH
117-03-088 0             826 N. 7th Ave.               CH
117-03-090 0                                          Vacant
117-03-091 0             145 E. University Blvd.       CH
117-03-387 0             101 E. University Blvd.       NHNC
BLOCK 29, CITY OF TUCSON
117-03-093 0             837 N. 7th Ave.               CH
117-03-094 0             833 N. 7th Ave.               CH
117-03-095 0             829 N. 7th Ave.               CH
117-03-096 0             26-28 E. 2nd St.              CH
117-03-102 0             823-827 N. 7th Ave.           CH
117-03-109 A             25 E. University Blvd.        CH
117-03-110 0             27 E. University Blvd.        CH
117-03-111 0             35 E. University Blvd.        CH
BLOCK 38, CITY OF TUCSON
117-03-255 0                                          Vacant
117-03-260 0             737-741 N. 7th Ave.           CH
117-03-264 0             717 N. 7th Ave.               CH
117-03-265 0                                          Vacant
117-03-268 0             25-27 E. 4th St.              CH
117-03-269 0             29 E. 4th St.                 CH
BLOCK 39, CITY OF TUCSON
117-03-271 0             144 E. University Blvd.       CH
117-03-272 0             128 E. University Blvd.       CH
117-03-273 0             130 E. University Blvd.       CH
117-03-274 0             110-116 E. University Blvd.   CH
117-03-275 0             102 E. University Blvd.       CH
117-03-276 0             737 N. 6th Ave.               CH
117-03-277 0             729 N. 6th Ave.               CH
117-03-278 0             728 N. 7th Ave.               CH
117-03-279 0             720 N. 7th Ave.               CH
117-03-281 0             711 N. 6th Ave.               NHNC
117-03-282 0             712 N. 7th Ave.               CH
117-03-283 0             123 E. 4th St.                NHNC
117-03-284 A             705 N. 6th Ave.               CH
117-03-284 B             131-133 E. 4th St.            CH
BLOCK 40, CITY OF TUCSON
117-03-285 0             246-248 E. University Blvd.   CH
                         741 N. 5th Ave.               CH
117-03-286 0             240-244 E. University Blvd.   CH
                         228-232 E. University Blvd.   CH
117-03-287 0             731 N. Arizona Ave.           CH
                         731-1/2 N. Arizona Ave.       CH
117-03-288 0             226 E. University Blvd.       CH
117-03-289 0             202-212 E. University Blvd.   CH
                         720 N. 6th Ave.               CN
117-03-291 0             725-727 N. 5th Ave.           CH
                         728 & 730-731 N. Arizona Ave. CH
117-03-295 0             723 N. 5th Ave.               CH
117-03-296 0                                          Vacant
117-03-297 0             237 E. 4th St.                CH
117-03-298 0             710 N. 6th Ave.               CH
117-03-299 0             245 E. 4th St.                CH
117-03-300 0             225 E. 4th St.                CH
117-03-302 0             702 N. 6th Ave.               CH
BLOCK 41, CITY OF TUCSON
117-03-304 0             733-745 N. 4th Ave.           NHNC
117-03-305 A             330 E. University Blvd.       CH
117-03-305 B                                          Parking Lot
117-03-306 0             300 E. University Blvd.       CH
117-03-309 0                                          Parking Lot
117-03-310 0             311 E. 4th St.                CH
117-03-312 0                                          Parking Lot
117-03-313 0             347 E. 4th St.                CH
117-03-314 0             335 E. 4th St.                CH
117-03-315 0             327 E. 4th St.                CH
117-03-316 0             319 E. 4th St.                CH
117-03-317 0             301 E. 4th St.                CH
BLOCK 42, CITY OF TUCSON
117-03-318 0             444 E. University Blvd.       CH
117-03-319 0             400 E. University Blvd.       CH
117-03-321 0             740 N. 4th Ave.               CH
117-03-324 A             721 N. 3rd Ave.               CH
117-03-325 0             445 E. 4th St.                CH
117-03-326 0                                          Vacant
117-03-327 0                                          Vacant
117-03-328 0             411-413 E. 4th St.            CH
BLOCK 43, CITY OF TUCSON
117-03-331 0             548 E. University Blvd.       CH
117-03-332 0             536 E. University Blvd.       CH
117-03-333 0             532 E. University Blvd.       CH
117-03-334 0             528 E. University Blvd.       CH
117-03-335 0             518 E. University Blvd.       CH
117-03-336 0             516 E. University Blvd.       CH
117-03-337 0             512 E. University Blvd.       CH
117-03-338 0             502 E. University Blvd.       CH/NHNC
117-03-339 0             728 N. 3rd Ave.               CH
117-03-340 0             728 N. Bean Ave.              CH
117-03-341 0             727 N. 2nd Ave.               CH
                         727 N. Bean Ave.              CH
117-03-342 0             721-725 N. 2nd Ave.           CH
117-03-343 0             722 N. 3rd Ave.               CH
117-03-346 0             519 E. 4th St.                CH
117-03-347 0             529 E. 4th St.                CH
117-03-348 0             533 E. 4th St.                CH
117-03-349 0             539 E. 4th St.                CH
117-03-350 0             547 E. 4th St.                CH
                         701 N. 2nd Ave.               CH
BLOCK 44, CITY OF TUCSON
117-03-351 0                                          Vacant
117-03-352 0             638 E. University Blvd.       CH
117-03-353 0             632 E. University Blvd.       CH
117-03-354 0             620 E. University Blvd.       CH
117-03-355 0             616 E. University Blvd.       CH
117-03-356 0             610 E. University Blvd.       CH
117-03-357 0             604 E. University Blvd.       CH
117-03-358 0             730-732 N. 2nd Ave.           CH
117-03-359 0             726 N. Jacobus Ave.           CH
117-03-361 A                                          Vacant
117-03-362 0                                          Vacant
117-03-363 0             724 N. 2nd Ave.               CH
117-03-364 0             605 E. 4th St.                CH
117-03-365 0             611 E. 4th St.                CH
117-03-366 0             617 E. 4th St.                CH
117-03-367 0             623 E. 4th St.                CH
117-03-368 0             629 E. 4th St.                CH
117-03-369 0             635 E. 4th St.                CH
117-03-370 0             641 E. 4th St.                CH
117-03-371 0             645 E. 4th St.                CH
BLOCK 45, CITY OF TUCSON
                         644 E. 4th St.                CH
117-04-001 0             644 Rear E. 4th St.           CH
                         628 E. 4th St.                CH
117-04-003 0             632 E. 4th St.                CH
117-04-004 0             626 E. 4th St.                CH
117-04-005 0             620 E. 4th St.                CH
117-04-006 0             614 E. 4th St.                CH
117-04-007 0             608 E. 4th St.                CH
117-04-008 0             602 E. 4th St.                CH
117-04-009 0             600-632 N. 2nd Ave.           CH
117-04-010 0             642 N. Jacobus Ave.           CH
117-04-011 0             633 N. 1st Ave.               CH
117-04-012 0             621 N. 1st Ave.               CH
117-04-013 0             632 N. Jacobus Ave.           CH
117-04-014 0             610 N. 2nd Ave.               CH
117-04-015 0             607 E. 5th St.                CH
117-04-016 0             611 E. 5th St.                CH
117-04-017 0             615 E. 5th St.                CH
117-04-018 0             619 E. 5th St.                CH
117-04-019 0             629 E. 5th St.                CH
117-04-020 0             637 E. 5th St.                CH
117-04-021 0             649 E. 5th St.                CH
BLOCK 46, CITY OF TUCSON
117-04-022 0             528 E. 4th St.                CH
117-04-023 0             526 E. 4th St.                CH
117-04-024 0             524 E. 4th St.                CH
117-04-025 0             522 E. 4th St.                CH
117-04-026 0             520 E. 4th St.                CH
117-04-027 0             510 E. 4th St.                CH
117-04-028 0             502 E. 4th St.                CH
117-04-029 0             624-628 N. 3rd Ave.           CH
117-04-030 0             633 N. 2nd Ave.               CH
117-04-031 0             631 N. 2nd Ave.               CH
117-04-032 0             620 N. 3rd Ave.               CH
117-04-033 0             614 N. 3rd Ave.               CH
117-04-034 0             501-503 E. 5th St.            CH
117-04-035 0             505 E. 5th St.                CH
117-04-036 0             513 E. 5th St.                NHNC
                         601-605 N. Bean Ave.          NHNC
117-04-037 0             527 E. 5th St.                CH
117-04-038 0             531 E. 5th St.                CH
117-04-039 0             547 E. 5th St.                CH
BLOCK 47, CITY OF TUCSON
117-04-040 0             635 N. 3rd Ave.               CH
117-04-041 0             432 E. 4th St.                CH
117-04-042 0             426-428 E. 4th St.            CH
117-04-043 0             420 E. 4th St.                CH
117-04-044 0             412 E. 4th St.                CH
117-04-045 0             402 E. 4th St.                CH
117-04-046 0             636 N. 4th Ave.               CH
117-04-047 0             634 N. 4th Ave.               CH
117-04-048 0             623 N. 3rd Ave.               CH
117-04-049 0             630 N. 4th Ave.               CH
117-04-050 0             628 N. 4th Ave.               CH/NHNC
117-04-053 0             621 N. 3rd Ave.               CH
117-04-054 0             615 N. 3rd Ave.               CH
117-04-055 0             609 N. 3rd Ave.               CH
117-04-056 0             425-427 E. 5th St.            CH
117-04-059 0             603 N. 3rd Ave.               CH
BLOCK 48, CITY OF TUCSON                              CH
117-04-060 0             342 E. 4th St.                CH
117-04-061 0             332 E. 4th St.                CH
117-04-062 0             326 E. 4th St.                CH
117-04-063 0             320 E. 4th St.                CH
117-04-064 0             312 E. 4th St.                CH
117-04-066 0             643 N. 4th Ave.               CH
117-04-067 0             628-630 & 632 N. Herbert Ave. CH
117-04-068 0             628 N. 5th Ave.               CH
117-04-069 0             624 N. 5th Ave.               CH
117-04-070 0             620 N. 5th Ave.               CH
117-04-074 0             331 E. 5th St.                CH
117-04-075 0             317-321 E. 5th St.            CH
117-04-077 0             307 E. 5th St.                CH
117-04-078 A             614 N. 5th Ave.               CH
BLOCK 49, CITY OF TUCSON
117-04-079 0             242 E. 4th St.                CH
117-04-080 0             234 E. 4th St.                CH
117-04-081 0                                          Parking Lot
117-04-082 0             222 E. 4th St.                CH
117-04-083 0             650 N. 6th Ave.               NHNC
117-04-084 0             626 N. 6th Ave.               CH/I
117-04-086 0                                          Parking Lot
117-04-087 0                                          Parking Lot
117-04-089 0             620 N. 6th Ave.               CH
117-04-090 0                                          Parking Lot
117-04-091 0             247 E. 5th St.                CH
117-04-092 0                                          Parking Lot
117-04-093 0                                          Parking Lot
117-04-094 0                                          Parking Lot
117-04-095 0             604 N. 6th Ave.               CH
BLOCK 50, CITY OF TUCSON
117-04-099 0                                          Vacant
117-04-100 0             632 N. 7th Ave.               NHNC
117-04-102 0                                          Parking Lot
117-04-103 0             637 N. 6th Ave.               CH/NHNC
117-04-105 0             624 N. 7th Ave.               CH
117-04-106 0             622 N. 7th Ave.               CH
117-04-107 0             620 N. 7th Ave.               CH
117-04-108 0             621 N. 6th Ave.               CH
117-04-110 0             612 N. 7th Ave.               NHNC
117-04-111 0             602 N. 7th Ave.               CH
117-04-112 0                                          Vacant
117-04-113 0             123-125 E. 5th St.            CH
BLOCK 51, CITY OF TUCSON
117-04-115 0             667 N. 7th Ave.               NHNC
117-04-120 0             629 N. 7th Ave.               CH
117-04-125 0             627 N. 7th Ave.               CH
117-04-126 0             621 N. 7th Ave.               CH
117-04-127 0             605 & 615-617 N. 7th Ave.     CH
                         75 E. 5th St.                 CH
BLOCK 62, CITY OF TUCSON
117-04-294 0             547 N. 3rd Ave.               CH
117-04-295 0             599 N. 3rd Ave.               CH
117-04-296 A             428 E. 5th St.                CH
117-04-297 A             422-424 E. 5th St.            CH
117-04-302 0             538 N. Hoff Ave.              CH
117-04-303 0             591 N. 3rd Ave.               CH
117-04-304 0             535 N. 3rd Ave.               CH
117-04-305 0             534 N. Hoff Ave.              CH
117-04-306 0             521 N. 3rd Ave.               CH
117-04-307 0             517 N. 3rd Ave.               CH
117-04-308 0             528 N. Hoff Ave.              CH
117-04-313 0             526 N. Hoff Ave.              NHNC
117-04-314 0             513 N. 3rd Ave.               CH
117-04-315 0             511-509 N. 3rd Ave.           CH
117-04-316 0             507 N. 3rd Ave.               CH
117-04-317 0             429 E. 6th St.                NHNC
117-04-321 0             503 N. 3rd Ave.               CH
BLOCK 63, CITY OF TUCSON
117-04-322 0             506 E. 6th St.                CH
BLOCK 64, CITY OF TUCSON
117-04-323 0             646 E. 5th St.                CH
117-04-324 0             640-642 E. 5th St.            CH
117-04-325 0             628 E. 5th St.                CH
117-04-326 0             616 E. 5th St.                CH
117-04-328 0             604 E. 5th St.                CH
117-04-329 0             523 N. Jacobus Ave.           CH
                         523-1/2 N. Jacobus Ave.       CH
117-04-330 0             525 N. 1st Ave.               CH
117-04-331 0             521 N. 1st Ave.               CH
117-04-332 0             528-530 N. 2nd Ave.           NHNC
117-04-333 0             522 N. 2nd Ave.               NHNC
117-04-334 0             519 N. Jacobus Ave.           CH
117-04-335 0             517 N. 1st Ave.               CH
117-04-336 0             643 E. 6th St.                CH
117-04-337 0             623 E. 6th St.                CH
117-04-338 0             621 E. 6th St.                CH
117-04-339 0             619 E. 6th St.                CH
117-04-340 0             617 E. 6th St.                CH
117-04-341 0                                          Vacant
117-04-342 0             514 N. 2nd Ave.               CH
117-04-343 0             601-603 E. 6th St.            CH
BLOCK 29, FELDMAN’S AMENDED
115-04-503 0             818 E. Speedway Blvd.         CH
                         818-1/2 E. Speedway Blvd.     CH
115-04-504 0             814 E. Speedway Blvd.         CH
115-04-505 0             812 E. Speedway Blvd.         CH
                         812-1/2 E. Speedway Blvd.     CH
115-04-506 0             1052 N. Euclid Ave.           CH
115-04-507 0                                          Vacant
                         1044-1046 N. Euclid Ave.      NHNC
115-04-508 0             1036, 1038, & 1040-1042 N.    CH
                         Euclid Ave.
115-04-512 0             1030 N. Euclid Ave.           CH
115-04-515 0                                          1024 N. Euclid Ave.
115-04-516 0             1018-1020 N. Euclid Ave.      CH
                         803 & 811 E. 1st St.          CH
115-04-519 0             819-821 E. 1st St.            CH
BLOCK 30, FELDMAN’S AMENDED
115-04-525 0             750 E. Speedway Blvd.         CH
115-04-526 0                                          Vacant
115-04-527 0             710 E. Speedway Blvd.         CH
115-04-528 0                                          Parking Lot
115-04-529 0                                          Parking Lot
115-04-530 0                                          Parking Lot
115-04-531 0             1046 N. 1st Ave.              CH
115-04-532 0             1039 N. Euclid Ave.           CN
115-04-533 0                                          Parking Lot
115-04-534 0             1036 N. 1st Ave.              CH
115-04-535 0             1030 N. 1st Ave.              CH
115-04-536 0             1029 N. Euclid Ave.           CH
115-04-537 0             1025 N. Euclid Ave.           CH
115-04-538 0             1024-1028 N. 1st Ave.         NHNC
115-04-539 0             1018-1020 N. 1st Ave.         CH
115-04-540 0             701 E. 1st St.                CH
115-04-541 0             707 E. 1st St.                CH
115-04-542 0             715-717 E. 1st St.            CH
115-04-543 0             723 E. 1st St.                CH
115-04-546 0             741-743 E. 1st St.            CH
115-04-548 0             745 E. 1st St.                CH
BLOCK 31, FELDMAN’S AMENDED
115-04-554 0             724 E. 1st St.                CH
115-04-555 0             920 N. 1st Ave.               NHNC
115-04-556 0                                          Vacant
115-04-557 0             708-712 E. 1st St.            CH
115-04-558 0             700 E. 1st St.                CH
115-04-567 0             906 N. 1st Ave.               CH/NHNC
115-04-569 A             722 E. 2nd St.                CH
115-04-568 A             830 N. 1st Ave.               CH
115-04-570 A                                          Parking Lot
115-04-571 A             830 N. 1st Ave.               CH
115-04-572 A             830 N. 1st Ave.               CH
115-04-573 A                                          Parking Lot
115-04-574 0             819 N. Euclid Ave.            CH
115-04-576 A             820 N. 1st Ave.               NHNC
BLOCK 2, BUELL’S ADDITION
124-05-007 A                                          University Main Gate
124-05-009 0                                          University Main Gate
124-05-010 B                                          University Main Gate
124-05-011 B                                          University Main Gate
124-05-012 0                                          University Main Gate
124-05-013 A                                          University Main Gate
124-05-014 A             834 E. University Blvd.       NHNC
BLOCK 3, BUELL’S ADDITION
124-05-016 A             701-707 E. University Blvd.   CH
124-05-018 0             715 E. University Blvd.       CH
124-05-019 0             721 E. University Blvd.       CH
BLOCK 4, BUELL’S ADDITION
124-05-024 0             704 N. 1st Ave.               CH
124-05-025 0             728 N. 1st Ave.               CH
124-05-026 0             730 N. 1st Ave.               CH
124-05-027 0             715 E. 4th St.                CH
124-05-028 0             721 E. 4th St.                CH
124-05-029 0             725-729 E. 4th St.            CH
124-05-030 0             731 E. 4th St.                CH
124-05-031 0             701 N. Euclid Ave.            CH
124-05-032 0             703 N. Euclid Ave.            CH
124-05-033 0             705 N. Euclid Ave.            CH
124-05-034 0             707 N. Euclid Ave.            CH
                         727-729, 731-733, & 735-737   CH
124-05-035 0             N. Euclid Ave.                CH
                         744-746 E. University Blvd.
124-05-036 0             742 E. University Blvd.       CH
124-05-037 0             732-738 E. University Blvd.   CH
124-05-038 0             728-730 E. University Blvd.   CH
124-05-040 0             720 E. University Blvd.       CH
124-05-041 0             708 E. University Blvd.       CH
124-05-042 0             704 E. University Blvd.       CH
BLOCK 5, BUELL’S ADDITION
124-05-043 0             714-718 N. Euclid Ave.        CH
124-05-044 0                                          Vacant
124-05-045 0             801-803 E. 4th St.            CH
124-05-046 0             805-811 E. 4th St.            CH
124-05-047 0             813-819 E. 4th St.            CH
124-05-048 0                                          Parking Lot
124-05-049 0             876 E. University Blvd.       CH
124-05-050 0             874 E. University Blvd.       CH
124-05-051 A             870 E. University Blvd.       CH
124-05-052 0             800 & 820 E. University Blvd. CH
BLOCK 9, BUELL’S ADDITION
124-05-084 0             632 N. 1st Ave.               CH
124-05-085 0             701-703 E. 5th St.            CH
124-05-086 0             709 E. 5th St.                CH
124-05-087 0             711-713 E. 5th St.            CH
124-05-088 0             715-717 E. 5th St.            CH
124-05-089 0             725 E. 5th St.                CH
124-05-090 0             733 E. 5th St.                CH
124-05-091 0             739 E. 5th St.                CH
124-05-092 0             615 N. Euclid Ave.            CH
124-05-093 0             745 E. 5th St.                CH
124-05-094 0             627 N. Euclid Ave.            CH
124-05-095 0             633 N. Euclid Ave.            CH
124-05-096 0             748 E. 4th St.                CH
124-05-097 0             746 E. 4th St.                CH
124-05-099 0             722 E. 4th St.                CH
124-05-100 0             734 E. 4th St.                CH
124-05-101 0             728 E. 4th St.                CH
124-05-102 0             712 E. 4th St.                CH
124-05-103 0             634 N. 1st Ave.               CH
124-05-104 0             710 E. 4th St.                CH
124-05-105 0             704 E. 4th St.                CH
124-05-106 0             636-638 N. 1st Ave.           CH
BLOCK 10, BUELL’S ADDITION
124-05-107 0             516 N. 1st Ave.               CH
124-05-108 0             701 E. 6th St.                CH
                         711 E. 6th St.                CH
124-05-109 0             711-1/2 E. 6th St.            CH
                         711 Rear E. 6th St.           NHNC
124-05-110 0             717 E. 6th St.                CH
124-05-111 0             721-725 E. 6th St.            CH
124-05-112 0             727 E. 6th St.                CH
124-05-113 0             731 E. 6th St.                CH
124-05-116 0             746 E. 5th St.                NHNC
124-05-117 0             726 E. 5th St.                CH
124-05-118 0             728 E. 5th St.                CH
124-05-119 0             714-716 E. 5th St.            CH
124-05-120 0             528-530 N. 1st Ave.           CH
124-05-121 0             532 N. 1st Ave.               CH
124-05-122 0             710 E. 5th St.                CH
124-05-123 0             702-704 E. 5th St.            CH
124-05-124 0             538 N. 1st Ave.               CH
 
8.8   Downtown Heritage Incentive District
   A.   Established: August 5, 1991, by Ordinance No. 7674.
   B.   Boundaries and Location. The boundary of the District coincides with
the Downtown Redevelopment District (see map in Article 11 of the UDC).
   C.   Structures Currently on the National Register of Historic Places. The
following are the National Register descriptions of the downtown structures
which are currently individually listed, with their dates of entry on the
Register:
Structure Address Date of Entry on the Register Additional Information
                    Date of
Structure  Address  Entry on  Additional Information
                    the
                    Register
Old Adobe
Patio      40 West  June 3,   This is a Mexican-style, adobe townhouse and is one of the oldest houses
(Charles   Broadway 1971      in Tucson. It has a flat roof, patio, and seventeen rooms. It now houses
O. Brown                      a restaurant and shops.
House)
           145-153            Constructed in 1858 (modified, 1880), this adobe, U-shaped townhouse is
Fremont    South    June 3,   said to have been occupied by former Governor John C. Fremont in 1881.
House      Main     1971      It has been restored and is now maintained as a museum by the Arizona
           Street             Historical Society.
Pima       115
County     North    June 23,  The three-story, Spanish Colonial Revival building has a blue tiled dome
Courthouse Church   1978      and was designed by noted Tucson architect, Roy Place.
           Avenue
           410 East           Constructed on a main commercial intersection, the three-story, Spanish
Coronado   9th      November  Colonial Revival-style hotel is historically important as a
Hotel      Street   30, 1982  manifestation of the development of tourism (and tourist hotels) in
                              Tucson.
                              Designed by the architects of the Treasury Department, the Neoclassical
United     55 East  February  Revival building represents part of the extensive Federal building
States     Broadway 10, 1983  program of the late 1920s. The building is four (4) stories tall and
Courthouse                    remains one of Tucson’s major public buildings. The Courthouse retains
                              its original integrity and continues to serve its original function.
1. Fourth
Avenue
Underpass
2. Sixth
Avenue
Underpass
3. Stone            September
Avenue              30, 1988
Underpass
4.
Vehicular
Bridges in
AZ
Thematic
Nomination
 
   D.   Structures Potentially Eligible for the National or Arizona Registers
of Historic Places.
      1.   The 1983 Historical Survey of Downtown Tucson evaluated some 200
structures and identified 40 as potentially eligible for National Register
listing. Of these, three (the underpasses) were subsequently placed on the
Register, and two (the El Presidio and Catalina Hotels) were demolished. In its
review of the remaining three dozen structures, the Downtown Preservation
Strategy Committee’s Inventory Subcommittee recommended that 20 buildings
receive priority for official recognition, whether as nomination to the
National Register, the Arizona Register, or designation as a local landmark. It
should be noted that designation would require additional research to document
the primary criteria of significance and integrity. Also, the owner’s approval
would be required.
      2.   Structures potentially eligible for National Register, the Arizona
Register, or local landmark designation are listed below, in chronological
order:
Structure Address Date Constructed
Structure                         Address                    Date Constructed
Arizona Daily Star Building       32 North Church Avenue     1884
Willard (Pueblo) Hotel            145 South Sixth Avenue     1903
Chicago Store                     130 East Congress          1905
W. A. Julian Building             117-121 East Congress      1905-07
Steinfeld Warehouse               101 West Sixth Street      1906
Tovrea Warehouse                  15 East Toole Avenue       1906, 1928
Old Pueblo Club                   115 South Stone Avenue     1907
Southern Pacific Railroad Station 400 North Toole Avenue     1907, 1942
Reilly Funeral Home               102 East Pennington Street 1908, 1935
El Paso and Southwestern Railroad 419 West Congress          1912
Station
Arizona Hotel                     31-47 North Sixth Avenue   1917
Lewis Hotel                       179 East Broadway          1917, 1939
Hotel Congress                    301-323 East Congress      1919
Odd Fellows Hall                  135 South Sixth Avenue     1919
Rialto Theater and Apartments     300-314 East Congress      1919-21
Baffert-Leon Warehouse            1 East Toole Avenue        1928
Thomas-Davis Clinic               130 South Scott Avenue     1928
Valley National Bank              2-16 East Congress         1929
Fox Theater                       27-33 West Congress        1930
First Interstate Bank Building    150 North Stone Avenue     1953
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3212.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3214.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3216.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3218.jpg]
Graphics included in this technical standard are reprinted from Tucson’s
Historic Districts: Criteria for Preservation and Development, City of Tucson,
1972, and Tucson Preservation Primer: A Guide for the Property Owner, edited by
Robert C. Giebner [A Class Project of the College of Architecture, University
of Arizona], 1979.
SECTION 9-03.0.0: SOUND ATTENUATION WITHIN THE AIRPORT ENVIRONS ZONE
Section
9-03.1.0   Purpose
9-03.2.0   Compliance
9-03.3.0   Required Construction Methods for Noise Level Reduction of 25 dB
9-03.4.0   Modifications
9-03.1.0   PURPOSE
   The following Standard is intended to provide construction/design
requirements for reducing interior noise/sound levels for all new construction
occurring within the Noise Control Districts (NCD) identified in the City of
Tucson Unified Development Code for the Tucson International Airport (TIA) and
Davis-Monthan (DM) Airport Environs Zone. The following Standard may be applied
to construction outside the TIA and DM Airport Environs Zone as determined by
the Building Official.
9-03.2.0   COMPLIANCE
   Compliance with this standard shall be deemed to meet requirements for a
minimum noise level reduction (NLR) of 25 decibels (dB). Alternative methods to
meet the required minimum NLR may be submitted for review and approval by the
Building Official or designated representative.
9-03.3.0   REQUIRED CONSTRUCTION METHODS FOR NOISE LEVEL REDUCTION OF 25 dB
3.1   Exterior Walls
   A.   Exterior walls, other than as described in this section, shall have a
laboratory sound transmission class (STC) rating of at least STC-30; or
   B.   Masonry walls having a weight of at least 25 pounds per square foot do
not require a furred (stud) interior wall. At least one surface of concrete
block walls shall be plastered; and
   C.   Stud walls shall be at least four inches in nominal depth and shall be
finished on the outside with solid sheathing under an approved exterior wall
finish; and
      1.   Interior surface of the exterior walls shall be gypsum board or
plaster at least one-half inch thick, installed on studs.
      2.   Continuous composition board, plywood or gypsum board sheathing at
least one-half inch thick shall cover the exterior side of the wall studs.
      3.   Sheathing panels shall be covered on the exterior with overlapping
building paper.
      4.   Insulation material at least R-11 shall be installed continuously
throughout the cavity space behind the exterior sheathing and between wall
studs. Insulation shall be glass fiber or mineral wool.
3.2   Exterior Windows
   A.   Windows, other than as described in this section shall have a
laboratory sound transmission class rating of at least STC-28; or
   B.   Glass shall be at least three-sixteenths thick; and
   C.   All openable windows shall be weatherstripped and airtight when closed
so as to conform to an air infiltration test not to exceed one-half cubic foot
per minute per foot of crack length in accordance with American Society for
Testing Materials (ASTM) E-283-65-T; and
   D.   Glass shall be sealed in an airtight manner with a non-hardening
sealant or a soft elastomer gasket or gasket tape; and
   E.   The perimeter of window frames shall be sealed airtight to the exterior
wall construction with a sealant conforming to one of the following Federal
specifications for caulking: TT-S-00227, TT-S-00230 or TT-S-00153.
3.3   Exterior Doors
   A.   Doors, other than as described in this section shall have a laboratory
sound transmission class rating of at least STC-26; or
   B.   All exterior side-hinged doors shall be solid-core wood or insulated
hollow metal at least one and three-fourths thick and shall be fully
weatherstripped; and
   C.   Exterior sliding doors shall be weatherstripped with an efficient
airtight gasket system with performance as specified in Section
3.2. The glass in the sliding doors shall be at least three-sixteenths inch
thick; and
   D.   Glass over two square feet in area, in doors shall be sealed in an
airtight non-hardening sealant or in a soft elastomer gasket or glazing tape;
and
   E.   The perimeter of door frames shall be sealed airtight to the exterior
wall construction as described in Section
9-03.3.2.D.
3.4   Roofs
   A.   Combined roof and ceiling construction, other than described in this
paragraph and in paragraph F, shall have a laboratory sound transmission class
rating of at least STC-39; or
   B.   With an attic or rafter space at least six inches deep, and with a
ceiling below, the roof shall consist of one-half inch composition board,
plywood or gypsum board sheathing topped by roofing as required; and
   C.   Open beam roof construction shall follow the energy insulation standard
method for batt insulation; and
   D.   Skylights shall conform to the window standard in Section
9-03.3.3.
3.5   Ceilings
   A.   Gypsum board or plaster ceilings at least one-half inch thick shall be
provided where required by paragraph 3.4 B, above. Ceilings shall be
substantially airtight with a minimum of penetrations; and
   B.   Glass fiber, cellulose or mineral wool insulation at least R-38 shall
be provided above the ceiling between joists.
3.6   Ventilation
   A.   A ventilation system shall be installed that will provide the minimum
air circulation and fresh air supply requirements for various uses in occupied
rooms without the need to open any windows, doors or other openings to the
exterior. The inlet and discharge openings shall be fitted with sheet metal
transfer ducts of at least 20 gauge steel, which shall be lined with one-inch
thick coated glass fiber, and shall be at least five feet long with one 90
degree bend; and
   B.   Gravity vent openings in attics shall be as close to code minimum in
number and size, as practical; and
   C.   Bathroom, laundry and similar exhaust ducts connecting the interior
space to the outdoors, shall contain at least a five-foot length of internal
sound-absorbing duct lining. Exhaust ducts than five feet in length shall be
fully lined and shall also meet the provisions of Section
9-03.3.2, Exterior Windows. Each duct shall be provided with a bend in the duct
such that there is no direct line-of-sight through the duct from the venting
cross-section to the room-opening cross-section. Duct lining shall be coated
glass fiber duct liner at least one-inch thick; and
   D.   Fireplaces shall be provided with well fitted dampers.
(Am. Admin. Directive, 5/14/2013)
9-03.4.0   MODIFICATIONS
   For modification procedures, refer to the procedures outlined in Section
1-01.6.0. Emergency situations and other conditions not specifically addressed
by this standard shall be judged on a case-by-case basis by the Building
Official, or designated representative, without setting precedent. In addition,
for all modifications requested, the Davis-Monthan Air Force Base (DMAFB) will
be notified for review of all such requests within the boundaries of the DM AEZ
Environs.
SECTION 10: TRANSPORTATION
SECTION 10-01.0.0: STREET TECHNICAL STANDARD
Section
10-01.1.0   General
10-01.2.0   Street Composition
10-01.3.0   Street Improvements
10-01.4.0   Construction Standards
10-01.5.0   Sight Visibility
10-01.6.0   Street Design Criteria
10-01.7.0   Modifications
10-01.8.0   Enforcement
10-01.9.0   List of Figures
10-01.1.0   GENERAL
1.1   Purpose
   The following Street Technical Standard has been established to:
•   Provide for streets of suitable location, width, and improvement to safely
accommodate vehicular, pedestrian, disabled pedestrian, and bicycle traffic;
•   Afford satisfactory access to police, fire fighting, ambulance, paramedic,
utility, sanitation, and street maintenance equipment;
•   Coordinate street improvements, both public and private, so as to compose a
convenient system and avoid undue hardships to adjoining properties; and
•   Provide design values and alternatives most suitable for various situations
as dictated by safety and sound engineering judgment.
1.2   Scope
   This standard applies to all development located within the City of Tucson.
1.3   Functional Classification
   The improvement and development of streets is based on the functional
classification system. The design characteristics of the street depend on the
volume and type of traffic, length of street, and whether or not it is a
through street.
   The three functional classifications identified by the City of Tucson are
local streets, collector streets, and arterial streets.
1.4   Definitions
   Definitions for words used in this standard are found in Section 12,
Definitions, or in Article 11 of the Tucson Unified Development Code (UDC).
10-01.2.0   STREET COMPOSITION
2.1   Right-of-Way Requirements
   A.   All rights-of-way, both public and private, will be designed to
accommodate present and future street pavements, medians, curbs, walks, utility
installations, drainage, landscaping, and other design considerations. All
entire or partial right-of-way widths are in whole numbers, dimensioned in
feet.
   The following abbreviations are used in this standard to refer to right-of-
way elements.
 
M - Median         T - Travel Lanes
TL - Turning Lanes C - Curbs
B - Bike Lanes     P - Parking Lanes
W - Sidewalk Area
 
   B.   The minimum required right-of-way width consists of:
 
Local Street     T & C & P & W
Collector Street T & C & W & TL & B & M (if required)
Arterial Street  T & C & W & TL & B & M
 
   C.   Each arterial and collector street will be designed to Major Streets
and Routes (MS&R) Plan guidelines to accommodate the projected traffic for the
design year and any safety features, buffer zones, frontage roads, refuge
lanes, bus lanes, or other design considerations.
   D.   Additional right-of-way is required by the MS&R Plan at major
intersections to allow for necessary turning movements and other street uses.
   E.   Where considered appropriate by the Tucson Department of Transportation
(TDOT), additional right-of-way may also be required for installing mass
transit stops, facilities for the physically disabled, or stormwater flows and
drainage structures.
2.2   Traffic Volumes
   A.   Residential Average Daily Traffic (ADT) can be estimated according to
the following table or the latest edition of the Institute of Transportation
Engineers (ITE) Trip Generation Handbook:
 
Type of Dwelling Unit   ADT per Unit
Single Family Dwellings 10.0
Apartment/Condominiums  7.0
Townhomes               6.0
Mobile Homes            5.0
 
   B.   Nonresidential ADT can be estimated using the Trip Generation Manual of
the Institute of Transportation Engineers.
   C.   The ADT calculated for the project must be added to the ADT of the
through traffic on any street adjacent to the project, to determine whether the
requirements of this standard apply to the street.
2.3   Width Requirements (See Figures 1-5.)
   A.   Pavement and Travel Lane Widths
      1.   Paved roadway and travel lane widths are determined by the use of
the following tables.
 
TABLE 1 MIDBLOCK PAVEMENT WIDTHS
Number of Parking Lanes Minimum Width of 2-Way Roadway Exclusive of Curbs
                        ADT 0-1,000 ADT 1,001-2,500
0                       24 feet     24 feet
2                       32 feet*    40 feet
 
            *May be used only with two (2) foot wide wedge curbs.
 
TABLE 2 TRAVEL LANE WIDTHS
ADT            Lane Width Number of Lanes
0 to 1,000     10 feet    2
1,001 to 2,500 12 feet    2
Over 2,500     Designed on a case-by-case basis
 
      2.   The width of a travel lane is determined by the speed of traffic,
modal split , truck traffic, ADT, and other considerations. Where the volume of
truck traffic exceeds 5% of the ADT, the minimum travel lane width will be 12
feet. Where speed of traffic and modal splits effect the width of travel lanes,
lane widths will be approved by TDOT .
   B.   When a travelway exhibits characteristics of both a parking area access
lane (PAAL) and a local street, TDOT will classify the travelway according to
the most dominant use.
2.4   Parking Lanes
   A.   A parking lane is eight feet in width and parallel with the curb, if
used with a vertical curb and measured from the face of the vertical curb, or,
if used with a wedge curb and measured from the back of the wedge curb.
Exception: seven feet is acceptable on local roads when the ADT is less than
1,000.
   B.   When wedge curbs are permitted, they may be included as a part of the
parking lane.
   C.   Parking is prohibited on arterial and collector streets, unless
specifically authorized by the Mayor and Council or the TDOT .
   D.   Local streets must be designed with parking on both sides of the
street, unless parking is provided in common areas distributed throughout the
subdivision, at a ratio of one parking space per dwelling within the
subdivision.
2.5   Additional Vehicular Lanes
   A.   Deceleration, left turn, and/or additional travel lanes may be required
adjacent to driveways on collector or arterial streets. A Traffic Impact
Analysis (TIA) shall be prepared for developments that generate over 100 peak
hour vehicular trips to determine the need for additional vehicular lanes. The
TIA must comply with the criteria established in the latest edition of the
city’s Transportation Access Management Guidelines.
   B.   Left turn lanes, with appropriate transitions, may be required on
streets that exist at less than the full future width or where significant
turning movements will occur. The minimum turn lane width is 11 feet, but 12
feet is recommended.
   C.   Pavement transitions are to be designed based upon the latest edition
of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices [MUTCD] or other TDOT approved
design manuals.
   D.   Median islands will be designed with a length consistent with the
design speed of the street and have a nominal width of 20 feet but at no point
be less than six feet in width unless approved by the TDOT , and not intended
for pedestrian use. Median islands will provide accessible routes through or
across medians and a place of refuge for pedestrians and disabled pedestrians
at all pedestrian crosswalks.
2.6   Bikeways, Lanes, and Paths
   A.   Bikeways and bike paths separate from the paved roadway require a
minimum of five feet for one-way travel and a minimum of ten feet for two-way
travel.
   B.   Each bike lane within the paved roadway requires a minimum of five feet
of additional pavement.
   C.   Bikeways, bike lanes, and bike paths will be designed in accordance
with the Arizona Department of Transportation publication, Arizona Bicycle
Facilities Planning and Design Guidelines and Mayor and Council policy.
2.7   Sidewalk Areas
   A.   All streets require a sidewalk area on each side of the street. A
sidewalk area generally consists of a space between the curb and sidewalk, area
for a sidewalk, and a ground slope area . Improvements include, but are not
limited to, wheelchair ramp s, sidewalks, driveways, utilities, street
furniture, landscaping, and drainage structures.
   Reduction in the width of the sidewalk area or the omission of the sidewalk
area (see Section
10-01.3.3.A for the criteria for the omission of sidewalk area) is not allowed,
except when authorized by the City Engineer or designee under any of the
following conditions:
      1.   If an alternative street cross-section has been previously approved;
      2.   In order to accommodate existing grade differentials;
      3.   In order to match existing sidewalks;
      4.   In order to accommodate drainage facilities; or,
      5.   In order to accommodate existing right-of-way.
   B.   The space between the curb and the sidewalk is reserved for placing
fire hydrants, traffic signs, mailboxes, water meters, drainage structures, and
other similar uses. The minimum width for this space is two feet.
   The space between the curb and sidewalk may be excluded. (See
Figures 1 and
2.) In such a situation, sufficient right-of-way on the property side of the
sidewalk must be dedicated to accommodate the items normally found in the
space.
   C.   When landscaping is installed in sidewalk areas which are not required
to have sidewalks, a four-foot wide walk area must be kept free from trees and
large bushes. If curbs exist, the walk area will be graded to provide a ground
slope of 2% to the top of the curb.
   D.   In sidewalk areas where sidewalks are installed, owners of abutting
property may place pea gravel, decomposed granite, or brick in sand in the
space between the curb and sidewalk and in the ground slope areas. A no cost
right-of-way permit from the City of Tucson is required for the placement of
the materials.
   E.   Landscaping work in street right-of-way that involves irrigation
systems, raised planters, trees, large shrubs, or curbing will require the
abutting property owner to submit a plan to, and receive written approval and a
permit (pursuant to Chapter 25, Tucson Code) from, TDOT . The landscaping will
be reviewed for sight visibility safety, pedestrian safety, upheaval potential,
and compatibility with existing utilities and drainage facilities.
   F.   Any improvements (landscaping, irrigation, etc.) installed in the
sidewalk area by the owner of an abutting property will be installed and
maintained at the owner’s expense. If the improvements need to be removed or
relocated because of construction of City of Tucson projects, removal and
relocation will be at the owner’s expense.
   G.   Maintenance of the sidewalk area in the public right-of-way is the
responsibility of the owner of the abutting property when the sidewalk area is
damaged or compromised by the owner of the abutting property or resident of the
property.
2.8   Pedestrian Access
   Barrier-free access routes shall be designed so they are traversable at all
times and free of floodwater during a ten-year frequency flood event.
   A.   All streets require the installation of a barrier-free pedestrian
circulation path, unless specifically exempted by this standard. The pedestrian
circulation path consists of sidewalks, wheelchair ramp s, and landings.
   Where the local street system is designed so that access to schools via the
local streets is indirect, a pedestrian easement is required which provides a
direct route to nearby schools (see the latest edition of the Arizona
Department of Transportation (ADOT) Traffic Safety for School Areas Guidelines
for additional information related to school pedestrian circulation.
   B.   Pedestrian circulation paths located in a street will conform to the
criteria in this standard.
   C.   Pedestrian circulation paths located within a development must meet the
criteria listed in Section 7-01, Pedestrian Access.
10-01.3.0   STREET IMPROVEMENTS
3.1   Paving
   A.   All pavement sections will be designed in accordance with ambient soil
conditions and projected use, using a method acceptable to the City Engineer.
      1.   The minimum structural section for permanent pavement on local
streets is:
         a.   Two inches of asphaltic concrete, supported by four inches of
aggregate base course, supported by subgrade compacted to 95% relative density
in accordance with the Pima County and City of Tucson Standard Specifications
for Public Improvements; or
         b.   Three and one-half inches of asphaltic concrete supported by
subgrade compacted to 100% relative density in accordance with Standard
Specifications for Public Improvements.
      2.   The minimum structural section for an interim paving improvement is
two inches of asphaltic concrete on compacted subgrade. (Interim paving may be
constructed on public streets when designated by the City Engineer. Such
interim paving must be at least 24 feet in width. Curbing may be required.)
      3.   The minimum structural section for a private residential street is
dust control paving .
      4.   The minimum structural section for a private street in an industrial
development will be three inches of asphaltic concrete supported by six inches
of aggregate base course.
      5.   The minimum structural section for temporary paving is two inches of
asphaltic concrete pavement on compacted earth.
   B.   All asphaltic concrete will conform to Standard Specifications for
Public Improvements or an approved equivalent, unless directed otherwise by the
City Engineer.
3.2   Curbing
   A.   Curbing is required on streets in order to adequately control drainage
within the street, prevent moisture from entering the subgrade, control access
to abutting property, separate the roadway from the pedestrian area, and
provide adequate lateral support for the pavement structure.
   B.   Curbing will conform to the following criteria.
      1.   Curbing will be vertical or wedge curbs as detailed in Standard
Details for Public Improvements.
      2.   Vertical curbing is required on all streets:
         a.   With a projected ADT of 1,000 or more, and
         b.   When the sidewalk adjoins the back of curb.
      3.   Wedge curbing may be used on streets with a projected ADT of 1,000
or less, but shall not be placed against sidewalks. A buffer of two feet is
required between the back of wedge curbing and the sidewalk, except when
authorized by the City Engineer for areas of reduced sidewalk area.
   C.   At the intersections of streets with other streets or collector or
arterial streets with PAALs/driveways, the curb lines will be connected with a
curve having the minimum radius shown in
Figure 6, measured at the face of the curb.
   D.   At intersections of alleys with streets having vertical curbing, curb
returns with a minimum radii of 12 feet are required. If the alleys are not
paved, the ends of the curb returns will be connected with a concrete header
along the extension of the street right-of-way. Curb cuts may be used in place
of curb returns only with the approval of the City Engineer. (See
Figure 7.)
   When wedge curbs are used, curb returns need not be provided at alleys
unless required for drainage control.
   E.   All curb cuts, curb returns, and curb depressions will be located in
accordance with the City of Tucson Code, Chapter 25.
   F.   Wheelchair ramp s meeting the criteria of this standard will be
provided at all curb returns.
   G.   When curb returns are installed at arterial intersections, conduit and
pull boxes will also be installed per the currently adopted street lighting
plan to allow for future lighting projects. The conduit and pull boxes will be
to Standard Details for Public Improvements. TDOT will provide guidelines as to
plan details.
3.3   Street Pedestrian Circulation Paths
   A.   Except as provided in Section
10-01.3.3.C, Sidewalks, as specified in Section
10-01.4.0, Construction Standards, are required along the entire street
frontage of new development of all properties, including proposed new
subdivisions and applications for building permits. The sidewalk requirements
also apply to expansions in floor area, site  area, or vehicular use area of
25% or more.
   B.   Sidewalks are required along the entire length of the street frontage
of all streets, whether public or private, of the property in question.
   C.   Exceptions. Sidewalks are not required in the following circumstances:
      1.   At locations where pedestrian traffic is extremely unlikely, subject
to approval of the City Development Review Committee (CDRC );
      2.   At locations where pedestrian traffic is heavily predominant along
only one side of a street, a sidewalk is required only on that side of the
street, subject to approval of the CDRC ;
      3.   For development of parcels located in areas included in improvement
districts which are under design and which include sidewalks;
      4.   On any residential street with an ADT of less than 140, provided the
street has vertical curbs and concrete driveways providing pedestrian and
disabled pedestrian access to the dwelling on each lot;
      5.   On any residential street with an ADT of less than 400, provided
that a sidewalk is constructed in an alternative location approved by the CDRC
;
      6.   For subdivisions proposing individual single-family residential
lots, with each lot containing 16,000 square feet of area or more;
      7.   On streets in established areas without existing curbs;
      8.   For lots containing drainageways in which the flow from the 100-year
storm is 100 cfs or greater, provided an alternate route for pedestrians is
constructed in a location approved by the CDRC . This exception is limited to
the width of the drainageway, which is measured from top-of-bank to top-of-
bank;
      9.   For streets in established areas where adequate right-of-way does
not exist and existing improvements adjacent to the right-of-way preclude
granting a public pedestrian access easement for construction of pedestrian
facilities on site ;
      10.   For a single-family lot where adjacent lots are developed without
sidewalks, provided the lot is not part of a subdivision that is under
development or has assurances posted for such improvements.
   D.   Sidewalk Location. Sidewalks must meet the following locational
requirements.
      1.   Sidewalks will be located a minimum of two feet from the back of the
existing or projected wedge curb location (the standard location) and extend to
the curb at all street intersections.
   These sidewalks may meander, if:
         a.   The sidewalk is in the standard location at the extension of the
property lines or matches the alignment of the abutting sidewalks; and
         b.   On a public street, the sidewalk is located within the right-of-
way or within an acceptable pedestrian easement; and
         c.   The maximum lateral offset does not exceed seven and one-half
feet; and
         d.   Lateral transitions in the sidewalk are no sharper than three
longitudinal to one lateral; and
         e.   Irrigation is not placed between the sidewalk and the curb; and
         f.   The sidewalk is a minimum of five feet in width where it adjoins
vertical curbing.
      2.   Sidewalks will extend the full length of the street frontage of the
development to provide continuity of the pedestrian and disabled pedestrian
circulation path.
      3.   Bus benches and shelters will be located adjacent to the edge of the
sidewalk and will not encroach into the five-foot wide circulation path.
      4.   There will be a minimum of one-foot separation between the five-foot
wide pedestrian circulation path portion of any sidewalk and any adjacent
structure. This one-foot wide area may also consist of concrete.
      5.   Sidewalks must be physically separated from any vehicular travel
lane by means of curbing, grade separation, barriers, railings, or other means,
except at crosswalks.
   E.   Ramp  Requirement. Curb ramp s must be provided at all points where the
sidewalk intersects a curb, in accordance with A.R.S. § 9-499.02. Ramp s must
align with each other where they cross the street.
(Am. Admin. Directive, 5/14/2013)
10-01.4.0   CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
4.1   Sidewalk Specifications
   A.   Width
      1.   Sidewalks located along a street will meet the following
requirements.
         a.   All projects which require a new sidewalk will provide a sidewalk
with a minimum width of five feet along local streets and six feet along
collector and arterial streets, installed to avoid any obstruction which
decreases the minimum width to less than five feet.
   Additional sidewalk width is required for schools and within pedestrian
oriented areas, such as the University area and the Downtown Redevelopment
Area.
         b.   All projects which have an adjacent existing sidewalk less than
four feet in width will provide a sidewalk with a minimum width of five feet
by:
            1)   Increasing the width of any narrower existing sidewalk to five
feet; and
            2)   Removing all obstructions (such as poles, signs, benches, bus
stops, etc.) from the sidewalk to provide a minimum width of five feet; or
            3)   Constructing additional sidewalk where obstructions cannot be
moved, so that a minimum five feet of sidewalk extends past the obstruction.
         c.   Where sidewalks are less than five feet in width, passing spaces
at least five feet by five feet will be located at reasonable intervals not to
exceed 200 feet. A T-intersection of two sidewalks or a level driveway apron is
an acceptable passing space. A public pedestrian easement may be required for
installation of the passing spaces.
   B.   Vertical Clearance. All sidewalks will have an unobstructed vertical
clearance of 84 inches.
   C.   Composition. Sidewalks located within a street right-of-way, both
parallel to the street and leading into a development project, will be
constructed in conformance with the composition requirements of the Standard
Details for Public Improvements. The Standard Details for Public Improvements
may have to be modified to comply with the slope  requirements of this
standard. Textured concrete will have a relief less than or equal to one-eighth
inch.
   D.   Slope .
      1.   Accessible Route Cross Slope
   The cross slope of the sidewalk will not exceed 2%. If existing public
sidewalks which intersect driveway aprons have a cross slope which exceeds 2%
(where the apron slope is measured to the back of the sidewalk), one of the
following will occur. A public pedestrian easement may be required for
installation of pedestrian facilities.
         a.   The driveway apron will be reconstructed so the sidewalk portion
of the apron does not exceed 2% cross slope ; or
         b.   An additional four feet of sidewalk, with transitions, will be
installed behind the existing apron; or
         c.   Additional paving will be installed to provide a level accessible
route, with transitions, in the parking area behind the sidewalk; or
         d.   Where excess right-of-way exists, the sidewalk is meandered
behind the driveway apron to provide an accessible route.
      2.   Accessible Route Running Slope
   The running slope of the sidewalk will not exceed one vertical to 20
horizontal, unless the longitudinal grade of the street exceeds this maximum.
Any portion of a sidewalk which exceeds this slope will conform to the
requirements of this standard concerning ramp construction, unless TDOT
determines that extenuating circumstances preclude conformance.
4.2   Ramp Specifications
   A.   Width
   All ramp s will have a minimum width of five feet, excluding edge protection
or flared sides.
   B.   Rise
   The maximum rise for any ramp will be 30 inches.
   C.   Slope
      1.   Accessible Route Cross Slope
      The cross slope of ramp s will not exceed one vertical to 50 horizontal.
      2.   Accessible Route Running Slope
      The running slope of ramp s will not exceed one vertical to 12
horizontal. This includes the slope of the underlying and adjacent topography.
   Exceptions:
         a.   Changes in elevation no greater than one-fourth inch may be
vertical and without treatment.
         b.   Changes in elevation between one-fourth inch and one-half inch
will be beveled with a slope no greater than one vertical to two horizontal.
   D.   Ramp  Landings
   All ramp s will have an unobstructed level landing both at the top and the
bottom of the ramp , meeting the following requirements.
      1.   Width
      The landing will be at least as wide as the ramp leading into it.
      2.   Length
      The landing will be at least five feet long.
      3.   Landing Slope
      A landing will be level in any direction. A street surface may be used
for the landing at the bottom of the ramp if it meets all composition and slope
requirements for an accessible route.
   E.   Sidewalk/Ramp  Intersections
   A sidewalk will intersect a ramp only at the top or bottom landing.
   F.   Ramp  Safety
      1.   Obstruction by Parked Vehicles
      Curb ramp s will be located so that vehicles cannot park blocking the
ramp access.
      2.   Handrails
      Handrails will be required for any ramp other than a curb ramp with a
rise greater than six inches or longer than 72 inches. The following criteria
apply.
         a.   Handrails will be located on both sides of the ramp .
         b.   On any ramp which changes direction, the inside handrail will be
continuous.
         c.   The height of the top of the handrails will be between 30 inches
and 34 inches from the ramp surface.
         d.   If the handrails are constructed of metal, the top railing will
be covered with a non-heat-conducting material.
      3.   Vertical Drop-Offs
      If any ramp other than a curb ramp has a vertical drop off on the side,
there will be a curb, wall, railing, or surface projecting above the ramp
surface to prevent pedestrians and wheelchairs from slipping off the ramp .
Minimum height of any protective device will be two inches.
      4.   Surface
      Ramp and landings will be rough finished for traction. Stamped textured
concrete is not acceptable.
      5.   Drainage
      All ramp s and landings will be designed so that water does not collect
on the surface of theramp or landing.
4.3   Driveways
   A.   Driveway aprons will be of portland cement concrete (PCC) constructed
to City of Tucson Standards, with a standard length of eight feet from the
front of the curb to the back of the apron.
   B.   Curb returns may be used in place of standard curb cuts only when one
or more of the following conditions occur.
      1.   The ADT of the driveway exceeds 100;
      2.   The points of access to a property should be limited for traffic
control and other reasons;
      3.   Local conditions occur which involve speed, the amount of truck
traffic, or the type of development and which, in the opinion of TDOT , require
curb returns; or,
      4.   When intersections a collector or arterial street.
4.4   Street Drainage
   A portion of rainfall which falls on subdivision lots eventually
concentrates in either streets or drainageways. The primary function of streets
is to carry the traffic. In most cases, however, drainage and traffic flow can
complement each other to accomplish the most efficient use of streets. As the
storm runoff amount increases adjacent to curbs, it will begin to interfere
with traffic movement, at which time the flow or portions thereof must be
removed from the streets into drainageways.
   A.   Drainage Criteria for Local, Collector, and Arterial Streets
   The design criteria given in Section 12.2 of Technical Standard
10-02.0, Standard Manual for Drainage Design and Floodplain Management in
Tucson, Arizona, shall apply to all newly constructed and substantially
improved local, collector, and arterial streets. The following drainage design
criteria shall apply.
      1.   Runoff from a ten-year storm must be contained within the curbs of
the street. On arterial streets or multiple lane roadways, at least one travel
lane in each direction shall be free from flooding during a ten-year flood.
Otherwise, storm drains, drainage channels, or other acceptable infrastructure
shall be provided to comply with all-weather access requirements.
      2.   Storm drain systems shall be designed such that the ten-year storm
is contained in the combined street gutter and storm drain system. Whenever
developments occur in areas not adequately served by existing storm drains and/
or drainage channels and street drainage design criteria require installation
of storm drains, the design of this drainage facility shall be as approved by
the City Engineer’s Office.
   B.   Maximum Allowable Street Flow
   All streets shall be designed and constructed so that the maximum rate of
storm runoff flowing in the direction of vehicular travel should not exceed 50
cfs. In no case shall the maximum rate of storm runoff flowing in the direction
of vehicular travel exceed 100 cfs without proper justification and prior
approval by the City Engineer’s Office.
   C.   Drainage Conveyance Structures
   Curb cuts, sidewalk scuppers, curb inlets, grate inlets, or other drainage
conveyance structures shall be constructed, as appropriate, to convey the
street flow to the storm drain or other drainageways.
   D.   Flow at At-Grade  Dip Crossings
   Streets required for permanent all-weather access shall be designed and
constructed so that the maximum rate of storm runoff flowing across the street
at a wash crossing shall not exceed one foot in depth during a 100-year flood.
   E.   All-Weather Access
   All-weather access is a safe vehicular travel route which both conventional
and emergency vehicles require for the purpose of unimpeded access. Streets
required for permanent all-weather access shall be designed and constructed
based on the following performance criteria.
      1.   At least one paved, permanent, all-weather access shall be provided
to each lot over terrain which can be traversed by conventional motor vehicles
in times of flooding. This standard applies to public or private streets and to
a designated route connecting a street and the development or building in
question.
      2.   Stormwater runoff flowing either across or in the direction of an
all-weather access route shall not exceed one foot in depth during the 100-year
flood.
      3.   The depth of flow in a roadway shall not exceed one foot in depth,
except at drainage crossings, during the regulatory (100-year) flood peak
discharge.
   F.   Sidewalks
   At any point where the ten-year flood discharge starts to cross a sidewalk,
the sidewalk shall be designed and constructed to convey the ten-year flood
flow under the sidewalk. The equation or design criteria dv2 < 18 may be
utilized to regulate flow depths and/or flow rates exceeding the ten-year flood
discharge magnitudes.
4.5   Vehicular Travel Lane Grade Criteria
   A.   Barring unusual circumstances of grade or drainage conditions, the
following criteria apply to streets (both public and private) and alleys. Any
exceptions must be obtained in writing from the City Engineer.
 
Maximum Longitudinal Grades
Travelways under 600 feet in length 15%
Travelways over 600 feet in length  12%
Cul-de-sac turning areas            8%
 
Minimum Longitudinal Grades
Crowned streets  0.50%
Inverted streets 0.50%
 
   B.   Vertical curves are required on local, collector, and arterial streets
where the algebraic difference in grade exceeds 1%, and the minimum desirable
vertical curve length is 100 feet. Vertical curves will be designed to meet
minimum stopping sight distance.
   C.   Crowned Streets (see
Figure 8). When the street is used as a ramp landing, the maximum slope of the
landing area is 2%.
      1.   The minimum crown is 2% for streets with a longitudinal grade of
0.50% or greater.
      2.   The minimum crown is 3% for streets where a longitudinal grade less
than 0.50% is approved.
      3.   The maximum crown is 4%.
   D.   Inverted Streets (see
Figure 8). When the street is used as a ramp landing, the maximum slope of the
landing area is 2%.
      1.   The minimum cross slope for an inverted street is 2% for streets
with a longitudinal grade of 0.50% or greater.
      2.   The minimum cross slope for an inverted street is 3% for a street
where a longitudinal grade of less than 0.50% is approved.
      3.   Inverted crown  slopes in excess of 3% may be used only with the
City Engineer’s approval .
   E.   Street improvements are required on streets abutting properties subject
to rezoning or subdivision platting. The extent of the improvements will be
based on the street classification, the amount of traffic projected, soil
conditions, and drainage.
   F.   All street improvement plans must comply with Standard Details for
Public Improvements which outlines drafting standards for the preparation of
plans.
   G.   All standard details, specifications, and procedures mentioned in this
standard may be obtained at the Office of the City Engineer or the City Clerk.
4.6   Utilities
   A.   Utilities will be located in compliance with utility location drawings.
(See
Figures 9-
14.)
   B.   Strip easements may be used along streets for the installation of
utilities. (See
Figure 15.) With the exception of minor service extensions to individual
parcels, all longitudinal utility installations between service points at
individual parcels will be located within street rights-of-way. Access between
the street and the private property will not be denied unless unsafe conditions
exist.
   C.   All sanitary sewer facilities will be constructed in accordance with
current Pima County Regional Wastewater Reclamation Department standards.
4.7   Assurances
   When assurances for street, sewer, electric and water utilities, and
drainage and flood control improvements are required in conjunction with a
subdivision, they will be posted prior to final plat approval by the City
Engineer or designee. Assurances are to be posted in accordance with Section
8.6.2, Subdivision Improvements and Assurances, of the Unified Development
Code.
10-01.5.0   SIGHT VISIBILITY
5.1   Sight Visibility Triangles
   Clear lines of sight will be maintained along all streets and driveways to
assure the safety of motorists and pedestrians.
   A.   Lines of Sight
      1.   Lines of sight will not be obscured between 30 inches and six feet
through a triangular area adjacent to a driveway, a PAAL, an alley, or a
street, where such access ways intersect with another street in a T-
configuration. The sight visibility triangle, or sight triangle, consists of
three sides that are formed by two intersecting access ways and a line
connecting the two.
   The first side, or through street side, is drawn parallel to the centerline
of the street that is intersected. The second side, or stem side, is drawn
parallel to the centerline of the stem street. The line which connects the
first two sides, or sight line, is drawn diagonally to the through street. (See
Figure 16.)
   Where streets meet in a four-way intersection, each street is considered a
stem, with the other street considered the through street, for purposes of
determining the sight triangle. (See
Figure 17.)
      2.   The datum for the purpose of measuring the limits of the lines of
sight (i.e., 30 inches and six feet) is an imaginary plane formed by the
intersection of the gutter line (or its approximation) of the through street
with the at-grade centerline (or its approximation) of the stem street.
   B.   Sight Visibility Triangle Criteria
      1.   A sight triangle will be maintained on each side of a stem that
intersects a two-way through street so that clear sight is provided to vehicles
approaching from both the near side (to the driver’s left) and the far side (to
the driver’s right) of the stem. Near side means approaching traffic is on the
same side of the street as the stem. Far side means approaching traffic is on
the opposite side of the street from the stem.
   The length required for the through street side of the sight triangle is
measured on the side of the stem from which traffic approaches. On one-way
streets or streets with median islands (i.e., no opening), only one sight
triangle is required on the side of approaching traffic; however, a 20-foot
(stem) by 30-foot (curb) pedestrian visibility triangle will be maintained on
the opposite side of approaching traffic. (See
Figure 16.)
      2.   If a street is included on the MS&R Plan, both the existing and
future sight visibility triangles (based on the MS&R Plan typical cross
sections) should be shown. Future sight visibility triangles are to be based
upon the MS&R Plan typical cross section for said street. The most restrictive
sight visibility triangles will be used unless specifically exempted.
      3.   The through street side of a sight triangle on a horizontal curve is
measured along a chord, as opposed to along the arc. (See
Figure 18.)
      4.   The sight triangle location and dimensions may be adjusted to
compensate for unusual circumstances, such as irregular topography or grade
changes, cul-de-sacs, curvilinear or deflected streets, or in other situations
acknowledged by the CDRC .
5.2   Sight Distances
   A.   The length of the stem side of the sight triangle is 20 feet, measured
from a point specified below.
   B.   The length and location of the through street side of the sight
triangle for near side/far side is determined according to the following
criteria.
      1.   On any PAAL or on a street that generates an ADT of 140 or less and
intersects a local road, no sight triangle is required. The minimum perimeter
yard required in Article 6, Dimensional Standards and Measurements, of the UDC
prevails.
      2.   Where the ADT is greater than 140 but less than 1,001, the through
street side is considered a local street in the “Line of Sight Matrix” (Section
10-01.5.3) and is measured at the edge of the nearest adjacent travel lane.
      3.   Where the ADT is between 1,001 and 12,000 and the street is not
designated as an arterial on the MS&R Plan, the through street side is
considered a collector street in the “Line of Sight Matrix” and is measured at
both the existing and projected (future) face of curb or edge of travel lane.
The future face of curb is based on the typical MS&R Plan right-of-way cross
section for that street.
      4.   Where the ADT is 12,000 or more or the street is designated as an
arterial on the MS&R Plan, the through street side is considered an arterial
street in the “Line of Sight Matrix” and is measured at both the existing and
projected (future) face of curb or edge of travel lane.
   The future face of curb or travel lane is based on the typical MS&R Plan
right-of-way cross section for that street.
      5.   On any street designated by the MS&R Plan as requiring intersection
widening, the midblock MS&R Plan cross section may be used, at the discretion
of the City Engineer, for determining the future sight visibility triangles of
parcels lying within or adjoining the intersection widened portion of the
street right-of-way.
5.3   Line of Sight Matrix
STEM STREET SIDE THROUGH STREET SIDE
                  Local Collector Arterial
STEM STREET SIDE THROUGH STREET SIDE
                           Local Collector Arterial
DRIVE/PAAL       Near Side 185*  265       345
                 Far Side  110   110       125
LOCAL            Near Side 180   260       340
                 Far Side  110   110       125
COLLECTOR        Near Side 175   255       335
                 Far Side  110   110       125
ARTERIAL         Near Side 165   245       325
                 Far Side  110   110       125
 
*Length in Feet
5.4   Structural Projections or Overhangs
   Structural projections or overhangs over six feet above finish grade are
permitted within the required setback areas, provided that the overhang does
not extend into the public right-of-way or the future right-of-way per the MS&R
Plan, and the following conditions are met.
   A.   On any PAAL, see Section
7.4.6.F.2, Setbacks from Access Lanes and PAALs, of the Unified Development
Code.
   B.   On any street, see Sections
6.4.5.C, Street Perimeter Yard, and 6.4.5.D, Exceptions, of the UDC.
10-01.6.0   STREET DESIGN CRITERIA
6.1   Street Layout
   A.   Partial local street rights-of-way are not acceptable for subdivision
design. Modifications may be granted in accordance with Section
10-01.7.0. Where partial streets exist adjacent to the tract being developed
(see
Figure 19):
      1.   Additional property necessary to provide the full width right-of-way
must be dedicated; and
      2.   Improvements must be made to the street as required by TDOT .
   B.   Proposed developments will provide for the continuation of existing
arterial and collector street right-of-way.
   C.   The local street system will be arranged to discourage through
vehicular traffic through the proposed development.
   D.   When residential lots front on arterials or collectors, proposed
developments will provide sufficient right-of-way for local service or access
streets. Other treatments to protect residential properties by separation of
through and local traffic will be considered.
   E.   Where residential driveways front directly on a major street, adequate
area will be provided on site to accommodate a vehicular turnaround area or a
circular driveway.
   F.   The proposed development will provide streets that conform to all
adopted neighborhood or area plans.
   G.   All stub streets will be designed as collector streets for a minimum
ADT of 1,000 vehicles and will provide temporary turnaround areas at the stub
end.
   H.   When the City of Tucson determines that vehicular access to or from a
development or subdivision at a particular location should be prohibited in the
public interest and for health, welfare, or safety, a one-foot wide no
vehicular access easement will be dedicated to the City of Tucson. Physical
barriers may be required.
6.2   Geometric Design
   A.   Street design will be in accordance with the following criteria,
subject to the approval of the City Engineer and concurrence by the CDRC .
Grades, curve criteria, sight distances, and other geometric design standards
not specifically included in this standard will conform to A Policy on
Geometric Design of Highways and Streets, published by the American Association
of State Highway and Transportation Officials (A.A.S.H.T.O.).
   Arterial street design will conform to the current edition of the
A.A.S.H.T.O. manual, A Policy on Design of Urban Highways and Arterial Streets.
   Minimum posted speed for public local streets will be 25 miles per hour.
Private local streets may be designed for 20 miles per hour.
   B.   Permanent dead-end streets will be designed with an adequate turnaround
at the dead end, except for dead-end streets less than 150 feet in length, if
municipal services, such as fire, refuse, and postal service, can be provided
without the use of the street.
   Dead-end streets may exceed 600 feet in length, as measured from the
centerline of the connecting street to the far end of the turnaround area,
under the following conditions.
      1.   The ADT is less than 400;
      2.   The total length of the dead-end street is not to exceed 1,200 feet
in length;
      3.   The street is approved by both the Fire Department and TDOT ; and,
      4.   The portion of the dead-end street nearest the connecting street has
a minimum of 36 feet of pavement (measured between backs of wedge curbs or
between faces of vertical curbs) for a distance equal to the total length of
the dead-end street less 600 feet.
   C.   Turnarounds may be designed as cul-de-sacs or “T” or “Y” shaped
configurations in accordance with Section
10-01.6.2.C.1 and Section
10-01.6.2.C.2.
      1.   The cul-de-sac is preferred by the City of Tucson at all times for
local street turnarounds because of its overall efficiency. (See
Figures 20 and
21.)
         a.   In residential areas, the right-of-way turnaround radius will be
a minimum of 50 feet, with a radius of 50 feet for return curves.
         b.   In industrial and commercial areas, the right-of-way turnaround
radius will be a minimum of 60 feet, with a radius of 60 feet for return
curves.
         c.   In residential areas, the turnaround will be paved with a minimum
radius of 42 feet, measured to the face of the vertical curb or to the back of
the wedge curb, whichever is provided.
         d.   In industrial and commercial areas, the turnaround will be paved
with a minimum radius of 52 feet, measured to the face of the vertical curb or
to the back of the wedge curb, whichever is provided.
         e.   Parking will be allowed along the curb of a cul-de-sac utilizing
a pavement turnaround radius of 50 feet or greater.
         f.   See
Figure 22 for the standard right-of-way and curb “knuckle” design for a street
right-of-way of 50 feet.
      2.   “T” and “Y” shaped turnarounds may be used for dead-end streets
which have a projected ADT of 140 or less. (See
Figure 23.) Parking will not be allowed in the turnaround area. Vertical
curbing is required in the turnaround area.
      3.   Street improvements may be required on dead-end streets abutting
properties subject to rezoning or subdivision platting. The extent of
improvements will be based on the street classification, the amount of traffic
projected, the soil conditions, and the drainage.
6.3   Street Alignments
   Jogs of less than 150 feet in local alignments are not acceptable. Arterial
and collector streets will not have jogs in alignment. (See
Figure 24.)
6.4   Intersection Alignments
   A.   The centerlines of intersecting streets will have an angle of
intersection of 90 degrees or as close to 90 degrees as is practicable. Local
streets will intersect at an angle no less than 60 degrees.
   Arterial and collector streets will have an angle of intersection no less
than 75 degrees. (See
Figure 25.) Curvilinear streets should radially intersect.
   B.   Right-of-way lines at the corners of street intersections will be
rounded with a curve radius of 25 feet or greater for residential districts and
40 feet for commercial or industrial districts.
6.5   Private Streets
   A.   Private streets are permitted only where satisfactory means of
providing for their control and maintenance is demonstrated.
      1.   The City of Tucson will not be responsible for maintenance,
liability, or enforcement of traffic control on private streets, except where
specifically authorized by ordinance.
      2.   Erection of all traffic control and street name signs is the
responsibility of the developer. Maintenance of all traffic control and street
name signs is the responsibility of the property owners’ association.
   B.   Private streets will be named according to current Pima County criteria
and will be approved by Pima County Addressing.
   C.   An applicant petitioning the City of Tucson to accept the dedication of
a private street to the public must satisfy TDOT that the street meets city
standards for public streets, such as structure, right-of-way, and all other
public street provisions.
   D.   Private streets must meet all the requirements of public streets which
carry similar types and volumes of traffic, except where specific exceptions
are noted in this standard.
   E.   PAALs are not acceptable for dedication as public rights-of-way.
6.6   Alleys
   Alleys are to be used for utility placement, provision of sanitary services,
and as a secondary point of access to property.
10-01.7.0   MODIFICATIONS
   A.   Where, in the opinion of the CDRC , there exist extraordinary
conditions of topography, land ownership, adjacent development, Historic
District review, or other circumstances not provided for in this standard, the
CDRC may modify this standard in such a manner appropriate to the public
interest.
   B.   In granting a modification of this standard or requirements of these
provisions, the CDRC may make such additional requirements as appear necessary,
in its judgment, to secure substantially the objectives of the Standards or
requirements so modified.
   C.   All items not specifically covered by this standard will be judged on a
case-by-case basis by the CDRC without setting precedent.
10-01.8.0   ENFORCEMENT
   The Department of Transportation is responsible for enforcing the provisions
of the Standard.
10-01.9.0   LIST OF FIGURES
   
Figure 1   Typical Cross Section for Interior Roads - No Parking Lanes (ADT 0-
1,000)
   
Figure 2   Typical Cross Section - Two Parking Lanes (ADT 0-1,000)
   
Figure 3   Typical Cross Section - Handicapped Accessible Drive
   
Figure 4   Typical Detail - Handicapped Accessible Ramp Detail for Vertical
Curb
   
Figure 5   Typical Cross Section - Two Parking Lanes (ADT l,001-2,500)
   
Figure 6   Curb and Property Radii
   
Figure 7   Alley/Street Intersection
   
Figure 8   Crowned Streets/Inverted Streets
   
Figure 9   150' Right-of-Way - Utility Location
   
Figure 10   120' Right-of-Way - Utility Location
   
Figure 11   100' Right-of-Way - Utility Location
   
Figure 12   90' Right-of-Way - Utility Location
   
Figure 13   76' Right-of-Way - Utility Location
   
Figure 14   64' Right-of-Way - Utility Location
   
Figure 15   Utility Strip Easement
   
Figure 16   Sight Visibility Triangles
   
Figure 17   Sight Visibility Triangles - 4-Way Intersection
   
Figure 18   Sight Visibility Along Curve
   
Figure 19   Partial Local Street
   
Figure 20   Cul-de-Sac
   
Figure 21   Cul-de-Sac
   
Figure 22   Standard Right-of-Way and Curb Knuckle Design for 50' Right-of-Way
   
Figure 23   Turnarounds
   
Figure 24   Street Jogs
   
Figure 25   Street Intersections
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3220.jpg]
Figure 1: Typical Cross Section for Interior Roads - No Parking Lanes (ADT 0 -
1,000)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3222.jpg]
Figure 2: Typical Cross Section - Two Parking Lanes (ADT 0 - 1,000)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3224.jpg]
Figure 3: Typical Cross Section Handicapped Accessible Driveway
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3226.jpg]
Figure 4: Handicapped Accessible Ramp Detail for Vertical Curb
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3228.jpg]
Figure 5: Typical Cross Section - Two Parking Lanes (ADT 1,000 - 2,500)
MINIMUM CURB RETURN RADIUS
 
                 ARTERIAL STREET COLLECTOR STREET LOCAL STREET P.A.A.L./
                                                                DRIVEWAY
ARTERIAL STREET   30'             25'              25'          25'
COLLECTOR STREET  25'             25'              25'          25'
LOCAL STREET      25'             25'              18'          18'
P.A.A.L./DRIVEWAY 25'             25'              18'          18'
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3230.jpg]
Figure 6: Curb and Property Radii
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3232.jpg]
Figure 7: Alley/Street Intersection
 
 
LONGITUDINAL GRADE CROWN
>0.50%             2% MIN.
<0.50%             3% MIN.
ANY                4% MAX.
 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3234.jpg]
 
LONGITUDINAL GRADE INVERT
>0.50%             2% MIN.
<0.50%             3% MIN.*
ANY                5% MAX.*
 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3236.jpg]
 
Figure 8: Crowned Street/Inverted Streets
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3238.jpg]
Figure 9: 150' Right-of-Way - Utility Location
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3240.jpg]
Figure 10: 120' Right-of-Way - Utility Location
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3242.jpg]
Figure 11: 100' Right-of-Way - Utility Location
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3244.jpg]
Figure 12: 90' Right-of-Way Utility Location
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3246.jpg]
Figure 13: 76' Right-of-Way - Utility Location
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3248.jpg]
Figure 14: 64' Right-of-Way - Utility Location
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3250.jpg]
Figure 15: Utility Strip Easement
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3252.jpg]
Figure 16: Sight Visibility Triangles
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3254.jpg]
Figure 17: Sight Visibility Triangles - 4-Way Intersections
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3256.jpg]
Figure 18: Sight Visibility Along Curve
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3258.jpg]
Figure 19: Partial Local Str
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3260.jpg]
Figure 20: Cul-De-Sac
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3262.jpg]
Figure 21: Cul-De-Sac
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3264.jpg]
Figure 22: Standards Right-of-Way and Curb Knuckly Design for 50' Right-of-Way
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3266.jpg]
Figure 23: Turnarounds
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3268.jpg]
Figure 24: Street Jogs
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/296bf9d764169cc6d3525ef86f2ca52d996c93e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3270.jpg]
Figure 25: Street Intersections
SECTION 10-02.0.0: PAVEMENT CUT CRITERIA
Section
10-02.1.0   General
10-02.2.0   Trenching Within the Rights-of-Way of City Streets
10-02.3.0   Shading , Backfilling, and Patching
10-02.4.0   Alternatives to Pavement Cuts
10-02.5.0   Abatement
10-02.6.0   Modifications and Appeals
10-02.1.0   GENERAL
1.1   Purpose
   The following Standard is intended to help provide for the continued high
level of service of street pavements by establishing criteria for the cutting
of pavement, trenching, trench backfilling, repairing of pavement cuts, and the
limiting of pavement cuts after the installation of new pavement or overlay.
The goal of this technical standard is to reduce the number of pavement cuts in
city streets and to improve the quality of those pavement cuts which are found
to be necessary.
1.2   Scope
   This standard applies to all roadway pavement located within the public
rights-of-way of the City of Tucson.
10-02.2.0   TRENCHING WITHIN THE RIGHTS-OF-WAY OF CITY STREETS
2.1   Applicability
   This Technical Standard concerning trenching under present or future
pavement, shading , trench backfilling, and patching in City of Tucson rights-
of-way shall apply to all public and private entities seeking to trench within
the City of Tucson rights-of-way. Builders, developers, utilities, etc., shall
make every effort to utilize the “common trench” principle. Multiple cuts for
services which can be combined into a common trench will not be approved.
2.2   Facilities
   When facilities other than City of Tucson Department of Transportation
facilities (storm sewers, street lighting conduit and appurtenances, traffic
light conduit and appurtenances) are installed in the City of Tucson rights-of-
way between curb lines, bedding and shading of the facility shall be in
accordance with the parent organization ’s specifications and details for
bedding , installation, and shading .
2.3   Permits
   Prior to excavation within the rights-of-way of the City of Tucson, a permit
to excavate within the rights-of-way shall be obtained in accordance with the
procedure outlined in Chapter 25 of the City of Tucson Code as adopted or as it
may be amended. The City Engineer, or designated representative, may, with
discretion, require the posting of a performance bond by any entity wishing to
obtain an excavation permit for the purpose of trenching within the rights-of-
way of the City of Tucson. The City Engineer, or designated representative,
may, with discretion, issue blanket/annual permits to utilities and other
entities trenching in City of Tucson rights-of-way for the purpose of
installing or maintaining service connections, subject to compliance with these
Standards. Failure to comply with these Standards shall be cause for revocation
of blanket/annual permits.
   Failure to obtain an excavation permit prior to commencement of trenching
activities shall be considered a civil infraction of Chapter 25 of the Tucson
Code. (See Section
10-02.2.5.D for emergency procedures.)
2.4   Traffic Control
   Traffic control during trenching operations shall be in accordance with the
current City of Tucson Work Zone Traffic Control Manual and Chapter 25 of the
City of Tucson Code, as adopted or as it may be amended. For situations and
conditions not covered in the City of Tucson Barricading and Channelization
Manual or City Code, the provisions of the Manual for Uniform Traffic Control
Devices shall apply. In all cases concerning traffic control, the Traffic
Engineer shall be the final authority with regard to barricading,
channelization, hours of work, and compliance with other Traffic Engineering
procedures and regulations.
2.5   Pavement Cuts
   A.   The following moratorium shall generally apply to the cutting of
asphaltic concrete pavement or overlay.
      1.   Streets Shown on the Current Major Streets and Routes (MS&R) Plan
      Five years from the date of acceptance of the last installation of
asphaltic concrete pavement or overlay. Chip sealcoats are not considered
overlays for moratoria purposes.
      2.   Streets Not Shown on the Current Major Streets and Routes (MS&R)
Plan
      In order to reduce the number of pavement cuts on streets not shown on
the current MS&R Plan, alternatives to pavement cuts shall be utilized for such
streets whenever feasible (see Section
10-02.4.0, Alternatives to Pavement Cuts).
      The City Engineer, or designated representative, shall maintain a list
for protected streets (“Protected List”) on which pavement cuts shall not be
allowed without the specific permission of the City Engineer, or designated
representative. Streets may be added to this Protected List from time to time
(at least semiannually), and such lists shall be maintained and available for
inspection in the office of the City Engineer.
      Criteria for placing a newly paved or overlaid street on the above
Protected List shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the following:
         a.   Residential collector streets.
         b.   Streets with inverted cross-sections utilized for drainage.
         c.   Streets in the Central Business District not shown on the current
MS&R Plan.
   The moratorium for streets not shown on the MS&R Plan, but included on the
Protected List, shall be three years from the date of acceptance of the last
installation of asphaltic/concrete pavement or overlay.
   No moratorium shall exist for streets not shown or included on the Protected
List or the MS&R Plan.
      3.   Traffic Loops
      Traffic loops may be installed in new pavement where required by the
Traffic Engineer. Grooves to receive traffic loop detection wire shall be sawed
to a depth sufficient to allow a sealant thickness over the loop wire of not
less than one inch. Sealant shall conform to the current specifications of the
Traffic Engineer.
   B.   Where the above moratorium is in effect, boring or jacking shall be
used for pavement crossing.
   C.   Where jacking or boring is impossible due to subsurface soil conditions
or other extenuating conditions, the City Engineer, or designated
representative, may, at his/her discretion, allow trenching subject to such
conditions as the City Engineer, or designated representative, may establish.
   D.   Where emergency (dangerous to health and safety) situations exist, the
express written or verbal permission of the City Engineer, or designated
representative, must be obtained prior to cutting of pavement within the above
restrictions. Emergencies under pavement not subject to these restrictions
shall be handled in accordance with the provisions of Paragraph 4, Section 17,
Chapter 25, of the City Code.
   E.   All final pavement cuts shall be sawed to the full depth of the asphalt
prior to patching. Initial cuts for pavement removal may be made using
pneumatic spades providing the spade penetrates the entire thickness of asphalt
and the successive cuts form a connected straight line. Dimensions for pavement
cuts shall be as called for in Section
10-02.3.3, Patching, and shown on Standard Detail 216.
   F.   The City Engineer shall maintain, in the Engineering Division,
information concerning the date, by month and year, of the latest construction
or overlay affecting streets covered by these restrictions.
10-02.3.0   SHADING , BACKFILLING, AND PATCHING
3.1   Shading
   Shading shall extend to one foot above the top of the highest projection of
the facility being installed and conform to the parent organization ’s
specifications.
3.2   Backfilling
   Backfilling of trenches under existing or future pavement with native soil/
aggregation base course/lean portland cement concrete shall be from the top of
the shading to the appropriate elevation depending on the type of patch to be
installed.
   Backfilling shall be in accordance with City of Tucson Department of
Transportation, Engineering Division’s Standard Specification for Public
Improvements (typ.) 923.
   When native soils (material excavated from the trench site ) are used for
backfill, evidence of meeting compaction requirements, in the form of test
results by a recognized testing laboratory in accordance with the following
schedule, may be required.
•   One test per 500 feet of trench length or portion thereof, per three feet
of trench depth or portion thereof. The City Engineer, or designated
representative, may require these tests anywhere within the backfill prism.
•   Aggregate base course used for backfill shall conform to City of Tucson
Standard Specification 303, Aggregate Base Course.
•   Controlled Low Strength Material No. 1 per SSPI subsection 501-2.03, Table
501-1.
3.3   Patching
   A.   Temporary Patching
      1.   Temporary patching shall be one-inch thick temporary cold-mix
asphalt placed on compacted back fill .
      2.   Temporary patches shall be replaced with permanent patches within 30
calendar days of the application of the temporary patch .
      3.   It shall be the responsibility of the organization installing/
securing the permit for pavement cuts to maintain the temporary patch until
replaced by a permanent patch .
   B.   Permanent Patches
      1.   Permanent patches shall be in accordance with Standard Detail No.
216 . Type B patches shall be used for all streets shown on the MS&R Plan and
all inverted water-carrying streets. A list of inverted water-carrying streets
will be maintained in the City of Tucson, Engineering Office. During trenching
activities, care shall be taken to preserve the shoulder at the trench top.
      2.   For longitudinal trenches whose top widths exceed four feet, the
roadway shall be repaved with a combination of materials having the same
structural strength and surface course as the existing pavement according to
the following schedule.
 
Trench/Width Repaving Width
4' - 12'     One-half pavement width or one lane width, depending on trench
             location
Over 12'     Full pavement width
 
      3.   Patches for transverse trench shall be twice the trench width.
      4.   Temporary Pavement. Permanent patches on temporary pavement shall
consist of the standard pavement section for residential streets.
      5.   The organization shall be provide a five-year warranty on permanent
patches.
3.4   Slurry Seal Coating
   Seal coating shall be done in accordance with City of Tucson Department of
Transportation, Engineering Division Standard Specification for Public
Improvements No. 404, where applicable.
3.5   Older Asphaltic Pavement Underlaid by Concrete Bases
   Type 3 patch per Standard Detail No. 216 shall be used and the underlying
concrete base cut to a width shown for Type 3 patches.
3.6   Chip Sealed Alleys
   Where the surface treatment of existing alleys consists of one or more
applications of emulsified asphalt and chip sealcoats, the permanent patch
shall be replacement in kind.
10-02.4.0   ALTERNATIVES TO PAVEMENT CUTS
   All alternatives to pavement cutting shall be explored prior to the
submission of an application for an excavation permit by those seeking to
install/repair/connect to underground facilities located within City of Tucson
rights-of-way. Applicants for excavation permits shall demonstrate, to the
satisfaction of the City Engineer, or designated representative, evidence of
investigation of alternatives to pavement cutting. These alternatives shall
include, but are not limited to, use of unpaved or chip sealed alleys, locating
trenches in parkway (behind curb) areas, unused (not water-carrying) portions
of drainageways, etc.
   Economics of installation shall not be the only or necessarily the
overriding consideration in the selection of underground routing and location.
10-02.5.0   ABATEMENT
   Abatement for violations of this standard shall consist of paving/overlaying
a substantial portion of the affected roadway. The extent of the paving/
overlaying shall be determined by the City Engineer, or designated
representative.
10-02.6.0   MODIFICATIONS AND APPEALS
6.1   Modifications
   Emergency situations and other conditions not specifically addressed by this
standard shall be judged on a case-by-case basis by the City Engineer, or
designated representative, without setting precedent.
6.2   Appeals
   Appeals to rulings made under this standard shall be to the Director of
Transportation, whose decision shall be final.
SECTION 11: UTILITIES (PRIVATE WATER COMPANIES, ELECTRIC, GAS, TELEPHONE)
SECTION 11-01.0.0: ABANDONMENT OF EASEMENTS
Section
11-01.1.0   General
11-01.2.0   Tentative Plat Content and Specifications
11-01.3.0   Final Plat Content and Specifications
11-01.4.0   Supplemental Documentation Specifications
11-01.1.0   GENERAL
1.1   Purpose
   In order to process plat-related actions in a timely manner, this standard
provides a simple method for abandonment of easements concurrently with the
processing of a resubdivision plat.
1.2   Applicability
   The provisions of this standard apply to easements, whether originally
created by a subdivision plat or by separate documents, when the same area or a
portion of the same area is resubdivided.
11-01.2.0   TENTATIVE PLAT CONTENT AND SPECIFICATIONS
   In addition to the information required by Section
2-06.0.0, Development Package, of the Administrative Manual, the following
information must be shown on the tentative plat of the proposed resubdivision.
2.1   All easements created by the original plat and/or by separate instrument,
in the correct location and labeled with the width, purpose of granting,
recording data of the original plat, and if applicable, the notation “to be
abandoned.”
2.2   A separate note that the easements created by the original plat (noted by
name and recordation data) and/or by separate instrument (noted by recording
data) will, unless otherwise labeled, be abandoned simultaneously with the
recording of the resubdivision (noted by name).
11-01.3.0   FINAL PLAT CONTENT AND SPECIFICATIONS
   In addition to the information required by Section
2-07.0.0, Final Plats, Land Splits, Block Plats, Minor Subdivisions, and
Condominium Plats, of the Administrative Manual, the following information must
be shown on the final plat of the proposed resubdivision:
3.1   All easements not to be abandoned with the width, purpose of granting,
and recording data of the original subdivision plat or separate instrument
shown.
3.2   A separate note that the interest of the City of Tucson in that portion
of the easement(s) created by the original plat (noted by name and recording
data) and/or by separate instrument (noted by recording data), which is
included in the resubdivision, will be abandoned by the recording of this
resubdivision plat, unless otherwise indicated.
11-01.4.0   SUPPLEMENTAL DOCUMENTATION SPECIFICATIONS
   The interest of the City of Tucson is abandoned by recordation of the final
plat. However, the interests of other entities may also have to be abandoned
prior to recording the final plat. These entities include, but are not limited
to:
•   Qwest Communications
•   Pima County Wastewater Management
•   Southwest Gas
•   Tucson Electric Power Company
•   Any private cablevision company
•   Any private water company
4.1   The developer must obtain from each entity having a record interest in an
easement, as shown by a current title report, a recordable document such as a
quit-claim deed or abandonment of easement which relinquishes its interest in
the easement. The request for abandonment should be made to the entity holding
an easement interest shortly after the City Development Review Committee  (CDRC
) approval  of the tentative plat. This is in order to allow adequate time for
relocation of any facilities within the easement prior to abandonment and
depiction of the new easement on the final plat.
4.2   The developer will record all such documents prior to or concurrently
with the final plat and provide a copy of each recorded document to the
Planning and Planning and Development Services Department (PDSD). These
documents do not need to be cross-referenced on the resubdivision plat.
4.3   The abandonment of an easement does not occur until all documents from
holders of interest have been recorded or submitted for recording with the
final plat of the proposed resubdivision.
SECTION 12: DEFINITIONS
SECTION 12-01.0.0: DEFINITIONS
   The definitions listed hereunder shall be construed as specified in the
section.
   Accessible Route Cross Slope. The slope perpendicular to the designed
direction of travel.

   Accessible Route Running Slope. The slope in the designed direction of
travel.
   Active Water Harvesting. The collection of stormwater into containment
systems  for storage and later diversion to beneficial uses.
   Approval. The proposed work or completed work conforms to this chapter in
the opinions of the Building Official.
   As Graded. The extent of the surface conditions on completion of grading .
   Bedding. That material between the bottom of the excavated trench and the
springline of the pipe or underground facility to be installed.
   Bench. A relatively level  step excavated into earth material on which fill
is to be placed.
   Bike Lane. An area set aside, within a paved roadway, for the purpose of
moving bicycle traffic. Bike lanes may be designated by signs, striped lane
markings, and/or physical barriers, such as curbs, guard rails, or special
fencing.
   Borrow. Earth material acquired from an off-site  location for use in
grading  on a site .
   Bus Lane. A travel lane within a street used exclusively or nearly
exclusively by buses.
   Catchment Areas. Areas of a site  where water is harvested, including where
rain falls directly on plant canopies and pervious Water Harvesting
Infiltration Areas , and where rain falls on impervious rooftops, sidewalks,
parking lots, driveways and other surfaces from which stormwater is directed
toward Water Harvesting Infiltration Areas .
   Catchment Ratio. The ratio of the water harvesting catchment area  to the
canopy area of the plants that use water harvested from that catchment area .
   CDRC. An acronym for City Development Review Committee .
   City Development Review Committee (CDRC). A technical advisory committee,
created by the City Manager, with representatives from City departments and
non-City public agencies involved in development review. (See Administrative
Manual Section
3-01.0.0 for more details.)
   Commercial Development. Any new non-residential development that is intended
to be used primarily for commercial activities, and is subject to the
requirements of the International Building Code.
   Compaction. The densification of a fill  by mechanical means.
   Container (AKA Dumpster). A metal refuse storage receptacle with a minimum
capacity of three cubic yards and a maximum capacity of eight cubic yards and
which is compatible with the collection vehicles used by the City.
   Containment Systems. Above-ground tanks, below-ground tanks, other types of
above- and below-ground water-holding containers, and associated pipes and
transmission equipment that enable beneficial use of harvested water.
   Crown. The cross slope or difference in elevation, expressed as a
percentage, between the high point of a street and the gutter line adjacent to
the pavement edge, for any given cross section.
   Curb Ramp. A ramp cutting through or leading up to a curb.
   Curb Return. The curved segment of curb used at each end of an opening in
the roadway curb.
   Design Year. The year the roadway improvement reaches life expectancy with
normal maintenance.
   Dust Control Paving. A double shot sealcoat of emulsified asphalt and stone
chips as detailed in "Standard Details for Public Improvements."
   Earth Material. Any rock, natural soil, or fill  any combination thereof.
   Erosion. The wearing away of the ground surface as a result of the movement
of wind, water or ice.
   Excavation. The mechanical removal of earth material .
   Fill. A deposit of earth material placed by artificial means.
   Final Pavement Cut. The sawing of pavement edge through its entire depth
along a line one foot beyond the widest portion of the trench width after
trench backfilling for the purpose of establishing a trench shoulder at the
time of permanent patching.
   Functional Classification. A method of distinguishing between local,
collector, and arterial streets, based on the purpose each serves.
   Grade. The vertical location of the ground surface.
   Ground Slope Area. The area between the back of the sidewalk and the right-
of-way line.
   Evapotranspiration. The transfer of water from land surface to the
atmosphere through the combination of evaporation and plant transpiration.
   Existing Grade. The grade prior to grading .
   Finish Grade. The final grade of the site , which conforms to the approved
plan.
   Grading. Any excavating or filling combination thereof.
   Grubbing. The removal of any vegetation from the existing grade  of the land
for purposes of land development. (Inventory and boxing of native vegetation
shall not constitute grubbing.)
   Impervious Subwatersheds. Discrete nonporous subareas of a site --including
rooftops, sidewalks, parking lots, driveways and other impervious areas--that
capture stormwater and deliver it through gravity flow to discrete containment
systems  or Water Harvesting Infiltration Areas .
   Infrastructure. All structures or improvements to the land such as roads or
facilities for the provision of gas, electric, water, drainage, or
communications, which are necessary to support development on abutting
property.
   Interim Paving. Paving which is placed to designated grades and which can be
expanded to a permanent improvement at a future time.
   Invert. The lowest point on any drainage conveyance cross section.
   Key. A designed compacted fill  placed in a trench excavated in earth
material beneath the toe of a proposed fill  slope .
   Level. Surface slopes not exceeding one to 50 in any direction.
   Level of Service. A general term describing the operating conditions a
driver will experience while traveling on a particular facility. Where roadway
conditions are fixed, level of service varies primarily with volume.
   Modal Split. The percentage or fractional portion of the total traffic for
which each component (car, truck, bus, car pool, etc.) is responsible.
   One-way Street. A street which has only one legal direction of travel.
   Parent Organization. The organization, such as the Tucson Water Department,
Pima County Wastewater Management, or other utility, having jurisdiction over
the underground facility being installed in the right-of-way.
   Passive Water Harvesting. The collection of stormwater directly into Water
Harvesting Infiltration Areas  without the temporary storage of water in a
containment system .
   Pavement Trenching. Includes the cutting of pavement and the excavation of
material to a depth below the lowest elevation of the underlying base course
within City rights-of-way. Typically, trenches are deeper than they are wide
and longer than they are deep; however, for purposes of this Development
Standard, any excavation within the City rights-of-way will be referred to as
trenching without regard to the geometric shape of the excavation. Trenching
may occur in other locations outside pavement areas.
   PCC. An acronym for Portland cement concrete.
   Permanent Patch. The native material/aggregate base course/concrete base and
hot mix asphaltic concrete/Portland cement concrete used to repair the upper
level of pavement cut and to provide a permanent wearing surface. The following
types apply:
      1.   Type A consists of emulsified asphalt and chip sealcoat, hot mix
asphaltic concrete, and aggregate base course above the trench backfill
material.
      2.   Type B consists of matching surface course of hot mix asphaltic
concrete and 3,000 p.s.i. high early strength Portland cement concrete above
the trench backfill material.
      3.   Permanent patches for Portland cement concrete surfaces not overlaid
with other materials shall consist of matching the existing structural pavement
section. The surface finished shall match the original concrete finish. The
trench shoulder and Portland cement concrete shall be the same as "Type B"
patch above.
   Plant Canopy Area. The area covered by plants as indicated on the landscape
plans, including understory, midstory and overstory plants.
   Professional Inspection. The inspection required by this code to be
performed by the civil engineer, soils engineer  or engineering geologist. Such
inspections include that performed by person supervised by such engineers or
geologists and shall be sufficient to form an opinion relating to the conduct
of the work.
   Rainwater. Liquid precipitation falling from the sky before it lands on a
surface.
   Ramp. A sloping element which provides a smooth transition between two
different points of elevation but does not include any flared sides which do
not meet the slope requirements for a ramp.
   Refuge Lane. A lane abutting the curb or shoulder of a roadway which
provides space for emergency parking of vehicles.
   Residential Street. A street serving primarily as access to residential
property.
   Shading. The trench backfill above the bedding material of the underground
facility, in accordance with the parent organization's specifications and
details, to a height of one foot above the parent organization's facility,
unless otherwise specified by the parent organization .
   Site. Any lot or parcel of land or contiguous combination thereof, under the
same ownership, where grading  is performed or permitted.
   Slope. An inclined ground surface the inclination of which is expressed as a
ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance.
   Soils Engineer (Geotechnical Engineer). An engineer experienced and
knowledgeable in the practice of soils engineering (geotechnical) engineering.
   Stationary Compactor (Stat-Pak). A refuse compacting machine that
mechanically compresses materials on-site for ultimate disposal by City
vehicles.
   Stormwater. Rainwater  that has landed on a surface.
   TDOT. An acronym for the City of Tucson Department of Transportation.
   Temporary Patch. A cold mix asphaltic concrete applied to the surface of a
trench backfill to provide a temporary wearing surface and moisture barrier
until a permanent patch can be installed.
   Temporary Paving (sometimes called strip paving). Asphaltic surface
treatment to graded and compacted earth.
   Terrace. A relatively level step constructed in the face of a graded slope
surface for drainage and maintenance purposes.
   Trench Backfill. The filling of the excavated void from a point one foot
above the facility installed (top of shading ) to a point sufficiently below
the existing original asphaltic concrete or Portland cement concrete surface to
allow the installation of the appropriate pavement patch.
   Water Harvesting. The process of intercepting stormwater and putting it to
beneficial use.
   Water Harvesting Infiltration Areas. Pervious areas of a site  where
harvested water collects and soaks into the subsurface to support landscape
plants. Water Harvesting Infiltration Areas include exposed soil shaped to hold
and infiltrate water, permeable soil subgrades overlain with impervious
pavement that receive water via perforated pipes or other conveyance
techniques, structured soil overlain with permeable paving, and other
strategies that collect water and allow it to soak into the subsurface to
support landscape plants.
(Am. Admin. Directive, 5/14/2013; Am. Ord. 11172, 5/20/2014)
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Ordinances
 
Ord. No.   Adopted   Section(s) Affected
11172      5/20/2014 12-01.0.0
11803      12/8/2020 9-02.5.0
Res. 23289 1/5/2021  4-03.0.0,
                     4-04.0.0
                    
 
References to Administrative Directives
 
No.    Approved  Section(s) Affected
                 8-01.5.0,
—    5/14/2013 9-03.3.0,
                 10-01.3.0,
                 12-01.0.0
—    11/6/2013 5-02.3.0,
                 7-01.3.0
1.02-9 4/25/2014 1-01.5.0,
       (Rev.)    1-01.6.0
—    3/22/2017 9-02.3.0
                
 
